Blue Beard	3843	312	Spanish	Long ago there was a man who had fine houses, both in town and country, covered with gold and silver, carved furniture, and cars all gold. But unfortunately this man had a blue beard, which made him look so awful and so terrible that every woman, young or old, ran away from él.Una of her neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were perfect beauties. He asked one of them for his wife, leaving her to decide which would entrust. None of them wanted to accept it, and sent it to and fro, from one to the other, neither able to adapt his mind to be married to a man with a blue beard. Another thing that made adversarlo was that he had already been married seven times, and no one knew what had happened with his previous esposas.Barba Blue, to be better appreciated, invited them, along with her mother and three or four of his best friends and some people in the neighborhood, to spend an entire week at one of its campestres.Allí sites, there was nothing but beautiful pleasure parties, hunting, fishing, dance, and joy in every activity. Nobody went to bed early and spent the night trying as look better. In short, everything was so successful that the youngest of the daughters, overpowered by so much wealth, began to think that beard of the owner of the house was not so blue, and he was a very gentlemanly man. So when they returned home, the boda.Como took place a month later Bluebeard told his wife that he felt compelled to make a cross-country trip of at least six weeks, as businesses were very important. He wished that divertiera well during his absence, called her friends, they were back to the field if he wanted to, and to live well wherever she found herself .- "Here" - he said, - "are the keys to the two great wineries where I have my best values: these are in the room where I keep my dishes of gold and silver, which does not use daily, these open my safes, containing my fortune, both gold and silver, they are my chests of jewels;. and this is the master key to all my apartments but this little key, is the key to the room that is the end of the gallery on the second floor can use all and open all you want, but when. the little girl in the room at the end, I forbid you categorically that use it, and I promise rigorously, if you use it and open it, there's nothing you can not expect from my enojo.Ella promised to obey exactly all his orders, and he, after hugging her, she got into his car starting its Safe Journey e.Sus neighbors and good friends did not wait for the newly married young the call to visit her, because very great was their impatience to see all the riches of the house, which did not dare to go while her husband was there because his beard blue waste time atemorizaba.Sin they reviewed all the rooms, cabinets, cupboards, tables, furniture, which were all so fine and rich, everyone seemed to outdo the others. Then they went to the cellars, where the best and richest furniture was, and they kept sufficiently admire carpets, beds, upholstery, tables and chairs, and large mirrors to be full length. Some of these mirrors were glass frames, other silver or gold, most beautiful and magnificent visto.Ellas never never ceased to praise and envy the happiness of her friend, who meanwhile was not so interested in looking at all these rich things, but it was all impatient to go and open the last room on the second floor, the forbidden. His curiosity grew quickly, and without considering that it was wrong to leave abandoned his friends, ran down the stairs as exitada two or three times stumbled about to break a bone, until he came to the room. At the front door she stood still for a moment, pondering the order he had given her husband, and thinking that would bring him unhappiness as a result of their disobedience, but the temptation was so great that he could not reject her. Then he took the little key and opened the door, trembling all over. At the beginning he saw nothing because the curtains were closed. A few seconds later began to perceive the presence of seven bodies of dead women, spread on the floor. (Those were the former wives of Bluebeard, with whom he had married, and then killed because of his disobedience to his orders not to open the forbidden room.) She thought he would surely die of panic, and the key, which had taken lock, fell from their manos.Una once recovered from the emotional blow, picked up the key, locked the door and returned to his room to get ready, but no relief was because he was aterrorizada.Habiendo observed that the small key had been spotted, she tried several times to clean it, but the stain would not go away. He washed in vain, and even rubbed it with soap and sand. The stain remained as it was a magic key that could never cleaned. When the stain is removed from one side, he returned by otro.Barba Blue returned from his tour that afternoon and said he had received a message in the way that the business was going to try, had concluded in their favor early. His wife did everything he could to convince him is very happy with her early the next morning retorno.A asked her the keys, who gave them, but with such a trembling hand that he was left with no doubt what he had spent .- "How is the little key in my room at the bottom, is not among all these?" - he asked .- "Surely" - she said, - "I let up on the table." - "Do not fail "- said Bluebeard, -" in fact bring it to me. "- After several attempts to evade the issue, she was forced to hand over the key. Blue Beard, having examined, said: - "How did this stain the key?" - "I do not know." - said the poor woman, paler than paper .- "do not you know!" - Bluebeard replied. - "I know very well You wanted to enter the forbidden room Okay lady, you're gonna get in there too, and take your place among the ladies you saw..." - She threw herself weeping at the feet of her husband, and she begged the pardon with all the signs of a true repentance for disobedience. She could have melted to a rock, so tender and so sad that was, but Blue Beard had a heart much harder than a rock .- "You'll have to die, ma'am" - he said, - "and it once." - "Since I must die" - she said, looking at him with her eyes all filled with tears, - "give me a little time to say my prayers." - "I'll give you a quarter of an hour, but not a moment longer. "- he replied Barba as Azul.En was alone, called her sister, and said -" sister Anne "- what was his name -" see above, I implore you, to the top of the tower, and see if our brothers come they promised that today would come, and if you see them give them a signal to hurry "- Her sister Anne went up to the tower, and the poor afflicted wife occasionally shouted: -".. sister Anne, do you see someone coming "- and sister Anne answered: -" I see nothing more than the sun, some dust, and green pastures "- Meanwhile Bluebeard, holding a large sword in his hands, shouted. his wife, as high as he could: - "Come down immediately, or I will go there for you!" - "Just a moment, please." - said his wife, and then cried softly - "Anne, sister Anne , you see someone coming "- and sister Anne answered: -" I see nothing more than the sun, some dust, and green pastures "-" Come down quickly, "- cried Bluebeard -".! or I will go there for you "-" there you go "- she replied, and again shouted: -"!? Sister Anne, do you see someone coming "-" Now I see "- Ana replied, -" a great dust, which comes from this side. "-" will they be our brothers? "-" Oh, no, sister !, is a herd of sheep "-" Do not go down "- cried Bluebeard .- "Just a moment." replied his wife. - "Sister Anne, do you see anyone coming?" - cried the other hand .- "I see" - said Sister - "two men on horseback, but a little distant." - "Blessed be God" - replied poor wife and with great joy, - "they are our brothers'll signal the best I can to hurry.." - Then Bluebeard bawled so tremendously that shook the whole building. The doomed wife fell and fell at his feet, all in tears, with her hair over her shoulders. - "None of that will help you" - said Bluebeard, - "die you." - Then, lifting her by the hair with one hand and raising his sword in the air with his other hand, he was about to behead . The poor lady, turning to him and looking at him with pitiful eyes, asked him to grant him a few small moments for your thoughts .- "No, no!" - he said, - "and commend to God." - and again raised brazo.En that moment as his scandal was heard and knock on the front door, so Bluebeard stopped immediately. The door was open, and abruptly entered two horsemen, who, sword in hand, went straight to Bluebeard. He recognized that they were his wife's brothers, one a cavalryman, and the other a musketeer. He wanted to run away quickly, but the brothers were so close that they reached before it reached the portal. They brandished their swords against his body and left him dead. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and did not have enough strength to get up and welcome their hermanos.Barba Azul had no heirs, so his wife became the possessor of all his possessions. She used one hand to help with the wedding of her sister with a young gentleman who loved her since a long time ago, another part to help their brothers in their military careers, and the rest for his own wedding with a noble and kind gentleman , who made her forget the past awful with Barba Azul.Enseñanza: Machismo and domestic violence against wives, must be reported immediately to justice, so that the offender is tried and convicted as deserved.
Allerleirauh	619	510B	Spanish	There was once a king who had a wife whose hair looked like gold, and so beautiful that all the land would not have found another one. He fell ill and, sensing an end, she called her husband and said: - If when I die you marry again, do not choose any woman who is less beautiful than me and not have golden hair. Promise me! The King promised, and she closed her eyes and died. For a long time the King was inconsolable, without thinking for a moment to remarry, until at the end, told his advisers: - There is no choice but to marry the King again so that we Reina. Messengers were then sent to all parts of the country, in search of a bride in beauty like the late Queen. But around the world there was no other, and although they had found one, would have golden hair. Therefore, the messengers had to return to court empty-handed. But behold, the king had a niece who was living portrait of his dead wife, as beautiful as she and the same golden hair. Watched one day the King, and seeing her at all like his late wife, suddenly felt in love with her. then he told his advisers: - I will marry my niece, because niece, since it is the portrait of my dead wife; otherwise, he would find a girlfriend that he seemed. She intends to knowing his uncle was horrified, because I was totally in love with a young nobleman. That thought is how to make them quit their wrongheaded decision and said: - Before satisfy your desire, it is necessary that three dresses regaléis me: I one golden as the sun; another, silvery as the moon, and the third, bright as the stars. I also want a coat made of a thousand different skins; and must have a bit of skin of each animal in your kingdom. In saying this thought: "It is absolutely impossible to get all that, and thus get my uncle to give up his idea." But the King remained obstinate, and the cleverest maidens of the country had to weave the three fabrics and make a gold dress like the sun, another silvery as the moon and another bright as the stars; and hunters had to capture animals from all over the kingdom and remove a piece of skin, and the chip was made a shelter in a thousand different skins. When all was ready, the king sent for his niece and presented the objects required for her, and said: - Tomorrow is our wedding. A maid to understand that there was no hope of making the decision to change the decision of his uncle, decided to flee. At night, when everyone was asleep, he rose and took the following things: a gold ring, a distaff diminutive of the same metal and a reel, of gold; three dresses, comparable to the sun, moon and stars, he got into a nutshell, put on her coat and rough skin, smearing also sooty face and hands. It was then entrusted to God and escaped. He was walking all night until she reached a great forest. As he was very tired, he sat in the hollow of a tree and fell asleep. The sun came out, but she continued to sleep without waking despite the very advanced stage of the day. It happened that the king who owned the forest, had gone hunting in it. When his dogs came to the tree, they began to snoop, you spin around and barking; so the king told the hunters: - Go see what kind of animal is hiding there. Men fulfilled the order, and turn around, said - In the hollow of the tree is an amazing animal, as ever we saw one like; his skin is a thousand different skins. He is lying, sleeping. He ordered the King: - See if you can catch it alive; then fasten it in and cargáis in the car. When the hunters grabbed the maid, this, awaking Startled, she shouted: - I am a poor girl helpless, abandoned father and mother. Pity on me and take me with you. Hunters said: - "Allerleirauh," You shall serve for the kitchen; Come with us, you can sweep up the ashes. And they put her in the car, drove her to the royal palace. There he was assigned a small block at the foot of the stairs, which did not penetrate no ray of light, and said - "Allerleirauh," you will live and sleep here. Then they sent to the kitchen, where he had to deal in bringing firewood and water, stoking the fire, birds pluck, select vegetables, sweep the ash and other tough jobs like these. There lived "Allerleirauh" long, leading a miserable life. Oh, beautiful girl! What will become of you? But it happened one day that there was a party at the palace, and she said to the cook: - go upstairs for a while to see me? I will place myself outside the door. Cook replied: - You go, if you want, but you must be back in half an hour to collect the ashes. It took her a lamp, went into her den, took off his fur coat and soot from the face and hands, which reappeared beauty in all its splendor washed. Then he opened the nut, pulled the dress as bright as the sun and put it on, and thus attired, climbed into the room where the party was held. All left him free passage, because nobody knew and took for a princess. The king came to meet her and offering her hand, invited her to dance with him, thinking in his heart. "Never my eyes saw a woman so beautiful" He finished dancing, the maid bent and the search King, had disappeared, no one knew his whereabouts. The sentries declared the palace gates, to the asked being, who had not seen him enter or leave. She had run to the block, which, after quickly remove clothing, face and hands black and put on his coat coarse, turning back into the "Allerleirauh." When he returned to the kitchen, to work, he began to collect the ashes, the cook said: - Leave it for tomorrow and prepare the soup of the King; I also want to upload a moment to take a look. But be careful you do not fall a hair; otherwise, we do not give anything to eat on. The man left, and "Allerleirauh" Flavored Soup King, making a broth as best he could, and when I had her list, down to the block, looking for the gold ring and threw it into the tureen . After the feast, the king commanded to be served dinner, and found the soup as delicious as ever would have eaten. And at the bottom of the dish he found the gold ring, could not conceive how he could go to stop there. He then ordered the cook, who had a big scare to receiving the message, and said "Allerleirauh" is filed: - sure you dropped one hair in the soup. If so, it will cost a beating. A to come before the king, he asked who had prepared the soup, to which the man replied: - I prepared. But the King replied: - It is not true, it was cooked differently and was much better than usual. Cook then said: - I must confess that not Guise, but that rough animal. - Go and bring him up - ordered the king. At the present "Allerleirauh" asked the King: - Who are you? - I am a poor girl with no father or mother. - What are you doing in my house? - he continued to ask the Sovereign. - I'm no good but to pull my boots on her head - she answered. - Where the ring was in the soup you brought? - I know nothing about the ring. The king had to fire her without make nothing of it. A After some time the other party was held, and, as before, "Allerleirauh" the cook asked him to go and look. Who said: - Yes, but come back in half an hour to prepare this soup so beloved King. It ran her den, washed quickly, out of the nut dress silvery as the moon, and started. He went to the hall, with the figure of a true princess, and the King went again to meet him, very happy to see her, and at that moment must begin dancing, danced together. Dance ended, she again disappeared so quickly that the king managed not to notice or what management had followed. The girl ran into her den, she dressed again "Allerleirauh" and went to the kitchen to cook the soup. While the cook was upstairs, she went to get her distaff gold and threw it into the bowl, pour over the soup, which was served to the king. He found it so delicious as before, and called for the cook, who had no choice but to admit that "Allerleirauh" had prepared the soup. The girl was again called before the King, but she answered it only served to have boots thrown at her head, and knew nothing of the golden distaff. The third party organized by the King, things passed as the two previous times. Cook said: - You're a witch, "Allerleirauh," and I always miss the soup something to make it better and that appeals to the King more than what I stew. - However, at his insistence, he left briefly absent. This time was the third dress, which glittered like stars, and presented in the courtroom. King danced again with the beautiful maiden, thinking he had never seen another so pretty. And as they danced without her noticing what happened a gold ring on his finger; In addition, he had given orders that the dance a long time is prolonged. At the end, he tried to hold it by hand, but she slipped away, fleeing so quickly among the guests, who instantly disappeared from sight. He sprinted the block from the bottom of the stairs, because his absence had lasted more than half an hour, and had no time to change her dress, so she threw on her fur coat. In addition, the rush is not smearing of the whole, as one finger remained white. He went to the kitchen, prepared soup King and getting out the cook threw gold winder tureen. The King, finding the object in the bottom of the fountain, he called for "Allerleirauh," and then noticed the white finger and the ring he had given her during the dance. Firmly he took her hand, and with the efforts of girl to get loose, he opened a little coat, sticking out from under the dress, bright as the stars. King stripped yanked his coat, and appeared golden hair, the girl could no longer continue hiding her beauty. And, once washed the soot that blackened his face, appeared the most beautiful creature I had ever existed on Earth. King said: - You are my dear bride, and never be apart! Soon the wedding was held, and the couple lived happily until the time of death.
Blancanieve and wished to be let	1535	426	Spanish	A poor widow lived in a small solitary hut, before which there was a garden with two roses: one white roses and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the two rose, and Blancanieve were called and wished to be let. They were so good and pious, industrious and diligent so that others would find no equal worldwide; only Blancanieve was more quiet and gentle than her sister. A wished to be let liked to run and jump through fields and meadows, seeking flowers and catching birds, while Blancanieve preferred to stay home, to the side of his mother, helping her in her work, or read aloud when there was no other occupation to attend. The two girls were so fond that came hand in hand, and when Blancanieve said - we part -contestaba never wished to be let: - No, while we live-and the mother added: - What is one, must be the otra.Con often they are leaving the two to the woods, picking strawberries or other berries. They never hurt any animal; before, to the contrary, they approached entrusted to them. The hare would eat a cabbage leaf from their hands; roe deer grazed beside the stag leapt merrily around, and birds perched on branches, twittering came up to ellas.Jamás minor mishap. When they surprised the night in the woods, they laid themselves down to sleep on the moss until morning; his mother knew and was not worried about it. Once they had slept in the woods, the awaken the dawn saw a beautiful child, with a bright white dress, sitting next to them. He arose and gave them a loving gaze; Then, without a word, he delved into the jungle. They looked girls around and saw that they had slept next to a cliff, which certainly would headlong if they had taken a step in the dark. His mother told them that surely would be the angel that keeps the buenos.Blancanieve and wished to be let children had her mother's hut so neat, it was a glory to see it. In summer, he wished to be let kept house, and every morning before her mother woke up, made him a bouquet of flowers in front of the bed; and there was always a rose from each tree. In winter, white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the llares; and the kettle was brass, shining like pure gold, burnished and clean it was. At dusk, when it was snowing, the mother said: - Blancanieve, he locks - and the three sat next to the home, and the mother wore glasses and read a great book. The girls listened, laboriously spinning; beside him on the floor, lay a lamb, and behind, perched on a hanger, a white dove was asleep with his head under the ala.Durante an evening in which they were three so gathered, they called the Open puerta.- , wished to be let; will be a traveler who seeks refuge mother he said. Ran wished to be let to unlatching, thinking it would be a poor; but it was a bear, which appeared at the door his black stubborn fat. The girl let out a scream and jumped back; the lamb began to bleat, and the dove, a beating of wings, while Blancanieve hid behind the bed of his madre.Pero the bear began to speak: - Fear not, I will do you no harm. I'm half frozen and I just want to warm myself a poquitín.- Poor bear! She cried the mother; lie down next to the fire and be careful not to burn the skin. Then, raising his voice: - Blancanieve, wished to be let, come out, the bear will do you no harm; takes good intenciones.Las girls came, and then also made step by step, the lamb and the dove, susto.Dijo past and the bear: - children, knock the snow take the skin - and they brought the broom and swept, leaving it clean, while he tended to the side of the fire, snarling little satisfacción.Al time, girls were familiar with the animal and made him a thousand pranks: tirábanle of hair, put their feet on his back, I jostled from side to side, beat him with a stick of hazel ... And when he growled they laughed. The bear took their games, and if ever her friends went a little far, exclaiming: - Let me live, Rositas; if I martirizáis.es to your boyfriend who matáis.Al be bedtime, and when everyone went to bed, the mother said to the bear: - You can stay at home - so you will be protected from the cold and evil tiempo.Al show the new day, the girls opened the door, and the animal trotted through the snow and disappeared into the woods. From then he returned every night at the same time; laid himself down next to the fire and let the children have fun with it as they wanted; and they got used to it in such a way that no longer shut the door until he entered his black amigo.Cuando came the spring and everything was green, the bear said to Snow White: - Now I have to leave and not return at all verano.- Where are you going, dear bear? -preguntóle Blancanieve.- to the forest, to keep my treasures and protect them from evil dwarfs. In winter, when the ground is frozen, they can not leave their caves or opened way up, but now that the sun has thawed the ground and heated, will rise to seek and steal. And what once falls into his hands and goes to their burrows, not easily back out to the luz.Blancanieve felt great sadness at parting from his friend. When he opened the door, the bear was caught on the latch and tore some skin, and Blancanieve seemed to distinguish a golden glow, though she was not sure. The bear away quickly and disappeared into the árboles.Algún time later, the mother sent the girls to the forest to fetch wood. They found a large downed tree, and near the trunk, amid the grass, saw something jumping from one side to another, but could tell what it was. A enanillo approaching discovered a wrinkled and withered face with a long beard, white as snow, the end had caught him in a cleft of the tree; Therefore, the man jumped like a puppy subject to a rope, unable to let go. Girls digging in his fiery red eyes, he shouted: - What do you stand there? Can not you come help me? - What happened to you, little man? Rojaflor.- asked Foolish curious! He replied the dwarf. I wanted from the trunk in a little wood for cooking. Large firebrands burn our food, for our dishes are small and eat much less than you who are coarse, greedy folk. I had just driven wedge, and everything had gone swimmingly, but this damn wood is too smooth; Wedge jumped when least expected, and the trunk was closed, and I was fucking beautiful beard, unable to remove; and I am now imprisoned. Yes, you can already Laugh, silly, faces wax! ! Ugh, and what you are ugly For more than girls worked hard, no means of desasir beard; estaba.- so solidly caught people said I'll go get Rojaflor.- goofy! He grunted the dwarf gangosa- voice. What do you want more people? To me I spare me with you two. Do not fret Blancanieve- said, I will find a remedy-and pulled her scissors out of his pocket, cut the end of the beard - Do not you think of anything best?. As soon as the dwarf was free, grabbed a sack full of gold, which had left the roots of the tree, lifted it up, he growled: - What Uncouth people Cut through a piece of my beautiful beard! What reward you devil! And walked away without looking at niñas.Poco time later, the two sisters wanted to prepare a fish dish. Came therefore fishing and arriving near the river, they saw something like a grasshopper hopped along to the water, as if wanting to get into it. In the approach, they recognized the dwarf marras.- Where are you going? -preguntóle Rojaflor-. I guess you will not want to lend to the water, right? - I'm not so stupid cried the dwarf. Can not you see that fish bloody drag me to the river? It was the case that the man had been fishing, but with such bad luck that the wind had entangled him the line on the beard, and itching a big fish, weak creature did not have enough strength to get him, however, was the fish which led to the enanillo to the water. He held on to the grasses and sedges, but their efforts did not serve much use; He had to follow the movements of the fish, with imminent danger of being dragged into the water. The girls came just in time; They grabbed him and tried to free his beard, but in vain, beard and line were entangled fast. There was no choice but to go back to the scissors and cut another piece of beard. To the view the enanillo, he shouted: - Stupid! What way is that to disfigure one? Not having enough to blunt the beard, but now you cut me another big chunk? How do I come to mine? If only tuvieseis to start running without soles on shoes! And, taking a sack of pearls that lay among the reeds, left without another word, disappearing behind a piedra.Otro day, the mother sent the two sisters to town to buy thread, needles, laces and ribbons. The road crossed a wasteland, in which, at intervals, there were large rocks scattered. Suddenly they saw a large bird circling overhead, descending more and more, until it landed on top of one of the rocks, and immediately heard a piercing scream of anguish. They ran there and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to take him away. Compassionate creatures grabbed with all his strength to the man and did not give up until the eagle released his victim. When the dwarf had recovered from the shock, he cried with his shrill voice: - Do not have done it more carefully? I have torn the chaquetita, and now all broken and holes, you helpless clumsy creatures! And carrying a bag of precious stones got into his cave among the rocks. Girls, accustomed to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their business in the city. Back to the pass back through the wasteland, surprised the dwarf, who had scattered in a cleared spot, the gems of his sack, certain that at such an advanced hour no one would pass by. The setting sun cast its rays on the glittering stones, which sparkled and glittered like suns; and their colors were so vivid, that small gasped, contemplándolas.- To what you PARAIS, with faces of your babiecas! She cried the dwarf; and his ashen face turned red with anger. And was about to continue their strong expletives when a grunt was heard, and a black bear, coming from the woods. Terrified, the man, attempted to escape; but the bear caught him before he could get into his hiding place. Then he began to beg, distressed: - Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, I will give all my treasure; Look, all those gemstones that are on the ground. Do not kill me. What you serve such a small, scrawny creature like me? Or you will feel it between his teeth. It is better that you eat these two wicked girls; yes they are a good snack, gorditas and tender quail. Coméoslas and much good you hagan.El bear, ignoring his words, struck to the evil man a swipe his paw powerful and left him dead on the acto.Las girls had run; but the bear called you: - Blancanieve, wished to be let, fear not; ! Wait for me, I'm going with you They then recognized his voice and stopped, and when the bear had reached suddenly his thick skin came off and was transformed into a handsome young man, dressed in gold brocade: - I am a prince -manifestó-, and the evil dwarf had loved me, stealing my treasures and condemning me err on the forest wild bear figure until his death redeemed me. He has now received the punishment merecía.Blancanieve married him, and wished to be let, with his brother, and the immense riches were distributed to the dwarf had accumulated in his cave. The old mother still lived many quiet and happy years at the side of his daughters. She took the two rose bushes, planted in front of her window, giving her roses every year hermosísimas, white and red.
Snow White	504	709	Spanish	There was a time in midwinter, a queen who was devoted to sewing sitting near a sale-na-framed black ebony. Snowflakes fell from the sky like markers. Looking snowing she pricked her finger with her needle and three drops of blood fell on the snow. As the effect was red on the white snow was so beautiful, the queen dijo.-¡Ojalá had a child as white as snow, as red as blood and as black as ebony wood! Shortly after She had a little girl who was as white as snow, as red as blood, and whose hair was as black as ébano.Por all that was called snow white. And the girl na-cer, Queen murió.Un year later the king took another wife. It was a beautiful but proud and arrogant, and no po-day woman bear anyone to surpass in beauty. I had a wonderful mirror and when she got in front of him, looking at him asked: Mirror, mirror in my room! Who is the most beautiful in this region Then the mirror answered: The Queen is the most beautiful of this región.Ella was satisfied knowing that your mirror always said the White verdad.Pero growing and increasingly embellished;? when it reached seven years was so beautiful co-mo the clear light of day and even more beautiful than the reina.Ocurrió one day when he asked the mirror: Mirror, mirror in my room! Who is the most beautiful in this region the mirror replied: The Queen is beautiful this place, but it's pretty much Snow White Queen más.Entonces was afraid and put yellow and green with envy. From that moment, when he saw Snow White her heart skipped a beat in the chest, such was his hatred for the girl. And envy and pride grew every day, like a weed, so that there was no rest day nor noche.Entonces summoned a huntsman and said -Lleva that girl to the woods; I do not want aparez-ca more before my eyes. Kill her and bring me her lungs and liver as prueba.El hunter obeyed and took her, but when he tried to cross the heart of Snow White, the girl began to mourn and said, 'My good hunter, do not kill me !; will run into the thick forest and never return más.Como was so beautiful the huntsman had pity and di-jo: 'Run, then, my poor girl thought, however, that the beasts soon devour!. However, not having to kill her was for him as if he removed a weight of the heart. A piglet came leaping; the hunter killed him, took his lungs and his liver and took them to the queen as proof that he had accomplished his mission. The cook-ro I cooked them with salt and poor woman cre-ate going to eat the lungs and liver Blancanieves.Por Meanwhile, the poor girl was in the midst of large forests, abandoned by all and with such fear all leaves Arbo-les frightened her. I had no idea how to cope and then ran and ran over sharp stones and through the brambles. Wild animals crossing-ban with her but did not do any harm. He ran to the nightfall; Then he saw a little house which came to rest. Everything there was small, but as pretty and clean as you can imagine. There was a small table with a white tablecloth and on him seven bowls, each with a small spoon, plus seven knives seven forks and seven glasses, all small. Along the wall were arranged, one beside the other seven little beds covered with white sheets like snow. As he was very hungry and thirsty, Snow White co-mine chunks of vegetables and bread from each little plate and drank a drop of wine from each cup. Then no-he felt so tired she lay down on one of the ca-mas. But it was no measure; one was too long, another too short, until finally the seventh-fi came in handy. He lay down, he in-ommended God and durmió.Cuando night fell returned home owners; seven dwarves were excavated and mined metal in the mountains. They lit his seven faro-litos and saw that someone had come, because the co-sas were not in the order in which they had left. The first said, 'Who sat in my chair the second: Who ate my platito the third: Who ate my bread the Fourth? Who ate my vegetables the Five.- Who jabbed my fork the sixth: Who cut with my knife seventh: Who drank my glass After the first one, looking around and saw a hollow in his bed and said: 'Who I walked in my bed the others came and exclaimed: 'Someone has been lying in mine too! Mi-rando in his, the seventh discovered Blancanie-see, lying and sleeping. He called the others, who rushed with gasps. Then & Now-ces went to their seven little candles to give light to Blancanieves.-¡Oh, my God, how beautiful they cried this ni-na! And felt such great joy that the de-wake her, but let her sleep. The seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of its com-drapers and so spent noche.Al dawn, he woke Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs seeing was afraid. But they were friendly and preguntaron.-What is your name? 'My name is Snow White said it.-How did you come to our house? And she told them that her stepmother had tried to kill her but the huntsman had pity on her allowing running all day to find the dwarves casita.Los said to him, 'If you want to make the task of the house, cook, make beds, wash, sew and knit, and if you have everything in order and can keep clean we; It not lack nada answered Yes Blancanieves- accept all co-reason. And he stayed with ellos.Blancanieves had the house in order. Ma-Nanas by the dwarves were leaving for the mountains, where they sought minerals and gold, and returned at night. By then the food was lista.Durante all day the girl remained alone; the good dwarfs warned: -¡Cuídate your stepmother; soon you know you are here! Do not let anyone in! The Queen, once ate those who thought they were the lungs and liver of Snow White, again believed the main and the most beautiful of all women. I was put in the mirror and said: Mirror, mirror in my room! Who is the most beautiful in this region, then the respondió.Pero mirror, through the woods, in the house of the dwarfs, Snow White cute it is much more.The Queen is the most beautiful of this lugarLa queen was terrified because I knew that is-I never lied pejo. Realized that the hunting-dor had deceived her and that Snow White lived. He pondered and searched for a new way to get rid of it because even that was not the most beautiful of the re-gion envy would not give respite or rest. When they finally hatched a plan face painted, dressed as an old peddler and was completely irre-conocible.Así disguised crossed the seven mountains and came to the house of the seven dwarfs, knocked on the door and shouted: -¡Vendo good commodity! I sell! I sell Snow White looked out the window and said: 'Good day, good woman. What you sell merchandise An excellent he replied; colores.La old tapes all pulled a braided silk multicolored, and Snow White thought: Well I can let this good mujer.Corrió the bolt to allow the passage and to buy that cute cinta.-¡Niña said the old woman how badly you've put that tape! Come you the arrangement as debe.Blancanieves, not distrusted, he was placed in front of her so that you fix the loop. But the old Ene-mately pressed it so hard that Snow White lost her breath and fell as muerta.-Well said the old woman, stopped being the most beautiful. Fue.Poco and then, at night, the Seven Dwarfs regre-saron to the house and were terrified at the sight of White-snow on the ground, motionless. They lifted her and discovered the snare that was oppressing her. White cut him and began to breathe and to revive slowly. When the dwarfs heard what had happened they said, 'The old saleswoman was none other than the evil queen. Be very careful not to let anyone when we're not around when the queen returned to her house stood before the mirror and asked:! Mirror, mirror in my room! Who is the most beautiful in this region Then, as before, he replied: The Queen is the most beautiful of this place, but passing the woods, in the house of the dwarfs, Snow White is pretty much what más.Cuando he heard these words all the blood Aflu-yo heart. Terror invaded because it was clear that Snow White had recovered life.-But now said she'll invent something that will make you perecer.Y with the help of incantations, which was ex-perta, he produced a comb poisoned . Then he Disguise-nization taking another look old. Well she dressed crossed the seven mountains and came to the house of the seven dwarfs. He knocked on the door and shouted: -¡Vendo good merchandise! I sell! ! Buy Snow White looked out and said: Go on your way; I can not let a nadie.-A the least you can see the old woman said, pulling out the poisoned comb and holding it up aire.Tanto liked the girl who was seduced and opened the door. When they agreed purchase so-bre old Say to him: 'Now I'll comb as corresponde.La poor Snow White, who never felt bad, left to the old, but no sooner had put the comb in the hair poison took effect and the small fell without knowledge.-¡Oh, beauty prodigy said poor woman-now I'm done with you! Luckily the night came early dwarves bringing with her. When they saw Snow White on the floor, as if dead, they immediately suspected stepmother. They examined the girl and found the poisoned comb. Barely they withdrew, Snow White came to and told them what had happened. In-tonces they warned him again that should cui-given and not open the door to nadie.En arrived home as the queen stood before the mirror and said: Mirror, mirror in my room! Who is the most beautiful in this region and the mirror replied again: The Queen is the most beautiful of this lugar.Pero passing forests, in the house of the dwarfs, Snow White cute it is much more.The the queen hear to the mirror thereby, shuddered and trembled cólera.-die need to Snow White said-though it costs my life to me misma.Se then went to a secret lonely room that no one could enter and manufactured a poisoned apple. Outwardly looked good, white and red and so well made that tempted who saw it; but just a small piece was eaten ensuing death. When the apple was ready she painted her face, she disguised herself as a peasant and went across the seven mountains to the seven enanos.Golpeó house. Snow White put her head out the ven-tana and said, 'I can not let anyone in; Dwarves have prohibido. I-It's nothing, 'said the peasantry I'm rid of my apples. Here, I'll give una.-No said White Neither must accept nothing.-¿Ternes that is poisoned? said the old woman; Mi-ra, cut the apple into two parts; you will eat the red part and the blanca.La apple was so cunningly made that only the red portion contained poison. The apple-LLA be tempted when he saw Snow White and the peasant could not resist eating more, he reached ma-no and took the poisoned half. He barely had a piece in his mouth, fell muerta.Entonces old he examined horri-ble look, laughed very strong and dijo.-White as snow, red as blood, ne-gra as ebony. This time the dwarfs can not revive you back home questioned the mirror! Mirror, mirror in my room Who is the most beautiful in this region!? And the mirror finally answered. The Queen is the most beautiful of this región.Entonces his envious heart found repo-so, if the envious hearts are in ever-contrar reposo.A night, returning to the house, the dwarfs in Snow White-contraron lying on the ground without a single breath escaping his mouth was dead. The rose, sought some poisonous thing, they cut her laces, combed her hair, washed-rum with water and hair came all this did not help the poor child was dead and followed-dolo.La are put in a parihuela . They sat beside her and cried for three days. Then they wanted to bury her but she was as fresh as a per-sona still alive and kept her cheeks sonrosadas.Los dwarfs said, 'We can put it under the black earth. E hi-they had made a coffin glass that could see her from all angles, and put it in his name inscribed in gold letters proclaiming that she was the daughter of a king. They then exposed the coffin on the mountain. One would always remain beside him to look after her. The animals also came to mourn: first an owl, then a raven and later a palomita.Blancanieves stay long in the coffin without decomposition; to the contrary, seemed dor-mir, as it was always white as snow, red as blood and hair were black as ébano.Ocurrió once the son of a king came by chance to the forest and went home dwarven overnight. In the mountains he saw the coffin with the beautiful Snow White inside and read what was it-Crito in letters of oro.Entonces told the dwarves: Give me that coffin; I will give them what they want to change.-we would not for all the gold in the world answered the enanos.-In that case the prince replied regálenmelo because I can not live without seeing Snow White. The hon-rare, deem it to what you love most in the mundo.Al hear him speak thus dwarfs had pity on him and gave him the coffin. The prince did take on the backs of his servants, but his-handed they stumbled against a bush and co-mo result of the jolt the piece of poisoned apple that Snow White still had in his throat was fired out. Shortly after she opened her eyes, lifted the lid of the coffin and resucitada.-¡Oh, God !, stood where am I? -exclamó.-side are to me, 'said the prince filled with ale-gría.Le told what had happened and said,' I love you like nobody in the world; see conmi-go to the castle of my father; be my mujer.Entonces Snow White began to feel affection for him and the wedding was prepared with great pomp and mag-nificencia.También was invited to the party's criminal stepmother of Snow White. After dressing in costume she was beautiful before the mirror and asked: Mirror, mirror in my room! Who is the most beautiful in this region The mirror replied: The Queen is the most beautiful of this place. But the young queen is much más.Entonces the poor woman swore and was so, so afraid, he did not know what to do. At the beginning I did not want to go in any way to the wedding. But found no rest until I see the young reina.Al get recognized Snow White and the anguish and horror that produced the discovery of jaron-nailed to the floor without power moverse.Pero had already put shoes on hot coals and iron then they placed in front of her with tongs. He forced the witch to enter those incandescent shoes and dance until death approaches.
little Red Riding Hood	245	333	Spanish	There was once a lovely girl who was loved by everyone who knew her, but especially by her grandmother, and there was nothing that had not given him the girl. Once he gave her a little cap made of red velvet, which suited her so well that she never wanted to use something else, so I started calling Red Riding Hood. One day her mother said, "Come, Little Red Riding Hood, here I have a cake and a bottle of wine, Take them to your grandmother this enfermita and weak and this will help Go now early, before hot day. and on the road, quiet walks and carefully, not swerve from the path, do not go to caerte and break the bottle and there is nothing for your grandmother. and when you come into your bedroom not say forget, "Good morning, "Oh, and do not go snooping around the room." "Do not worry, do well all," said Little Red Riding Hood, and took things and said goodbye affectionately. Granny lived in the woods, about a kilometer from home. And no more he had entered Little Red Riding Hood in the woods, always within the path when he met a wolf. Red Riding Hood did not know that this creature could do some damage, and had no fear of him. "Good morning, Red Riding Hood," said the wolf. "Good morning, friendly wolf." - "Where are you going so early, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "To my grandmother's house." - "What's in that basket?" -. "Cake and wine Yesterday was baking day, so my poor sick grandmother is to have something good to become stronger." - "And where your grandmother live, Little Red Riding Hood?" - ". As half a kilometer farther into the woods His house is under three large oaks, hazels one side and probably've seen." Innocently replied Little Red Riding Hood. The wolf said quietly to himself: "What a creature so tender that good snack - and will be tastier than that viejita So must act gently for both easily!.." Then he joined Red Riding Hood a small stretch of the road and then said, "Look Little Red Riding Hood, which pretty flowers are there, why do not you go and pick some And I do not think you realize how sweet? singing birds. is that going in such a hurry on the road like you to school, while the whole forest is full of wonders. "Little Red Riding Hood raised her eyes, and when he saw the rays of the sun dancing here and there among the trees, and saw the beautiful flowers and birdsong, he thought. "I guess I could take some of these fresh flowers to my grandmother and you will love Besides, it is still very early and there will be no problem if I fall behind a little, I'll be always in good time. " And so it went off the road and went to cut flowers. And when you cut one, he saw another prettier, and another and another, and inadvertently was deeper into the forest. Meanwhile the wolf took the time and ran straight to the grandmother's house and knocked on the door. "Who?" Granny asked. "Red Riding Hood," replied the wolf. "I bring cake and wine. Open to me, please." - "Move the lock and opens you," called out the grandmother, "I am very weak and can not get up." The wolf pressed the latch, opened the door, and without saying a word, he went straight to bed Granny and swallowed a mouthful. And then put her clothes, a cap was placed, got into bed and closed the cortinas.Mientras therefore Little Red Riding Hood had he run after flowers, and when he saw that he had so that he could take no more, he remembered her grandmother and set off towards it. When he arrived, he was surprised at finding the door open and entering the house, felt so strange feeling that she said to herself, "Oh God uneasy I feel today, and at other times that I liked so much to be with! granny." Then he shouted, "Good morning !," but there was no answer, so she went to the bedroom and opened the curtains. There seemed to be granny with his hat covering her entire face, and a very strange appearance. "Oh, Grandma!" He said, "what big ears you have." - "It is better to hear, my child," he was the answer. "But Grandma, what big eyes you have." - "better to see you, dear." - "But Grandma, what big arms you have." - "To hold better." - "And how big mouth you have." - "To eat you better." And he had not finished saying this, when a jump out of bed and also swallowed Riding Hood Roja.Entonces the wolf decided to take a nap and turned to throw on the bed, and once asleep began to snore loudly. A hunter who happened was passing by, heard loud snoring and thought, How hoarse this little old lady! I'll see if I need any help. Then he entered the bedroom, and when he went to bed he saw the wolf lying there. "So I find you here, old sinner!" he said. "For some time looking for you!" And he was about to fire his weapon against him, when he thought that the wolf might have devoured the little old lady and still could be saved, so he decided not to shoot. Instead he took a pair of scissors and started cutting the belly of the sleeping wolf. As he had made two cuts, saw shine a red beanie, then he made two more cuts and Little Red Riding Hood went out and cried, "How scared I was, what dark that is there in the wolf !," and then came also granny, alive but could hardly breathe. Quickly, Red Riding Hood brought many stones that filled the belly of the wolf. And when the wolf woke up and tried to run and walk away, but the stones were so heavy that he could not stand the effort and fell muerto.Las three people were happy. The hunter took the skin the wolf and took her home. The grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine that Little Red Riding Hood and brought revived. But Red Riding Hood only thought. "While I live, I will never retire from the trail into the woods, which my mother had prohibited" It is also said again that Red Riding Hood had cakes Granny, another wolf he spoke, and tried to make it out of the path. But Red Riding Hood was already on the defensive, and went straight on their way. At the arrival, she told her grandmother that she had met another wolf that had greeted her with "good morning," but with such a suspicious look, if it had not been because she was in the street, of insurance He had swallowed. "Well," said the grandmother, "close the door well, so you can not enter." Then, after a while the came the wolf knocked on the door and shouted: "Open Grandma I'm Little Red Riding Hood and I bring some cakes!" But they were silent and did not open the door so that hocicón began to give about around the house and finally jumped onto the roof and sat down to wait for Little Red Riding Hood returned home at dusk to then jump on it and devour in the dark. But Granny knew their evil intentions very well. At the front of the house there was a big pot, so he told the girl: "Look Little Red Riding Hood, yesterday I made some rich sauces, so it brings with water bucket in which I cooked, the pot outside. " And the big pot filled to its maximum, adding delicious seasonings. And those delicious aromas began to reach the nose of the wolf, and began vacuuming and walking toward the smell exquisite. And he walked up to the edge of the roof and stretched both his head slipped and fell exactly to the middle of the boiling pot, choking and cooking immediately. And Little Red Riding Hood returned safely to his house and henceforth always was careful not to fall into the traps of those who seek to harm.
Curmudgeon	1701	801	Spanish	Awl Maese was a short, skinny and driven man, he could not be a quiet time. His face, nose sleeves rolled up, was freckled and pale; her hair, gray and bristly, and his eyes, small but continuous movement. Nothing was overlooked, everything he was buts, I knew to do things better than anyone and always right. When I went down the street, triggering both arms as if they were rowing, and once gave a slap to the water bucket carrying a girl so hard that he received a ducha.- Piece of ass! - gritóle while shaking water -. Did not you see coming up behind you? It was a shoemaker by trade, and when I worked, stretching the thread with such violence that was his fist in the ribs of passersby not kept at a safe distance. No official lasted more than a month at home, he always had something to object, for it was perfect and polished work. Ora stitches were not equal; ora a shoe was longer or higher than the other heel; ora leather was little beaten ...- Wait - apprentices used to say - I'll be'll teach you how softens skin! - and, taking straps, unloading them a spanking in espalda.A all called slackers, even though he worked very little, because it was not able to sit still or fifteen minutes. If his wife had risen at dawn and lit fire, he jumped out of bed and ran barefoot to cocina.- Want to set fire to the house? - he shouted -. Are you going to roast a whole bull? Or do you think that give me firewood If, in the laundry, put the girls laughing and gossiping counted, it appeared there quarreling and shouting: - There are those geese honking instead of working. What makes this soap in the water? A scandalous waste, and over laziness. They do not want to spoil your hands, and do not rub the clothes -. And in his anger, he stumbled against a washtub full of bleach and flooded all cocina.Si built a new house, ran to the window to look at him - again by the red sandstone walls - he exclaimed -. A stone that just never dry. Anyone living in this house ever be healthy. And then, look at how badly placed stones masons. The mortar is worthless: Gravilla must put and not sand. I still live to see how the house will collapse on the heads of its inhabitants -. He sat and gave a few stitches. But a moment later got up again a jump and cried, unbuckling his leather apron: I have to go talk to these people seriously! -. And he undertook with carpenters - What's that? - gritábales -. And Plumb, what's the use? Do you think that the beams endure? ! Be there shall all riled up and removing an operator's ax hand, wanted to teach him to handle; but at the same time he saw a car approaching laden earth. He dropped the ax and ran to the farmer who guiaba.- Are you crazy? - Told him -. Who would think to hook young horses to a wagon so loaded? The poor beasts will fall dead when least expected -. The farmer did not answer, and Maitre awl, choleric, he turned to his taller.Cuando he was about to get back to work, the apprentice handed him a zapato.- What's this? - shouted him -. Did not I tell you not to cortaseis the shoes so broad? Who is going to buy a shoe that has no more than the sole? I demand that my orders are fulfilled on the letter - Maestro - the apprentice replied -. No doubt you are right to say that the shoe is not right, but it is the same as you cortasteis and you began to sew. Marchasteis you so fast that you fell off the table, but I did not pick it up. But you will not be content to or an angel come down from heaven! One night he dreamed that Master Lezna had died and road was heaven. A arriving, he called loudly to me puerta.- strange - he said - not having a bell; injures one knuckle golpeando.Acudió to open the Apostle Peter, curious to know who was asking the entrance so insistencia.- Oh, you are, Maitre awl! - said -. I'll let you in, but I must warn you that ye lose your habit of criticizing everything, and censuraréis what ye see in the sky, because, otherwise, could have a Podíais disgusto.- save you a warning - replied Awl -. Be conduct myself properly, and here, thank God, everything is perfect and there is nothing worthy of criticism, quite the opposite of what happens in the tierra.Entró, then, and began pacing up and down the vast celestial spaces. He looked right and left, shaking occasionally the head or grumbling between teeth. She saw two angels carrying a beam; It was an individual had in the eye while searching for the mote in another's eye. But had not the beam in the direction of its length but in width, "Habráse you seen more nonsense ?," thought Maitre awl. But he fell silent and relaxed, thinking: "Basically, what difference does it with the beam in either direction, so you can spend really do not see that collide with anything?." A little while the observed two other angels casting water from a source in a barrel; at the same time realized that the barrel was bored, and water came from all sides. They were sending rain to the EARTH.- A thousand devils! - broke our man; but repressed fortunately in time, he thought: "Maybe it's pure pastime, if one is fun, it may be devoted to these useless things, particularly here in heaven, where, from what I have noticed, everyone is idle . " I continuing, he saw a car stuck in a deep agujero.- No wonder - told the man beside him -. Who would think I load it? What you wear it - Good wishes - said the man -. I never got them walk in the right way. However, I managed to drag the car up here, and I shall not leave in the estacada.Y, indeed, to the soon came an angel and hooked two horses "Well - thought Awl -;. But two horses will not extend the carriage of the quagmire, at least it would take four. " And behold, it is presented a second angel with two other horses; but he not hooked in front, but behind. That was too much for Master Lezna: - Dunce! - he exclaimed, unable to contain himself - What are you doing? When have you seen since the world began, unclog a car like this? These wiseacres conceited believe better understand all the things that had kept ranting nadie.Y, a denizen of heaven, who grabbed his jacket collar, and with irresistible force threw him to the heavenly mansion was lodged. From outside our man returned to look inside and saw four winged horses were lifting the carro.En now awoke maese awl. "Truly, in heaven things do not run as land - said to himself to himself - and can apologize many of them, but who is able to do with patience how to engage horses in front and behind a car at a time ? it had wings, it is true, but how was I to know? also, go silly stick a pair of wings about animals already have four legs to run. but I have to get up, because, otherwise, everything will go head home. Good luck I have not really dead !. "
Colas Colas Chico and el Grande	2005	1535	Spanish	They lived in a village two men who called the same: Colas, but one had four horses, and the other only one. Colas called to distinguish the Great to that of the four horses, and Colás the Chico to the other, who owns one. Let's see now what happened to the two, because it is a verdadera.Durante story all week, Colás the boy had to plow for the Great and lend his only horse; Colas then the Great lent to the other four horses, but only once a week: Colas domingo.¡Había to see the boy doing the whip on the five animals! He watched as his, but only for one day. The sun shone, and the church bells calling to Mass; people, endomingada, passed with prayerbook under his arm to listen to the preacher, and Colas saw the boy with his five horses plowing; and the man gave him such pleasure to see him like that, hitting a new whip, shouted: "! Oho My Horses" - You must not say this -reprendióle the Grande- Colas. Only one of the horses is tuyo.Pero as repassed people, Colas Chico, forgetting that I should not say, again shouting, "My horses Oho!." - Be warned last once said Colás the Grande-. As you repeat, you arreo one bump your horse to leave it dry, and all that you've ganado.- promise you I'll not say Colas said the boy. But he spent most people who greeted him with a nod and our man, very smugly, thinking it was really good to see who had five horses to plow his field, again cracking the whip, exclaiming: "Oho! My horses "-. I'll give your horses! cried the other, and, grabbing a mallet, struck him on the head of the queue Chico, and mató.- Ouch! I've run out of horse! He lamented the poor Colas, beginning to mourn. Then skinned, he puts the skin to dry in the wind, metióla in a sack, which was charged to the back, and made his way to the city to see if the vendía.La distance was very long; I went through a great dark forest, and as the weather was very bad, got lost, and did not find the path until dusk; it was too late to return home or reach the city before they closed the noche.A walking distance of the road was a large country house. Although the shutters of the windows were closed, through the cracks it filtered light. "These people will allow me to spend the night here," Colas thought the boy, and called the puerta.Abrió the owner of the farm, but hearing what he asked the stranger told him to follow his way, because her husband was away and I could not admit desconocidos.- Well, I will have no choice but to spend the night out Colas said, as the woman closed the door in narices.Había near a large pile of hay, and between him and the house, a small paja.- shed roof I sleep up there Colas said the Chico, seeing the tejadillo-; It will be a good bed. I do not think the stork comes to mind bitten down to the Well legs on the roof had built her nest genuine cigüeña.Subióse our man to the shed and lay back, turning a lady prays beside the other, looking for a position comfortable. But behold, the shutters did not reach the top of the window, and they could see the interior.En the center of the room was a large table set with wine, roasted meat and fish appetizing. Seated at the table were the village and the sacristan, she served him, and him they were going eyes after the fish, which was his favorite dish. "Who was with them !," Colas thought the boy, extending head window. And then he saw also speaks a superb cake. ! What a feast, holy God on the road then she heard the trot of a horse on his way to the house; He was the husband of country, which regresaba.El husband was a good man, and everybody liked him; only had one flaw: he could not see the sexton; as he put one in the eyes, entrábale a mad rage. Why the sexton of the village had waited for the husband out trip to visit his wife, and she had given him with the best he had. A hearing to the man who returned they were frightened them both, and she asked the sacristan who hid in a large empty chest, knowing very well the ill of her husband by sacristanes. He hastened to hide in the oven tasty meats and wine, was not observed that the husband and ask him accounts.- What a shame! Colas sighed from the roof of the shed, and seeing the banquete.- disappearing Who's out there? He asked the farmer looking at Colás-. What are you doing in the straw? Come in, you'll be mejor.Entonces Colas told him that he had lost, and begged him to let him spend the night. No more missing -respondióle the farmer, but before vida.La do something for the woman received two kindly, she sets the table and served them a tureen of porridge. The farmer came hungry and ate with good appetite, but Nicholas did nothing but think of that succulent roast, fish and cake hidden in the table horno.Debajo had left the bag with horsehide; We know that going to the city to sell. Porridges as he choked, punched the bag with his foot, dry skin and produced a chasquido.- Chit! Colas said to the sack, to the same time again stepped on and produced a loud click the FIRST.- Hey! What's in your bag? He asked the owner of the house. - Nothing, it's a warlock replied the other. He says we need not eat porridge with grilled meat, fish and cake there in the horno.- What do you say? She cried the peasant, running to open the oven, where all meats were tasty that the woman had hidden, but he guessed they were there for work of the sorcerer. The woman did not dare to open his mouth; the dishes brought to the table, and the two men were given away with fish, roast and sweet. Colas then again pressed the sack, and skin crackled again. - What do you say now? asked campesino.- said the very pícaro- says it has also made out three bottles of wine for us; and they are in that corner, to the side of the horno.La woman had no choice but to make the wine he had hidden, and the farmer drank and made merry. What would not have given to have a warlock like the Colas kept in his bag - Is Able to make out the devil? -I ask-. I'd like to see, now I'm ALEGRE Oh yes! Colás- replied. My warlock does what I ask. Right, you? he asked stepping on the bag and producing another crujido-. Do you hear? He said yes. But the devil is very ugly; you better not veas.- not afraid. How do you think that is? - Well, it looks much like a sacristán.- Phew! He exclaimed the farmer. Yes it's ugly! You know ?, one thing I can not bear it is to see a sexton. But it does not matter. Knowing that is the devil, I can tolerate it for once. Today I feel in the mood; so I will not get too ...- Whatever, I I'll ask the wizard - Colas said, and stepping on the bag, applied against him oreja.- What does - says that open and see that ark to the devil; It is curled inside. But do not let the cover, which could escaparse.- Help me hold -pidióle the peasant, heading the ark where the woman had put the sacristan of flesh and blood, who was dying of fear in his peasant escondrijo.El raised a little cap carefully and looked at the interior.- oops! She cried, striking a retrograde jump. I already saw it. Just like a sacristan! Frightening! We celebrated with a few drinks and a good part of the night passed codo.- steepening the need to sell the warlock said the farmer. Ask what you want; I will give you even a bushel of money.- No, I can not Colás- replied. Think of the benefits that can be drawn from this brujo.-¡Me have become infatuated with him! Want It Now! He insisted the other, and continued suplicando.- Good -avínose to order Colás-. I will because you've been good and I have given asylum tonight. You give in the wizard for a bushel of money; but it has to be a rebosante.- fanega The have said the labriego-. But you will also take the ark; I do not want her at home any longer. Who knows if the devil is still in it! .Colás the boy gave the farmer the sack with dry skin, and received in exchange a bushel of fine heaping money. The farmer gave him still a cart to transport money and arca.- Goodbye! said Colas, away with coins and the chest containing the sacristán.Por to the opposite edge of the forest flowed a river flowing and very deep; the water ran so furiously, it was impossible to swim against the tide. Not long ago he had been lying on a big bridge, and when Colas was in the middle said loudly, to be heard Sexton: - What do I do with this box so uncomfortable? It weighs as if full of stones. I'm already getting tired of dragging; I bring it down to the river, If my house floats up well, and if not, importa.Y lifted a little with one hand to throw it to the river. - Stop, do not! She cried the sexton from within. Let me out FIRST.- God forgive me! Colas said, feigning fright. Still here! Echémoslo to the river without wasting time, choking - Oh, no, no! He pleaded the sexton. If you let me go I'll give you a bushel of money.- Well, that's different Accepted Colas, opening the ark. The sexton hurried out of it, threw the ark into the water and went home, where Colas received the promised money. With whom she had given him the farmer now had the barrow full. "I've taken good horse," was said when back home, he poured the money in the middle of the room. "The rage that will Colás the Great when you see that I have become rich with my only horse !; but will not tell. "he sent a boy home to his compadre to ask to borrow a measure bushel." what will want ?, "preguntóse Colás the Great; and he smeared with tar background to remain stuck something I wanted to measure. And so it happened, because when they returned bushel was stuck in the bottom three coins shiny silver eight shillings. "What does this mean ?," he exclaimed, and ran home QUEUE Chico. - Where did you get that money? -preguntó.- skin of my horse. I sold yesterday afternoon.- Well, if you paid the fine! - said the other, and, without losing time, went home, killed his four horses and hatchet after skinning, marchóse with skins to city.- skins, furs! Who buys skins? - going through the streets, screaming. Tanners and shoemakers came, asking the Price.- A bushel of money for skin - said Colás.- Are you crazy? They cried all -. You think you have the money to bushels -? Skins, skins! Who buys skins? He repeated loudly; and all those who asked the respondíales price: - A bushel of money for Skin. This -decían wants to mock us all, and, brandishing their tethers shoemakers and tanners their aprons, they stood to bludgeon Colás.- Skins skins! They shouted, persiguiéndolo-. Already adobamos see how yours will look like a loofah! Throw him in town! -. And Colas had no choice but to put their heels. Never had spanked him so prettily. "It's mine now !," he said coming home. "This I pay Colás the Chico! Le smash your head!." It happened that day, at the other Colas, he had died grandmother, and although old had always been very hard and shrewish, grandson felt it and climbed to the dead on a bed rather warm, to see if I could bring her back to life. There she spent the night, while Colas slept in a chair in a corner. It was the first vez.Estando and dark, the door opened and Colás the Great, armed with an ax. Knowing full well where the bed, walked straight to her and settled in the head with an ax Grandma, convinced that was the nieto.- For not mock me again! she said, "It's a bad man !," is returned home. Colás thought the boy. "He wanted to kill me luck that the grandmother was dead;!. In other words, this does not account" then dressed the body with clothes on Sunday, borrowed a horse from a neighbor and after hooking his car, put the I corpse grandmother, sitting in the back seat, so he could not fall with the movement of the vehicle, and set off through the forest. At the sunrise he reached a large inn, and Colás the Chico stopped her for desayunarse.El innkeeper was very wealthy man. Good at heart, but he had a genius soon and irascible, as if he had on his body and pepper tabaco.- Good morning! He said to Colás-. So early and already he endomingado - Yes, replied the other -. I'm going to town with her grandmother. I carry in the car, but can not lose. Are you willing to take a glass of mead? But you have to speak out loud, because it is hard to oído.- No more missing replied the innkeeper, and, filling a glass of mead, he went to serve him to the grandmother, who was seated stiffly in carro.- Os bring a glass of mead from your son 'I told the innkeeper. But the woman, of course, remained motionless and callada.- Do not hear me? He shouted the man with the full force of his lungs. I bring you a glass of mead from your son! And repeat it twice more, without the old would make the slightest movement, the man lost his temper and threw the glass at her face, so that the liquid is he poured from his nose and the Back. Good God! Colas said the boy, and jumped out of the innkeeper by grabbing her chest. You've killed my grandmother! Look what you've done hole in the forehead - Oh, what a disgrace! She cried the innkeeper her hands to her head. Everything guilt of my genius! Colas, my friend, will give you a bushel of coins and bury your grandmother as if it were my own; but do not say anything, because it would cost me life and be a lástima.Así, Colás the Chico took another good bushel of money, and the landlord gave the old burial as if it were his own abuela.Al back our man with all the money sent home a boy qUEUE the Great to borrow a bushel. "What does this mean ?," he thought the other. "Well, I did not kill him? I'll see myself." And, carrying the measure, headed home the Chico.- QUEUE Where did you get so much money? he asked, opening eyes like oranges seeing all riqueza.- that I do not kill me, but my grandmother replied the boy Colas. I sold the corpse and have given me for him a bushel of money.- How well you have paid! cried the other, and ran home, he grabbed the ax, killed his grandmother and, carrying her in the car, drove her to the city where he lived the apothecary, to whom asked if he would buy a muerto.- Who is and where did you get it? It asked the Colás- boticario.- my grandmother she said. I killed her to get her a bushel of money.- God help us! He exclaimed the apothecary What nonsense! Do not say that, you can cut your head -. And he did see how evil had been their action, saying he was a bad man and deserved punishment. Asustóse both tails, riding in the truck jumped up and whipping the horses, he started back home without stopping. The apothecary and the others present, believing him mad, they let him go free. "Gonna pay me !," Colas said when he was on the road. "This will not pass it, compadre." And as soon as he arrived home he took the largest sack he found, was to encounter Colás the Chico and said: - Twice have deceived me; the first I killed the horses, and the second to my grandmother. You're to blame for everything, but you'll never make fun of me -. And Colas grabbing the boy, he puts it in the bag and lifted it up said: - Now I'm going to drown The trail to the river was long, the Chico Colás weighed his stuff!. The road passed very close to the church, from which came the sound of the organ and the singing of the faithful. Colas deposited the bag by the door, thinking it would not hurt to get to hear a psalm before going ahead. The prisoner could not escape, and all the people were in the temple; and so he entered him.- My God, my God! Colas sighed the boy inside the sack, twisting and turning, unable to break free. But behold that happened to pass a very old shepherd, white-haired and walking with a stick. He drove a herd of cows and oxen, that the pass, turned the bag which contained the Chico.- Colas My God! He is sighing -continuaba the prisoner. So young and having to go to heaven - Instead, I, poor me 'said the pastor, can not go, despite being so viejo.- Open the sack shouted Colás-, get into him in my place, and soon will be in the Paraíso.- a thousand loves! He replied the pastor, untying the rope. Colás the boy jumped out of his prisión.- Will you take care of my cattle? -preguntóle old, tucking turn in the sack. Colas tied tightly, and then walked away with the manada.A little Colás the Great left the church, and the bag was loaded onto the back. To the lift it seemed to him that weighed less than before, as the old shepherd was much more than Colás the scrubby Chico. "What has become light !," he thought. "This is the reward of having heard a psalm." And when he came to the river, which was deep and mighty, threw water sack with the old shepherd, shouting, believed that it was his rival: - Do not come back to mock me and started back to his house! but getting to the intersection of two roads topóse again with Colás the boy, who was driving his ganado.- What's this? He said wonderingly. But I did not drown - Yes replied the other. About half an hour ago you threw me to the río.- And where did you get this herd? Colas said the Grande.- water animals are replied the boy. I'll tell you the story and to thank you for having drowned, because now I am rich indeed. I was really scared when I was in the sack, and the wind hummed in my ears to the you hurl from the bridge, and the water was very cold. I immediately went to the bottom, but I was not hurt, because it is covered with the soft grass you can imagine. As soon as I fell sack opened and I was presented with a beautiful girl in a white dress as snow and a green headband around wet hair. I took her hand and said, "Are you, Chico ?. Colás the moment there you have a few cattle, a mile away, awaits you all a pack, you the gift." Then I saw that the river was like a great road for seafarers. On the bottom there is a large traffic of carriages and pedestrians coming from the sea, in earth, as far as the river begins. There were beautiful flowers and the green grass I've ever seen. The fish went swimming with my ears, just like the birds in the air. And more sympathetic than people, and what fattest cattle, grazing by gullies and steep banks - Why have you returned to earth? Colas said the Great. I would not have done, if well it was there BELOW.- Yes replied the other, but it occurred to me a great idea. You heard what I said to the maid revealed to me than a mile down the road - way and understand the river, because they can not go anywhere else - I waited a whole herd of cows. But I know very well that the river describes many curves, now here, now there; It is the never ending story. Instead, going overland can hit the road; thus saving me almost half a mile, and came much earlier where the ganado.- is Lucky you! Colas said the Grande-. Do you think I would also gained, if descend to the bottom of the river - sure Colas said the boy, but I can not take the sack to the bridge, weights too. If you settle, to go there on foot and then get into the sack, I will hurl the river gusto.- Thank you very assented the other. But if when you're down I give nothing, you spank a great time; And do not think I speak for broma.- Bah! Do not take it so seriously! - and they walked two to the river. When cattle, who was thirsty, saw the water, ran toward her to calm sed.- just look how rush! Colas' said the boy. Good looks who want to return to the fondo.- Yes, help me, 'said the tonto-; otherwise you are going to bring stick -. And got into a big sack that came crossed on the back of one of the oxen. - Put in a stone, he would not remain floating if -añadió.- Perfectly said the boy, and introducing a bulky stone sack, tied tightly and, bam !, Colás the Great flew through the air, and in an instant he plunged into the river. "I'm afraid not find the cattle," said the other Colas, striking out with his herd home.
The riddle	208	851	Spanish	Once upon a time the son of a king, who came wanted to run the world, and went with no company than a faithful servant. The day came to a big forest, and at nightfall, finding no shelter, did not know where to spend the night. Then he saw a girl who was going to a house, and the closer, she realized that she was young and beautiful. He went to her and said: - My good girl, would not we find shelter for a night in the house, me and the servant - would willingly answered the girl with sad voice? but I do not advise it. Maybe it's that I seek another accommodation.- Why? He asked the AU-PRINCE My stepmother has evil tricks and hates strangers suspirando.Bien girl answered the prince realized that this was the house of a witch; but as it was not possible to continue walking in the dark night, and on the other hand, was not afraid, he entered. Old, sitting in an armchair by the fire, looked at the stranger with her red eyes - Good night! nasal voice she said, she wanted to be gentle. Sit at rest-. And he blew the coals, which was cooking something in a puchero.La daughter warned the two men not to eat or to drink nothing, for the old woman brewed concoctions harmful. They slept peacefully until dawn, and mounted prince when they prepared to resume the route, and being on his horse, the old woman said: - Wait a moment, you take a drink, as she fetched despedida.Mientras drink, prince hurried away, and when the witch came out with the drink, only found to the servant who had to buckle his silla.- Take this to your master! -Told him. But at the same time the glass broke and the poison spilled on the horse; It was so virulent that the animal fell dead, as if struck by lightning. The servant ran to account for his master of what happened, but, not wanting to lose his chair, turned to look. A arriving next to the body of the horse, he found that it was eating crow "Who knows whether we shall find anything better ?," the servant said.; killed, then, the crow and put it in the zurrón.Durante all day were wandering through the woods without finding the exit. At nightfall they found an inn and entered it. The servant gave the raven to the innkeeper, so that it ready for supper. But it turned out he had gone to a den of thieves, and late at night they stood twelve murderers, who conceived the purpose of murdering and robbing outsiders. However, before implementing it sat at the table, along with the innkeeper and the witch, and a soup made with meat ate the raven. But as soon as they had taken a couple of spoonfuls, they all fell dead, because the crow was contaminated with the poison of the caballo.Ya was not in the house but the daughter of the innkeeper, who was a good girl, innocent, full of crimes of those mens. He opened to outsiders all doors and showed them the accumulated treasures. But the prince told him he could keep everything, he would have none of that, and went on his way with his criado.Después wandering aimlessly long time, came to a city where he lived a princess proud daughter of the King, who commanded proclaimed his decision to marry the man who was able to put to a riddle that she did not know decipher, with the proviso that, if you guessed, the suitor would be beheaded. He had three days time to resolve; but they were so intelligent, that I had ever met before that deadline. They were already nine suitors who had perished in this manner, when the prince arrived and, dazzled by her beauty, was willing to stake his life. He introduced himself to her and laid his riddle: - What is it, 'he said one thing that he did not kill any, and yet, killed twelve in vain princess gave a thousand and thousand times around the head, could not quite? to solve the riddle. He consulted his book of enigmas, but found nothing; He had ended its resources. Not knowing what to do, she sent her maid to be introduced hidden in the bedroom of the prince and put to stalking, thinking maybe talk in his sleep and reveal the answer to the riddle. But the servant who was very smart, got into bed instead of his master, and when the maid came, snatching yanked the cloak that came wrapped, he threw sticks in the room. The second night the princess sent her maid to see if he had better luck. But the servant also took off the robe and threw palos.Creyó then the prince would secure the third night, and lay down on the bed. But it was the very princess who came, wrapped in a gray coat and sat down beside her. When he thought he was asleep and dreaming, she to speak softly, hoping he would respond in a dream, as many do. But he was awake and heard everything she perfectamente.Preguntó: - One killed none, what is this he replied: - A raven that ate a poisoned horse and died at his vez.Siguió her asking - and killed, However, twelve, what is this - twelve murderers, who ate and died raven and envenenados.Sabiendo what he wanted, the princess tried to slip away, but he held her coat, she had to Leave. In the morning, the daughter of the King announced that he had deciphered the riddle and sent for the twelve judges, gave the solution to them. But the young man asked to be heard and said: - During the night, the princess slid to my bed and I asked him; Without this, I never would acertado.Dijeron judges: - Give us a prueba.Entonces the servant entered with the three mantles, and when the judges saw the gray that used to take princess, failed the following statement: - That this mantle edge gold and silver; will be your wedding.
The water of life	920	551	Spanish	There was once a king who became seriously ill. There was nothing to relieve or soothe your pain. After much deliberation, the sages decided they could only heal the water of life, so hard to find that was not known to anyone who had achieved. This king had three sons, the eldest of whom decided to leave in search of exotic medicine. - Certainly, if I can improve, my father rewarded me handsomely. - I thought, since he cared more gold than the health of his father. On his way he met a little man who asked her fate. - What must you care that to you ?, Dwarf! Let me go my way. Duende, offended by the surly prince used his powers to turn him into a gorge in the mountains increasingly narrowed again until the horse could not turn around, and there was trapped. Seeing that his brother did not return, the median decided to go in search of medicine for her father: "All the reward will be for me." - I thought ambitiously. Not wearing long way to go, when the elf appeared asking where I was going: - What will matter to you! Out of my way, Dwarf! The elf stepped aside, but not before cursing him to end up in the same trap as the largest, trapped in a mountain pass became increasingly narrower, until horse and rider were immobilized. A passing day and no news, the youngest son of the king decided to go in search of his brothers and the miraculous water to heal his father. Cabalgando, the man found that he also asked his fate: - My father is very ill, seeking the water of life, which is the only cure for it. - You know and where you go to find it? - again he asked the dwarf. - Not yet, can you help me, pixie? - You turned out to be kind and humble, and you deserve my favor. Take this rod and these two loaves and head to the enchanted castle. Touch the gate three times with the rod, and throws bread to each of the two beasts who will try to eat you. - then Look for the source of the water of life as quickly as possible, because if they give the twelve, and still inside the castle, and you can never leave. - He added the little man. Riding his horse, after several days, the prince came to the enchanted castle. He played three times the gate with the magic wand, tamed the beasts with the loaves and came to a room where there was a lovely girl: - Finally the spell is broken! In gratitude, I'll marry you if you return within a year. Happy with the offer, the boy quickly sought the source of gushing water of life. He filled a bottle with her and left the castle before midnight. Back to the palace, he met again with the elf, whom he related his experience and asked: - My brothers left long ago, and I have not seen again. You would not know where can I find them? - They are trapped by greed and selfishness, but your kindness will set you free. Come home and find them along the way. But Beware of them! As announced by the duende, the child found his two brothers before reaching the castle of the king. The three went to see his father, who after taking the water of life recovered completely. He even seemed to rejuvenate. The youngest of the brothers then told her commitment to the princess, and her father, proud, gave him his most sincere blessing to the wedding. So close to the agreed date, the youngest of the princes prepared to go in search of his beloved. This, waiting anxiously in the castle, ordered to extend a road gold from his palace to the road, to welcome her future husband: - Let go to the one who comes in the middle of the road, - he told the guards - Any other will be a impostor.- warned. And he went to make preparations. Indeed, the two older brothers, envious, plotted separately come before him and presented the princess as liberators: - Suplantaré my brother and espouse the princess - I thought each of them. The first to arrive was the older brother, who seeing the golden road thought the ruin if trod, and by a circuitous route, was presented to the keepers of the door, right, as the rescuer of the princess. But these, obedient denied him passage. The middle brother came later, but pushed the horse off the road for fear of damaging it, and took the road to the left until the guards, who too was not allowed to enter. Finally came the younger brother, who did not even notice when the horse began to walk down the golden road, for he was so absorbed in his thoughts about the princess who could say floating. A getting to the door, they opened immediately, and there was the princess waiting for him with open arms, full of joy and recognizing him as their savior. The betrothal lasted several days, and brought much happiness to the couple, who also invited the father, who never became ill.
Curlew and lapwing	1652	2075	Spanish	- Where do you prefer to take your sheep graze? - someone asked an old shepherd vacas.- Here, sir, where the grass is neither too fat nor too lean; another mode will not bien.- Why not? - Asked the ANOTHER: Did not hear that cry from the meadow deaf? - said the pastor -. Is the curlew, which once was a shepherd; and so was the hoopoe. I will tell the historia.El curlew kept their cattle in green and fatty meadows where flowers grew a profusion; why his cows became wild and savage. Instead, the hoopoe drove them to graze high dry mountains where the wind plays with sand; so their cows as plump and failed to develop. When, at nightfall, the shepherds came cattle, curlew getting not muster their cows because they were petulant and he escaped. And he shouted "Tainted, here!"; but it was useless; They would not listen to his call. For its part, the lapwing could not put them together, so weak and emaciated that they were. "Up, up, up !," he shouted at them; but all was in vain; still they are lying in the sand. This happens when it is not appropriate to measure. Even today, although no longer keep flocks, shouting: curlew, "Manchada, here !," and the lapwing. "Up, up, up !."
The beloved Rolando	534	1119	Spanish	There was once a woman who was a witch-fledged, who had two daughters: one, ugly and bad, which wanted to be his daughter; and another, beautiful and good, he hated because she was her stepdaughter. He had an apron this cute, envied the other lot, so he told his mother that in any way wanted to be done with the garment. - Do not worry, my daughter said the old woman, you will. While your sister has deserved death; tonight, while you sleep, I will come and cut off your head. Take care to get to the other side of the bed, she sleeps on this side. Lost should have been the unhappy girl, to have not heard everything from a corner. Throughout the day they left not look out the door, and bedtime, the other went first to bed, standing against the wall; but when already was asleep, his stepsister, quietly, switched places, occupying that of the background. Late at night, he entered the old, tiptoed; right hand brandishing an ax, left tempted to see if there was someone in the first place and then taking the gun with both hands, he dumped her ... and cut the throat of his own daughter. When he left, the girl got up and went to the home of his beloved, named Rolando. - Listen, dear Roland said, calling the door, we must flee immediately. My stepmother wanted to kill me, but he was wrong and killed his own daughter. In the morning you will realize what you have done, and we lost. - Flee, because 'I said Rolando, but to bring away the magic wand; otherwise we can not save us, if we pursue. She went in search of the magic wand; Then, taking the head of the dead, he sheds three drops of blood on the floor: one, in front of the bed; another, in the kitchen, and another on the stairs. This done, he hurried back to the house of her lover. At dawn, the old witch got up and went to call her daughter to give her apron; but she did not go to their voices. He then shouted: - Where are you? - Here on the stairs, sweeping answered one of the drops of blood. He left the old, but, he did not see anyone on the stairs, shouted again: - Where are you? - In the kitchen, warming said second drop of blood. So she went to the kitchen, but there was nobody, so he asked aloud again: - Where are you? Oh !, in my bed, sleeping said third drop. A coming into the room and approached the bed, what did you see the witch? In his very daughter bathed in blood. She herself had cut off his head! The sorceress angry and looked out the window; and as for its arts he could see very far, he discovered his stepdaughter escaping with her boyfriend beloved. - will serve them nothing! he exclaimed. They do not go away, no matter how far they are! And, put on her boots, that with every step walked the path of an hour and came after them reached soon. But the girl, seeing her stepmother approached, used the magic wand and transformed her dear Roland into a lake, and she turned herself into a duck swimming in the water. Witch stood on the shore and began to throw bread crumbs and do everything possible to attract the animal; but he was careful not to approach, so old, at dusk, had to return without having achieved their goal. Then, the girl and her beloved Rolando regained their human form and continued walking throughout the night, until dawn. It was then that the maiden turned into a beautiful flower in the midst of a thorn scrub, and turned her dear Roland into violinist. A short time came the witch great strides and said to the musician: - My good musician, may I reach that pretty flower? - I think so - answered him; I'll play in the meantime. old got into the thicket to pluck the flower, he knew exactly who he was; and violinist began to play, and the woman, willy-nilly, started dancing as it was that a magical tune. And the more deeply touched him, the more abrupt jumps had to give her, so the thorns tore all the clothes and tore the skin, leaving bloodied and battered. And as the musician did not stop playing, the witch had to keep dancing until falling dead. A free being the Roland said: - I now my father's house to prepare for our wedding. - I'll stay here meanwhile said the girl, waiting for your return; and no one recognizes me, I will become an ingrown rock. Rolando left, and maiden transformed into rock, remained in the camp, awaiting the return of her beloved. But he will get Rolando home, fell into the nets of another woman, who managed to make him forget his fiancee. The poor girl remained a long time waiting for him, and seeing that he did not return, full of sadness, it became flower, thinking, "Someone will trample me !." It happened that a shepherd tending his flock in the field, seeing that flower so pretty, cut it and put it in his chest. Since that day, all things went swimmingly at home of the pastor. When he got up in the morning he was with all the work done: the rooms, swept; clean dust the tables and benches; the fire in the stove, and pots filled with water. At noon, on arriving home, the table was set, and served a tasty meal. The man could not understand that, and he never saw anybody in his house, which was also so small that nobody could hide inside. Moment I was very pleased with these developments; But in the end, he was alarmed and went to consult a fortune teller. It said: - That's like magic. Get up a well day early and see if something moves in the room; If you see that if, whatever it is, then check it a cloth over, and the spell will be trapped. So did the shepherd, and the next morning the daybreak, he saw the chest open and the flower come out. Pasting jumped, threw a cloth over and immediately ended the charm, and a lovely maiden, who confessed to the flower, which until then had looked the order of his house. He told his story, and as a boy liked the girl, he asked if she wanted to marry him. But she responded negatively because still in love with her dear Roland; He remains faithful to him, though he had abandoned. But he promised that he would not go, but continue taking care of your home. Meanwhile came the day indicated for the wedding of Rolando. Following an old custom of the country, an announcement inviting all the girls to attend the ceremony and singing in honor of the bridal couple was made. At the hearing the faithful girl, she felt a deep sadness that thought his heart would burst in his chest. I did not want to go to the party, but the other girls went to find her and forced her to accompany them. He tried to go delaying the time to sing; but at the end, when all had sung, he had no choice but to do it too. But the starting her singing and her voice reach the ears of Rolando, he jumped up and exclaimed: - I know that voice; It is true my fiancee and I do not want another! All you had forgotten, revived in his memory and in his heart. And so it was that the maid faithful married his beloved Rolando, and finished his sentence, began for her a life of bliss.
the colt	1367	430	Spanish	There was once a king and queen who were rich and had that may be desired, except children. Queen Lamentábase day and night, saying - I'm like an empty field A God wanted to fulfill their desires but when the child came to the world did not figure human being, but little donkey!. To view the mother burst into tears and wailing, saying it would have been better to continue without children before giving birth to a donkey, and that they should throw it into the river to feed the fishes. But the King intervened: - No, because God has willed it so, he shall be my son and heir; and when I die, she will rise to the throne and gird the corona.Criaron then to the donkey, which grew, and grew his ears, straightened so high and it was a beauty. Moreover, it was joyful natural and frisky, and showed a special liking to music, to the point that he went to an instrumentalist famous and said: - Show me your art, because I want to get to play the lute as well as tú.- Oh, my lord! - answered the musician -. You will resultaras difficult because you have very large fingers and are not conformed to it. I fear that the strings do not resistan.Pero his warnings were of no avail. The colt stood his ground; he studied with perseverance and application, and so I knew how to handle the instrument as well as its maestro.Un day ride out the young gentleman. He was thoughtful and came to a fountain. A look in the water he saw the figure of an ass, and gave him so much grief that went wandering out into the world of God, without taking more than a faithful companion. After walking aimlessly long time, they came to a country ruled by an old king, father of a beautiful girl country. Donkey said: - We'll stay here - and knocking on the door, shouted: - Out here there is a stranger. Open and let us entrar.Y like nobody opened them, he sat down and began to ring the lute with both front legs. The doorman opened eyes like oranges and, running to the King, he said: - There was at the door, there is a colt who is playing the lute with both art and the best of Invite maestros.- then to the musician that between - he ordered the king. But seeing a donkey appeared, released these great laugh. Waiters were ordered to give feed and take down; but he protested - I'm not an ass vulgar stable, but noble.- In this case, go with the soldiers - they said entonces.- No - he replied - I want to be with the Rey.Echóse he laughed and said, , good-humored: - Well. Ask yourself as, donkey. Ponte beside me -. Then he asked -: donkey, how do you think my daughter's ass turned his head to look at her, making a gesture approbative said: - The truth is I've never seen another as Hermosa, can sit beside her, If quieres.- gladly! - exclaimed the donkey, and, standing beside her, ate and drank, behaving with greater accuracy and pulcritud.Cuando had a good season in the court of that king, he thought: "All this does not remedy anything must return to house. , "and, sad and downcast, he presented himself to the Sovereign to say goodbye. But the King had taken him affection and said: - What's wrong, I donkey? You seem soured as a jug of vinegar. Stay with me, I will give you everything you ask. Do I pray like - No - she replied the donkey, shaking his head. - Want ornaments and precious stones - No.- Do you want half my kingdom - Oh no Said the king then:? - If I could adivinarte tastes! Do you want to marry my daughter - Oh, yes! - said the colt -. This yes I like! - and immediately he became cheerful, regaining his former good humor, for he was one of the greatest desires. Solemnized consequently a wedding splendid and dusk, when the couple were taken to his room, wanting to know the King if the colt behaved with kindness and correction, sent a servant that he hid in the bedroom. When the newlyweds were in the room, ran groom locked the door, glanced around and, sure they were alone, pulling off suddenly ass's skin, was transformed into a slender, handsome young man.- you see now who I am - said the princess - and see also that I am not unworthy of ti.Alegróse the bride and kissed him very excited. But the morning came, the waiter got up and came back into the skin of an ass, so that no one would have suspected who was behind that figure. Not long in coming King: - Yikes! - he said -. Well, it is not happy the little donkey! But you must be sad - he continued, addressing his daughter - a husband by not having a man like demás.- Oh, no, my father! - she said -. I want it as much as if it were the most beautiful of men, and muerte.Admiróse be faithful to the King; but the servant who had been hidden, he deciphered the mystery. King said: - This can not be verdad.- Watch yourself the next night and you will see with your own eyes. And if you will follow my advice, Lord King, strip off the skin and arrojadla to the fire; and will have no recourse but to present in its true Figure.-'s good advice - said Rey.Y at night, when everyone was asleep, sneaked into the room, and arriving at the bedside, could see in the light of the moon, a handsome young man asleep; and skin lay spread on the floor. Cogióla and went out again. Sent immediately light a big fire and throw him ass skin; and he did not move from there until it was completely burned and reduced to ashes. I eager to see what would the prince awaking, he removed all nighter, with attentive ear. He awoke the boy to the daybreak, jumped out of bed to get his ass's skin, and not to find her, exclaimed, startled and filled with anguish: - Now I have no choice but to flee But exit found himself with! king, who said: - my son, where are you going in such a hurry? Stay, you're a man so handsome I do not want to separate yourself from me. You'll soon half of my kingdom, and when I die, I shall inherit todo.- Well, the good principle also have a good end answered the young -. I stay with King vos.Diole half of the kingdom, and when, at the end of a year, he died, he bequeathed the rest. In addition, the death of his father, he also inherited his, and thus discoursed his life in the midst of the greatest abundance.
The owl	1662	1281	Spanish	A couple of centuries ago, people were warned not as smart and as it is now, much less. Well, those days happened in a small town event strange that I'm contaros.Un evening came from a nearby forest one of those big owls we call owls or Grand Dukes, and went to get in the barn of a farmer, where he spent the night. The next morning he did not dare to leave their shelter, for fear of the other birds, which, as soon as they discover, burst into a frightful griterío.Cuando the boy from the farm went to the barn straw, asustóse so to the see to the owl perched in a corner, he ran away and told his master that in the haystack was a monster and not see another like in his life; He moved his eyes around the head, and was able to swallow without any cumplidos.- already know you - answered the master -. You are brave enough to run after a blackbird in the field; but when you see a dead chicken, you arm a stick before approaching him. I'll have myself up, to find out what monster is this that dices.Y going, Bouncy, to the barn, glanced at the indicated place, and discovering a strange and horrible animal, entróle a ghost like that of his servant. He got two jumps and ran to alarm the neighbors, asking them assistance against a dangerous and unknown animal, which could endanger the entire city if he gave for leaving their granero.Movióse big fuss and shouting in the streets. Bourgeois came armed with pikes, forks, scythes and axes, as if it were a battle with formidable enemy. Then the members of the Council were also presented, with the mayor at the head, and once all formed in the plaza of the market, began the march toward the barn and surrounded him everywhere. He advanced then one of the bravest and entered pica in hand; but immediately he came out again, pale as death and unable to utter word after the cry of horror that had ripped the sight of the monster. Two others ventured to try his luck, but retreated as terrified as primero.Finalmente, walked a tall, brawny, famous guy for his military exploits, and said: - Just look do not ahuyentaréis this monstrous beast. We must act seriously; The more I see you are all about sluts and no one dares to put the bell on the gato.Pidió that lend armor, sword and pike, and prepared to fight. All praised his courage, and there were many who feared for his life. They opened the double doors of the barn owl appeared, in the meantime, had landed on one of the main beams. He ordered him to bring a ladder, and when placed and prepared to climb into it, we all cheered loudly and instructed St. George, the dragon slayer. Come up, when the owl knew their aggressive purposes, also disturbed by the noise of the crowd and seeing no way of escape, began to roll his eyes, ruffled feathers, he spreads his wings and chattering with beak, with hoarsely launched his cry: "chuhú, chuhú!." - embístele, embístele! - people shouted from below héroe.- effortful if you were here with me - he said - surely not long to shout as well. - Decreased another step; but entróle an earthquake strong and retreated, almost desmayado.Ya there was anyone willing to brave the peligro.- This monster - said - with only her cry and breath poisoned and wounded to the strongest and bravest of our men. Also we will expose the lives of others? They deliberated on what should be done to prevent the ruin of the city. For some time she found no remedy; until finally the mayor dijo.- My opinion is that we all contribute to compensate the owner the value of this barn with all it contains, grain, straw and hay, and peguemos fire to ignite everything with the terrible beast; This way, nobody will expose his life. It is a case where no objections to tread; stinginess contraproducente.Todo the world would be declared in accordance with the proposal and torched the barn on all sides, and along with it the poor owl was reduced to ashes. And whoever does not want to believe it, you will ask.
The headstrong boy	1110	779	Spanish	He was a stubborn kid on end, never did what his mother sent him. Therefore, God Our Lord was not happy and let him fall ill. And no doctor knew it right remedy your ailment, and little time was lying on his deathbed. When it came down to the burial ground and covered him, he came out his little arm, and even if they turned putting more and more land over to no avail: he always came back to poke the little arm. I was the mother herself must go to the grave and give him a few blows with his rod; only then he doubled, and the child could rest beneath the earth.
The Carnation	721	652	Spanish	There was once a queen whom God Our Lord had not granted the grace to have children. Every morning she went to the garden to pray to heaven to bestow on her motherhood. One day an angel descended from heaven and said: - Rejoice, you'll have a gifted child the gift of seeing their wishes fulfilled, you will see that whatsoever in the world. The queen was to give her husband the happy news, and when the time, gave birth to a son, with great joy of the King arrived. Every morning the Queen went to the park with the child, and washed there in a crystal fountain. It happened one day when the child was a little older, that having him in her lap, the mother fell asleep. the old cook, who knew the particular gift of the small, kidnapped and then approached; then he killed a chicken and poured the blood on the apron and dress the Queen. Then take the child to a secluded place where a nurse would be responsible for feeding, was presented to the King to accuse his wife of having let the beasts robbed his son. And when the King saw the apron stained with blood, gave credence to the accusation infuriated so much that he built a dungeon deep in which neither light of the sun or moon, and she sent enclose the Queen, condemning her to stay there for seven years without eating or drinking, to die of hunger and thirst. But the Lord God sent two angels from heaven in the form of white doves, which flew every day and brought him food; and this lasted until the seven years passed. Meanwhile, the cook had thought: "Since the child is endowed with the gift of seeing satisfied his desires, when I was here could cause my disgrace." He left the palace and went to the house of the boy, who was already grown enough to know how to speak, and said - You want to have a beautiful palace garden and everything that applies. And the words were barely out of the lips of the child, appeared all desired. At the end of some time, he told the cook: - It is not good to live alone; You want a beautiful girl for companion. The child expressed this desire, and immediately he was presented with a very beautiful maiden, as no painter had been able to paint. Thereafter they played together, and tenderly wanted, while the old cook went out hunting like a gentle man. But one day came the prince could feel like being on the side of his father, which perhaps would put him in a difficult situation. He went forth, and leaving the girl in a secluded place, he said: - Tonight, when the child is asleep, you approach his bed and plunge this knife into his heart, bring me his heart and tongue . If you do not, you will pay with life. He left, and returning to the next day, the girl had not done it, and said: - Why do I have to shed innocent blood that has not harmed anyone? - If you do not, it will cost you your life! 'I said the cook. When he left, the girl did bring a young doe and put to death; Then he took out the heart and tongue, and put them on a plate. A seeing the old man approached, said to his companion: - Lie down on the bed and cover yourself with the blanket! He entered the wicked and asked: - Where are the heart and tongue of the child? The girl reached the plate, and at the same time the prince, uncovering exclaimed: - Old damn, why did you kill me? Now hear your sentence. You are about to transform into Spaniel; You have a gold chain neck and eat hot coals, so that the fire will scorch your throat. And the time he uttered these words, the old man was transformed into spaniel, with a gold chain attached to the neck; and cooks gave him to eat hot coals, which seared his throat. King's son continued to live still some time there, always thinking of his mother, and if she were still alive. Finally he told the girl: - I want to leave my country; If you like to come with me, I take care of you. - Ouch! she exclaimed. It is so far! In addition, what shall I do in a country where nobody knows me? -. A prince seeing her uncertainly, as both would hurt the separation, he became carnation pinned in his buttonhole. He then set off their land, and the dog had no choice but to follow. He went to the tower that served as a prison to his mother, and, as was very high, expressed the desire to appear a ladder able to reach the dungeon, and down she asked aloud: - Madrecita my soul, Lady Queen, are you still alive or are you dead? And she said - I just eat and not hungry-thinking they were angels. But he said: - I am your beloved son, who falsely said that the beasts I had snatched from her lap; but I'm alive, and soon deliver you. And, turning to leave the tower, she walked to the palace of the king, his father, which was announced as a strange huntsman, and asked to be used in court. The King accepted his services, provided it was a skilled hunter and could get game, because in the kingdom had not ever been. The hunter promised to provide in amount sufficient to provide the royal table. He then gathered all the hunters, who were ordered to leave were arranged with him to the mountain. He left with them, and once they reach the ground, placed in a large open circle at a point; He was standing in the middle, he began to wish, and at one point entered the circle around a hundred magnificent pieces, and the hunters did not have more work to tear them down dead. They were then loaded into sixty carts and taken to the King, who saw, at the end, heaping hunting his table, after many years of being deprived of it. Very pleased the King, invited the next day to eat the whole Court, for which he prepared a splendid banquet. When they were all gathered, he said, addressing the young hunter: - Since you have shown such skill, you will sit next to me. - Lord King, your majesty does me too much honor, 'said the young man; I'm just a simple hunter. But the King insisted, saying - I want you to sit next to me-and the young man had to obey. The whole time he thought of his beloved mother, and so, expressed the hope that one of the highest courtiers talk about it and ask how it was faring in the tower Lady Queen; if was still alive or had died. Hardly he had this desire in his mind, when Marshal went to the Monarch in these terms: - Most Serene Majesty, since we are here all happy and enjoying, but how is the Lady Queen? Do you live or already dead? To which the king replied: - He let beasts devour my beloved son; I do not want to talk more about it. Then the huntsman arose, said: - My venerable Lord and Father, the Queen is still alive, and I am his son, and they were not beasts which robbed me, but old that evil cook while my mother slept, I snatched his lap, sprinkled her apron with the blood of a chicken -. And, grabbing the dog by the collar of gold, he added: This is the criminal! -and he sent for burning coals, that the animal had to eat in the presence of all, burning throat. He then asked King if he wanted to see him in his human form, and to her affirmative answer, turned to its original condition chef, with his white apron and the knife to the side. In the see the King, ordered, enraged, that arrojasen in the deepest dungeon. Then he continued the hunter: - My Father, will you also see the maid who has cared for me, and I was ordered to take away his life under his penalty, despite which did not? - Oh yes, with pleasure! said the King. - Father and my Lord, I shall show in the figure of a beautiful flower said the prince, and, pulling from his pocket carnation, put it on the royal table; and was beautiful as ever see another like King. He followed the child: - Now I'm going to present in its true human form-and wanted it to become a maid. And change occurred in the act, appearing before these young as beautiful as any painter would have known painting. The king sent two waitresses tower and two servants to fetch the Lady Queen, and bring her to the royal table. A getting to her, she refused to eat and said: - compassionate and merciful God who has supported me in the tower, I will call soon. yet He lived three days, and died as a saint. And the entombed be followed two white doves that had fed during their captivity, and they were angels of heaven, and fell on his grave. The old king ordered the cook to be quartered; but grief had taken over his heart, nor soon died. His son married the beautiful maiden who had been in the shape of flower, and God knows if alive.
The nail	1752	2039	Spanish	A merchant had done good business at the fair. Sold all their goods, returned well filled with gold and silver bag. Wanting to be home before dark, he put the money in his bag, atósela behind the chair and set off, riding his horse. At noon I stopped to rest in a city; he was about to continue his route, when the waiter of the inn, to the present horse, he said - Lord, in the left hull missing a nail behind the herradura.- No matter - answered the merchant -. Iron endure six hours remaining travel. You have prisa.Por the afternoon, after another break and a feed to the animal, the boy entered the room and said: - Lord, your horse has lost the horseshoe helmet left behind. Are you willing to take you to the blacksmith - Leave it - answered the merchant -; the animal will hold the remaining few hours to home. Prisa.Y've continued. But, to the little while, the horse began to stumble and limp then finally fell and broke a leg. The trader had to leave on the road, carry the suitcase and go walk the rest of the journey, arriving home very late and night. you name it has had a damn fault spot! - dijo.Apresúrate it calmly.
The lamb and fingerling	1340	450	Spanish	Once upon two little brothers, a boy and a girl, who wanted dearly. Her mother had died, her stepmother hated and tried always cause all the evil possible. It happened that one day the two brothers were playing on a meadow in front of his house, in the company of other children. And next to the meadow extendíase a pond, which reached to one side of the house. The children ran and played attained, and sang: "Duckling, love me a little, and I will give my bird pajarito.El seek me straw, the straw will give to my cow, the cow will give me milk rich; I will give milk to the baker, the baker will bake me cakes, pastries give them to the cat, the cat will hunt me mice, the mice hang them on their backs ... and you will bite !. " And they put in a circle, and which he played the word "bite" should run, chasing the other until they reached. The stepmother seeing them jump from the window so happily, he was angry and, as a witch, loved the two brothers, turning to the boy in fish, and the girl, on lamb. Here the fish swam sadly in the pond, and the lamb ran across the meadow, also sad, without eating or touching a tuft of grass. That it was some time, until one day came strangers to the palace, and the stepmother wicked thought: "This is a good opportunity," and called the cook and said: - Go to the meadow to find the lamb and kill it, because we have nothing to offer huéspedes.Bajó cook, grabbed the animal and took him to the kitchen, legs tied; and all she suffered with patience the beastie. But when the man, pulling the knife, came to the threshold for sharpening, he noticed a little fish with signs of great agitation, he swam against the landfill and looked at him. He was the brother, who, seeing that the cook was taking the lamb, he had gone from the center of the pond. then bleated the lamb from above: "Little brother who dwell in the pond, my poor soul is hurt and soon the cook sangrante.Muy unmercifully, I nailed the knife in the heart." He said the minnow: "Oh, sister, you call me from above my poor soul is hurt and sangranteen deep waters of the pond." A hearing cook talking to the lamb and directing the those pececito words so sad, asustóse and realized that he must not be a natural lamb, but the victim of a spell of bad witch casa.Dijo: - Calm down, I will not kill - and, taking another beef, the stewed and sacrificed for guests. Then he led the lamb to a good peasant, and explained what he had heard and witnessed. It turned out that precisely this peasant had been the nurse of the sister, and, suspecting the truth, the animal was a good fairy. this He pronounced a blessing on the lamb and the little fish, and both recovered at once his own human figure. Then he took a small house in a large forest, where they lived alone but happy and content.
The Raven	883	401A	Spanish	There was once a queen who had a young age-old daughter, whom he had to still carry in their arms. One day the child was naughty, and her mother could not calm her down in any way, until, losing patience, seeing crows flying around the palace, opened the window and said: - Would you seeming crow and echases to fly; at least have peace! Pronounced just these words, the girl was turned into a raven and shedding maternal arm, fled out the window. He went to a dark forest, where he remained a long time, and his parents lost all trace of her. One day, a man passing through the forest heard the caw of a crow; the approach to the place from which he heard the bird said: - I'm a Princess of birth and was delighted; but you can break free. - What should I do? - he asked. And the raven replied: - Follow the forest until you find a house, where he lives an old woman. Will offer food and drink; but do not accept anything, because by little to eat or drink'll be plunged into a deep sleep, and it will not be possible rescue. In the garden behind the house is a large pile of bark, there Stay there. For three days I will come at two in the afternoon, a car pulled in, the first time by four white horses; four red, the second, and by four black, the third; But if instead you find yourself being awake asleep, you can not disenchant me. Man promised to fulfill all the verbatim; But the raven he sighed: - Oh !, I know that I do not free yourself, because you accept something old. The man repeated his promise that he would not touch anything to eat or drink. At the meeting in front of the house, the woman came out to meet him. - Poor, and how tired you look! Comes to rest, eat and drink something. - No - replied the man - I do not want to take anything. But she insisted strongly: - If you do not want to eat, even drink a drink; once does not count. And the stranger, yielding to temptation, drank a little. In the afternoon, about two o'clock, he went out to the garden and sitting on the heap of bark, it was decided to wait for the raven. But he can not resist his weariness, he sat for a while with the firm intention not to fall asleep. However, hardly they had tended he closed his eyes and was so deeply asleep that nothing in the world could have awaken. At two o'clock the raven came to his chariot drawn by four white horses; but the bird had been sad, saying - I'm sure sleeping. And indeed, when he reached the rendezvous he saw lying on the floor asleep. He stepped away from the car, walked over to him and shook him and called, but in vain. At noon the next day, the old woman went back to provide food and drink. The man refused to accept; However, at the insistence, again another sip from the cup. Shortly before the two went back to the garden, to the place agreed to wait for the raven; but suddenly he struck him such intense fatigue legs not supported; unable to control himself, he threw himself on the ground and went back to sleep like a log. A passing crow in his chariot of four red horses, said sadly: - Sure sleeping! - and she approached him; but there was no way to wake him. A third day he asked the old: - What is that? Do not eat or drink. Do you want to die? But he replied: - I do not even want to eat or drink. She stopped beside the fountain with food and a glass of wine, and when the smell went to his nose, could not resist and took a long drink. At the appointed hour he went out to the garden and climbing on the pile of bark, he wanted to await the coming of the enchanted princess. But feeling even more tired than the day before, he lay down and fell asleep like stone. At two appeared again the raven in his car, drawn by four black horses now; the carriage was also black. The bird, which had been in deep mourning, said: - I know that sleeping and can not disenchanted! At the reach him, found him fast asleep, and, though it shook and called, there was no way to wake him. Then put his hand bread, a piece of meat and a bottle of wine, all these meals could eat and drink whatever he wanted, without ever fail. Also he puts on his finger a gold ring which was removed from his and he had etched his name. Finally, he left a letter informing him what had given him, and: "Well see here you can not disenchanted, but if you want to do, go get me to the golden palace of Stromberg, you can do it, I'm sure. " And, after depositing all things with him, he went back to his chariot and went to the golden palace of Stromberg. When the man woke up, realizing that he had fallen asleep, he felt a great sadness in his heart and said: - No doubt that has long passed, without my release. But looking at the objects deposited with him, he read the letter, and reported how everything had happened. He got up and went immediately in search of the golden castle of Stromberg; but did not have the slightest idea of ​​his whereabouts. After traveling much of the world, he came to a dark forest, through which he walked for two weeks without finding out. One evening was so tired, I lay down in some bushes, and fell asleep. The next morning he went his way, and at sunset when was about to settle into some bushes to spend the night, injuring his ears some lamentations and groans not let him fall asleep; and the time arrives when people turn on the lights, I saw shine a in the distance and headed toward her; he came to a house which seemed very small, since before her a huge gigantazo he was. He thought, "If I come and see me giant, it cost me my life." In the end, overcoming fear, approached. When the giant saw him, he said - I like to come, many hours ago I have not eaten anything. You are about to serve dinner. - Do not do such a thing - said the man -; I'm not easy to swallow. But if you want to eat, I have enough to fill you up. - Being well - said the giant - you can rest easy. If I wanted devorarte was a lack of something else. The two sat at the table, and the man took his bread, wine and meat inexhaustible. - I like this - he watched the giant, eating upon it. When they finished, the man asked: - Did could tell me where the golden castle of Stromberg rises? - will consult the map - said the giant -; in it they are registered all cities, towns and houses. He went to find the map, he kept in his bedroom, and began to search the castle, but it does not appear anywhere. - No matter - he said -; upstairs in the closet, I have other older maps, find them. But it was useless. The man was about to leave, but the giant begged him to wait two or three days to return his brother, who had gone in search of food. When the brother arrived, they asked about the golden castle of Stromberg. He answered: - When you have eaten and are satisfied, will consult the map. They then went to his room and began searching and rummaging on his map; but neither they found the castle blessed; the giant drew new maps, and did not rest until they finally found him, was, however, many thousands of miles away. - How can I get there? - asked the man; and the giant replied: - I have two hours. I'll take you to the neighborhood, but then have to go back to breastfeed our son. The giant transported up to about a hundred hours away from the castle, and said - the rest of the way can do it on your own - and came back. The man kept going day and night until, at the end, he came to the golden castle of Stromberg. It was built on top of a glass mountain; Princess was enchanted castle turns around in his car until he entered the building. The man was glad to see her and tried to climb to the top; but every time I tried it, like the glass was slippery, fell back. Seeing that could never climb, he was grieved and said, "I'll stay down and wait." And a cabin was built, where she lived for a year; and every day he saw pass the princess in her carriage, without ever reach it. One day from his hut, he saw three bandits who fought and shouted at them: - God be with you! They stopped the fight; but as they saw no one, recommenced with greater courage than before; it got really dangerous. He turned to shout: - God be with you! They suspended them again battle; but neither saw anyone, soon resumed and he repeated them for the third time - God be with you! - and thought, "I have to find out what happens." He therefore addressed the fighters and asked them why they were fighting. He said one of them had found a stick, a blow from which it was enough to open any door; the other said he had found a layer became invisible to the one she wore; as to the third, he had captured a horse able to walk throughout the grounds, and even climb the glass mountain. The disagreement was that they did not know whether to keep three things in the community or stay with one each. Then the man said: - I'll change them all three. I do not have money, but other items are worth more. But first I have to try to see if I told the truth. Others let you ride the horse, they hung the cloak from her shoulders and put his stick in his hand; and once he had it all disappeared from sight. then he began handing caning, shouting: - Haraganes, there have their deserved! They are satisfied? Then he climbed to the top of the mountain of glass and getting to the door of the castle, found closed. He slammed his stick, and the door opened immediately. He went inside and climbed the stairs to the top; in the living room was the princess with a golden cup full of wine before her. But I could not see him because he wore the cape on. A being in front of the maid ring removed her to put her finger and dropped into the cup; to the clash with the background, there was a twang. He said the Princess then: - This is my ring; therefore, the man who has to break free must be here. I searched the whole castle, but gave him. He had come to me out, mounted his horse, and had taken off his coat.
the destripaterrones	581	1535	Spanish	It was a village whose inhabitants were all rich farmers, and there was only one that was poor; so they called the destripaterrones. I had no even a cow, much less money to buy it; and he and his wife were dying to have one. One day the husband said: - Hey, I have thought of a good idea. I'll ask our compadre, the carpenter, who make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, so that it is like the other. So it will grow, and eventually will give a cow. The woman liked the idea, and the carpenter compadre cut and carefully brushed veal, elaborately painted and even did so bend down his head as if he were feeding. When, the next morning, the cows were taken, the destripaterrones called the pastor and said - Look, I have a little calf, but is still so young to be carrying it around. - Well, 'said the pastor, and adapting it to the shoulders, took her to the meadow and put it on the grass. The veal was motionless, grazing, and the pastor thought, "will soon run alone, judging by what you eat." At dusk, when entering cattle, said Pastor to the beef: - If you keep going on your legs and boots as you did, also can walk like the others. Do not expect to charge you. The destripaterrones, standing at the door of his home, awaiting the return of her little calf, and seeing pass the driving cattle herdsman and missing your pet, he asked for it. He said the shepherd: - There has been eating; He not wants to continue with the others. - Taking! exclaimed the farmer, I want my calf. Then again both to the meadow, but the veal was not; someone had stolen. - will have been lost, 'said the pastor. But the destripaterrones replied: - To me not give me that! -and filed complaint with the mayor, who condemned man, negligence, to compensate the plaintiff with a cow. And behold how the destripaterrones and his wife had finally the long-awaited cow. They were delighted, but as they had no forage, they could not feed him, and thus had to faenarla soon. After salting the meat, the man went to the city to sell the skin to buy a heifer calf with what it took off. During the march, on passing a mill, he found a crow that had broken wings; it collected by compassion, and wrapped in the skin. As time had become very ugly, with rain and wind, the man had no choice but to ask for accommodation at the mill. I was home alone the mill girl, who told the destripaterrones: - Sleep in straw -. And food offered bread and cheese. The man ate and then went to sleep with the skin on the side, and the woman thought. "Tired and already sleeps" Therein the sacristan, which was very well received by the mill girl, who said he entered: - The pattern is not; comes in and we will give a banquet. The destripaterrones not slept yet, and hearing they were about to be good life, angry at having to be content with bread and cheese him. She set the table and served roast, salad, cake and wine. When they were about to sit down to eat, they knocked on the door: - Good God! She cried the girl. Master!-. And, in haste, he hid the roast in the oven, wine under the pillow, the sheets salad and cakes under the bed; as to the sexton, he hid in the hall closet. then going to open to the miller, he said: Thank God you're back at home! Whoops time to go around the world! The miller, to the sight of the farmer lying on the hay, he asked: - What does that here? - Ah! He said the girl, is a poor wretch who took the rain and storm, and asked for shelter. I have given bread and cheese, and I have let you sleep in the hayloft. Said the man: - I have nothing to say to that; but soon prepare me something to eat. The girl replied. - Well, I have nothing but bread and cheese. - I content myself with whatever replied the man; come-and bread and cheese, looking at the destripaterrones, called: - Come, eat together. The other did not repeat and eat in good company. Viewing soil miller skin enveloping the raven, asked his guest: - What you got there? -a what the farmer replied: - In there I I have a soothsayer. - I, too, could you guess me things? said the miller. - Why not? said the labriego-. But only says four things; the fifth is booked. - Curiously said the man. Make me guess something! The farmer pressed the raven's head, and the animal let out a squawk, "CRR CRR !." He asked the miller: - What did you say? He said the farmer: - First, said there came under the pillow. - That would be good! cried the miller, and, going to check, he came back with the wine. Forward said. Again he made the destripaterrones cawing crow: - say now that there is roasted in the oven. - That would be good! He replied the other, and went forth, roast brought. The stranger continued to speak to the pajarraco: - This time says there is salad on the bed. - That would be good! He repeated the miller, and indeed, soon returned to her. For the last time, he pressed the destripaterrones raven's head and, playing his croak, said: - It turns out that there are cakes under the bed. - That would be good! cried the miller, and went into the bedroom, he found indeed cakes. They sat for two to the table as the girl of the mill, asustadísima was getting into bed, keeping all the keys. A miller would have liked to know the fifth thing; but the farmer said: - First we will eat quietly all, for the fifth is not so good. They ate, then, discussing the meantime the price I was willing to pay the miller for the fifth prediction, and were agreed three hundred ducats. destripaterrones then tighten again the head of the raven, making squawking loudly. He asked the miller: - What did you say? And the farmer replied: - You said that in the closet of the lobby is hiding the devil. - Well, the devil will have to leave! cried the owner running to open wide the door of the house. He then asked the key to the closet the girl, and she had no choice but to pass it; to the open the cabinet the destripaterrones, the sacristan ran like a soul by the devil, which Miller said: - I saw the black with my own eyes; you're right! The next morning, the destripaterrones was leaving at dawn with three hundred ducats in my purse. Back at home, man became the rumboso, and began to build a nice little house, so the villagers said among themselves - for sure the destripaterrones will have been in the country where it snows gold and people collect money baskets. The mayor summoned to give account of the origin of his wealth, and he said - I sold my cow's skin in town for three hundred ducats. A hearing that the peasants, eager to take advantage of such a splendid business, rushed to kill their cows and skinning them all with purpose of selling in the city and swell to make money. The mayor demanded that her maid was before the others; but when it was presented to the furrier of the city, he did not give but three ducats for a skin, and then those who came not offered nor so that even: - What do you do with so many skins? -told them. Farmers outraged to see that they had been deceived by the destripaterrones, and eager for revenge, he was accused of cheating before the mayor. The destripaterrones was unanimously sentenced to death: it would put in a leaky barrel and thrown into the river. He was taken to the outskirts of the village, and told the clerk he did come to the priest will pray for the requiem mass. Everyone else had to get away, and seeing the destripaterrones to the sexton, who had recognized surprised at the home of the miller and said: - I brought you out of the closet; now you get me out of the barrel! He happened to pass at that time, guiding a flock of sheep, a shepherd who knew the destripaterrones that I really wanted to be mayor, and he cried out with all his might: - No, I will not! Even if the whole world strive, I will not! Pastor heard the voices, approached and asked: - What's wrong? What you do not want to do? And the condemned man replied: - It is determined to make me mayor if you agree to get into a barrel; but I refuse. To which the pastor replied: - If for mayor just get into the barrel, I'm willing to do it right away. - If you walk, 'I'll be mayor said the farmer. The man consented, and got into a barrel, while the other applied and nailed the cover. Then he walked away with the shepherd's flock. The priest returned to the village and announced that he had prayed the mass, so that they all went to the place of execution, they pushed the barrel, which began rolling down the slope. She cried the shepherd - I want to be mayor! But the present, thinking it was the destripaterrones the so shouted, responded: - Also we wanted, but first you'll have to take a look down there! barrel-and plunged into the river. They returned the villagers to their homes, and the enter the village ran into the destripaterrones, which pimpante and very satisfied, also came driving his flock of sheep. Amazed, they asked: - Destripaterrones, where did you come from? Do you come from the river? - Of course, 'she said the man, I have sunk much, much, until finally touched bottom. I removed the lid of the barrel and left him, and behold, I found myself in a beautiful meadow where many lambs were grazing, and I brought this herd. They asked the peasants: - And still remain? - I think so 'he answered; more than they can carry. Then the villagers agreed to go all out to look for flocks; and the mayor said - I'm going ahead. They reached the edge of the river and just floated in the blue sky some of those little clouds that seem tresses, and nulliparous call, which were reflected in the water: - Behold the sheep, there in the background! They cried the peasants. The mayor came and said - I'll go down first to see how the thing; if it's okay, I'll call. And a jump, plum !, dove into the water. Others believed saying to them, Come !, and rushed after him. And behold, all the people drowned, and destripaterrones, as was the sole heir, became, for evil, in a rich man, for the riches achieved with dirty tricks or hoaxes, only lead to hell.
The money rained from the sky	1456	779	Spanish	There was once a girl who was an orphan and lived in so poor that there was no room or bed to sleep in, not possessing more than clothing that covered his body and slice of bread that had a kind soul; but it was very good and very pious. As it looked abandoned all set off, trusting few steps Dios.A found a poor man who said, "If I could give something to eat, because I have so hungry!" And she gave him all her bread saying, "God help you." He continued walking. Shortly after he found a child crying, saying, "I'm cold in the head, give me something to cover me." He took off his cap and gave. A little further he saw another one that was half frozen because he had no doublet and gave him his; the other finally asked her saya and gave it too. Being already night came to a wood, where another boy who asked the shirt found. Charitable girl thought to herself: "The night is very dark, no one will see me, well I can give you my shirt." And he gave también.Ya not anything left to give. But at the same instant they began to fall the stars of the sky and the reach Earth beautiful coins of gold and silver turned, and although he had taken off his shirt found another new entirely and much finer fabric. He gathered all the money and was rich for life.
Dr. Smarty	929	1641	Spanish	Once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who went to the city driving a chariot pulled by two oxen to sell to a doctor for a load of wood for two ducats. While they paid their money the doctor was sitting at table; when the farmer saw how well he ate and drank he became envious and thought that he too wanted to be a doctor. So few moments did not know what to do, and so he asked if it could not be done DOCTOR ¡Ya believe it! He answered the doctor; this is achieved fácilmente.-What should I do? You asked campesino.-First you buy an alphabet, those who have painted on the front pages gallito; secondly you sell your wagon and oxen, which serves, you buy suits and everything that is typical of the doctoral necessary; and, thirdly, to send a sign where it reads "I'm Dr. Wise Guy" and nailed up above the door of your home.The farmer followed the instructions to the letter. And behold, when he had doctored people awhile, but not much, a great man robbed a certain amount of money. Then someone told him about Dr. Wise Guy, who lived in this town and that should also know where the money was. So the Lord sent hook the car, went to that town, came to his house and asked if he was Dr. Smarty. Yes, it was. Then you have to go with him to recover the stolen money. Oh yeah!; but Grete, his wife, would have concurred Mr. acompañarle.El, invited the couple to go up to the car and set all. When they arrived at the mansion originally the table was already set, and the Lord asked him to dine before anything else. Delighted !, said, but his wife, Grete; and she sat with her on the table. When the first servant came with a dish of succulent delicacies, the peasant nudged his wife and said Grethe, that is the only primero.Y wanted to imply that this was who had served the first course; but the servant believed he meant "This is the first thief"; and as it really was he was afraid, and when he left he told his comrades: The doctor knows everything; let's go wrong unemployed; He said I'm out on top would not go second but had no choice and, as he did with his dish, the peasant, giving another nudge to his wife, said Grethe, that is the second servant segundo.El also he panicked and rushed out. A third fared no better, for the peasant again said Grethe, that is the tercero.El quarter served a covered source, and then the Lord asked him to show his arts guessing what it contained. The source had crabs. The doctor looked at the fountain and, not knowing what to answer, he exclaimed: 'Oh you poor crab hearing it exclaimed M.: -¡Ahí you have it: I know !; and also you know who has the dinero.Al servant entered him mortally panic and winked at the doctor, letting him know he left a moment. When he did, the four confessed to having stolen the money, assuring be willing to make restitution and to give further substantial sum if agreed not discover them, because they would head it. He also showed where they had hidden the money. The doctor was satisfied, he came back, sat down at the table and said, 'Sir, now'll look in my book to see where hidden the dinero.Y in these fifth servant hid in the chimney to see if Dr. still he knew more; but he opened his book and began leafing through it from top to bottom, looking rooster. As he could not find him, he said: I know you're there, and you have to salir.Creyó the chimney that went with it and left terrified of hiding saying: That man knows everything! Then Dr. Mr. Smarty showed where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it; He received a good remuneration for both parties and became a famous man.
The Rumpelstiltskin (Rumpelstiltskin)	524	500	Spanish	They say that in a very distant time the king decided to stroll through its domains, including a small village where he lived a miller with his beautiful daughter. In the interest the king for her, the miller lied to be important: "In addition to beautiful, is capable of turning straw into gold spinning it with a spinning wheel." The king, really happy with this quality girl, do not hesitate and took him to the palace. Once at the castle, the king ordered that would lead to the daughter of the miller a packed thatched room where there was also a distaff: "You have until dawn to show me that your father was telling the truth and turn this straw gold. otherwise, you will be banished. "the poor girl wept inconsolably, but behold a dwarf appeared that offered zany spin straw into gold in exchange for her necklace. The daughter of the Miller gave the jewel and ... zis-zas, zis-zas, the dwarf spun straw was becoming gold in the shins until he there was not a straw and the room sparkled by oro.Cuando the king saw the feat, driven by greed, he blurted out, "We'll see if you can do the same in this room." And he pointed to a larger room filled with straw and more than the previous day. The girl was desperate, believing impossible to accomplish the task but as the day before, appeared Rumpelstiltskin, "What will you give me if I spin the straw into gold?" He asked to be visible. "I have only this ring." Maiden said handing ring. "Let us begin," said the dwarf. And zis-wham, wham-zis, all the straw became spun gold. But the greed of the king did not end, and when he saw that his orders had been fulfilled, he announced, "will repeat the feat again, if you get it, I'll do my wife." For he thought that, despite being the daughter of a miller, he never finds women with better dowry. One more night girl cried, and again appeared the grotesque dwarf, "What will you give me in return to solve your problem?" He asked, jumping, the girl. "I have more jewels to offer," and thinking that this time she was lost, she cried inconsolably. "Well, in that case, give me your first child," he demanded enanillo. He accepted the girl: "Who knows how things will go in the future." - "He said to himself." And as had happened before, he was turning straw into gold as the stranger be spun. When the king came into the room, her eyes shone even more than gold that was watching, and summoned his subjects to celebrate the esponsales.Vivieron both happy and at the end of a year, they had a beautiful sapling. The queen now had forgotten the incident with the distaff, straw, gold and the dwarf, and therefore greatly frightened when a night elf appeared jumpy claiming his reward. "Please, midget, please, now possess wealth, will give you everything you want." How can you compare the value of a life something material? Love your son, "the dwarf demanded scruffy But both begged and pleaded the woman who touched the dwarf." You have three days to figure out what my name, if you guess right, I'll leave you to stay with the child. As much as he thought and racked his brain the molinerita to find the name of the dwarf, never got a correct answer correcta.Al third day, he sent his scouts to look different names to all corners of the world. Back, one of them told the story about a leprechaun to which he had seen jump to the door of a small hut singing: "Today I take wine, and tomorrow beer, then the child without traerán.Nunca missing, broken or not the head the name Rumpelstiltskin will guess! " When the dwarf again the third night, and asked his own name to the queen, this he replied: "Your name is Rumpelstiltskin!" "It can not be!" he shouted, "Do not you know! told you that the devil!" And so much and so great was his anger, which kicked on the ground that left leg buried halfway, and when he tried it out, the dwarf broke in half.
juniper	444	720	Spanish	For a long, long time, like some two thousand years, he lived a wealthy man who had a woman as beautiful as godly. They loved each other dearly, but they had no children, despite how much they wanted; the wife asked the sky day and night; but none came. In front of his house in a courtyard, growing a juniper and a winter day when the woman beneath him was peeling an apple, cut on a finger and blood fell into the snow. - Ouch! - he said with a sigh deeply, and watching the blood, he went into a deep depression: "If I had a red child like blood and white snow !," and saying these words, he felt suddenly in his inside a strange joy; He had a premonition that something unexpected would happen. He went into his house, spent a month and thawed snow; two months, everything was green, and flowers sprouted from the ground; the four, all the trees were a jumble of new green branches. The birds were singing, and trills resounded throughout the forest, and the flowers had fallen from the trees at the end of the fifth month; and the woman never tired of spending hours and hours under the juniper tree, which smelled so good. His heart leapt with joy, fell to his knees and was beside himself with joy. And when he had passed the sixth month, and the fruits were already swollen and juicy, felt in his soul a great placidity and stillness. A seventh month arriving ate many juniper berries, and sickened and felt a deep sadness. He then spent the eighth month, she called her husband and crying, she said: - If I die, bury me beneath the juniper. And suddenly, she was comforted and happy, and thus passed the ninth month. then she gave birth to a white child as snow and red as blood, and the sight of it, such was his joy, he died. Her husband buried her beneath the juniper, and not quite mourn; at the end of some time, her tears began to flow less copiously, to the end dried, and the man took another wife. With his second wife he had a daughter, and we said that the first marriage had left her a child as red blood and white as snow. A woman seeing her daughter, was in love with her; but when I looked at the small, jealousy oppressed his heart; he thought it was a continuous nuisance, and thought of nothing but try to remain entire fortune to her daughter. The demon inspired a deep hatred of the child; He began to send him from one corner to another, treating him to pushing and shoving, so the poor little one lived in constant fright. When he returned from school, there was a moment of rest for him. One day the woman was upstairs, her daughter came and said: - Mom, give me an apple! - Yes, my daughter - her mother said, and offered a very beautiful removed from the ark. But this ark had a large heavy lid with a lock wide and sharp iron. - Mom - continued the girl - Could not you also give you a little brother? The woman waved a bad mood, but said - Yes, when I get back from school. And behold, when I saw coming from the window, as if at that moment had entered into his soul the devil, removing the girl apple to give him, said: - Do not thou have you before your brother ! And the fruit back to the ark, closed. A child arriving at the door, the evil that took them inspired him affectionately: - My son, do you apetecería an apple? - he asked the small, looking at him with angry eyes. - Mom - she answered the boy - put a face scares me! Yes, I want an apple! And the inner voice of the devil made him say - Come with me - and, lifting the lid of the box: - I grab it yourself. And leaning little, he returned to tempt the devil. A sharp blow closed the ark with such violence that cut round the head of the child, which fell between apples. At the same moment the woman felt great anguish and thought, "I wish I had not done !." He went down to his room and pulled a white cloth comfortable; He placed his head on his neck cloth tied like a scarf, so that the wound is not noticed, and the dead boy sat on a chair outside the door, with an apple in his hand again. Later, Marlenita went into the kitchen, looking for her mother. This was beside the fire and stirred the boiling water that was in a pout. - Mom - said the girl - the little brother sitting in front of the door; It is all white and has an apple in his hand. I asked him to give me, but does not answer me. He has given me very afraid! - back - the mother said, - and if not you answer, you stick a bump on the head. Marlenita went out and said: - Brother, give me the apple! - But tracking, the quiet, the girl hit a blow to the head, which broke off and fell to the ground. The little girl was terribly frightened and began to mourn and cry. He ran to the side of his mother and exclaimed: - Oh Mama! I've cut my brother's head! - and she cried inconsolably. - Marlenita! - cried the mother. - What have you done? But shut up, that no one knows. As this can not be helped, I'll cook stew. And taking the child's body, he cuts it apart, threw it into the pot and cooked. Meanwhile, Marlenita did nothing but mourn and mourn, and tears fell into the pot, there was no need to throw salt. A father arriving home, he sat down at the table and asked: - Where is my son? His wife served as a great source, very large beef with black sauce, while Marlenita still crying helplessly. He repeated the man: - Where is my son? - Ouch! - she said -, has gone home to his mother's relatives; He wants to spend some time with them. - What is going to do there? At least he could have fired me. - I was so impatient! I asked that he might stay there six weeks. I take good care; It is in good hands. - Ouch! - exclaimed the father. - This disgusts me. He has done wrong; I could even have said goodbye. And he began to eat; addressing the girl said: - Marlenita, why are you crying? And will return your brother. Woman! - he continued, - what good food is today! Pour me more. And the more he ate, the most delicious found. - Put me more - insisted - I do not want to make anything; it seems as if all this was mine. And still he is eating, pulling the bones under the table, until he no longer was iota. But Marlenita, going to his dresser, pulled the bottom drawer of his most beautiful silk scarf, wrapped in his bones collected from under the table and brought them out, crying tears of blood. He deposited there in the grass, under the juniper, and when he did everything, suddenly felt a great relief and stopped mourn. Juniper then began to move, and its branches to come together and separated as when a person, feeling happy heart, clapping his hands together. a sort of fog surrounding the tree was formed, and in the middle of the fog appeared suddenly a flame, which flew a little bird beautiful, which rose into the air at high altitude, singing melodiously. And when he had gone, the juniper returned to remain as before; but the cloth with the bones was gone. Marlenita felt in his soul peace and joy, as if her brother were still alive. He went back into the house, he sat down at the table and ate their food. But the bird flew on, until you reach the house of a goldsmith, where he stopped and began to sing: "My mother killed me, my father ate me, and my good sister my little bones kept, put them on a doily silk , very nice !, and foot juniper buried. kivit, kivit, what a cute little bird I am !. " The goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain, and hearing the song of the bird that was perched on his roof, he thought he'd never heard anything so beautiful. He rose, and passing the doorpost, he left a slipper, and thus had to continue until the middle of the barefoot street foot, with his apron on one hand the gold chain, and the iron on the other; and the sun flooded the street with its bright rays. Raising his head, looked at the bird goldsmith: - How well you sing! - Told him -. Repeat your song! - No - replied the bird; - if I do not pay, I do not sing again. Give me your chain and sing again. - Behold the chain - said the goldsmith -. Repeat the song. Flew down the bird, picked up right leg chain and, perching in front of the goldsmith, he sang. "My mother killed me, my father ate me, and my good sister my saved huesecitos put them on a doily silk, very nice !, and foot juniper buried. kivit, kivit, what a cute little bird I am !. " He flew the bird to store the shoemaker and, perching on the roof, he returned to sing. "My mother killed me, my father ate me, and my good sister my huesecitos kept put them on a doily silk, very nice! and at the foot of juniper buried. Kivit, kivit, what a cute little bird I am !. "
Spirit bottling	939	331	Spanish	Once there was a poor woodcutter who worked from early morning until late at night. Having got to the end, collect some money he said to his son: - You are my only child; the money I managed to save my sweats, I'll spend it on your instruction. Learn a trade that is useful and honest, and you'll stay when I'm old and my members are so weak that they have to stay home sentado.Se was the boy to college and studied with application and diligence for a while, earning commendations their maestros.Después to study two or three courses, sold what little money collected by the father, and the youth was returning to the people. Alas - sadly said to the old - nothing more I can give you! They are very hard times, and just get to earn enough bread for each day.- Father - answered the boy - do not be anxious about this. When God has willed it so, it is to be for my good. Arreglaré.Como me and the father was preparing to leave for the forest to earn a few coins in his office lumberjack, said to his son: - Let me go with you to ayudaros.- No, son - answered the woodcutter -. I would be very painful, because you're not used to this kind of work; resistirías not. In addition, I have only one ax and no money to buy other.- Ask for one at the neighbor - said the waiter. He will lend his ax until I have earned enough to buy una.Fue man to borrow an ax to his neighbor, and awakening the day they went together to the forest, where the son began to help his father, working with all zeal and joy. At noon, when the sun was overhead, the old man said: - Now we will rest and eat; then resume the trabajo.Cogiendo boy bread, he said: - Rest you, Father. I'm not tired; I'll wander around a bit looking for nidos.- not be silly - cried the old -. If you're running around, then you will be given and you can not even lift his arm; you better stay conmigo.Pero the son went into the woods looking happily eating bread and branches in search of nests. So he walked aimlessly, he reached the foot of a tall, burly oak, which appeared several hundred years and whose trunk, embrace just five men with outstretched arms. He stopped and thought, "Many are the birds that have made their nest here." Suddenly it seemed to hear a voice; listening intently, he caught a few words in a tone off: "Let me out, let me out !." He looked around, but found nothing. The voice seemed to come from inside the earth. He then shouted: - Where do you voice he answered: - I'm here, among the roots of oak! Let me out, let me out! The student began to clear the foot of the tree and dig in the earth among the roots, until at the end, he discovered a glass bottle tucked in a small hollow. At the lift and examine it in the light, he saw a shape, like a frog jumping inside the bottle. "Let me out, let me out !," he heard, and the waiter, without thinking anything bad, removed the cap from the botella.Inmediatamente came out a spirit, which began to grow so rapidly that within a few moments he had become a horrible man, big and burly as half of the roble.- you know - said the monster with terrible voice - what will be your reward for having freed - No - answered the boy without fear -. How do I know - Well, I'll tell you - shouted the spirit -; a reward, I'll wring your neck! - you able to tell me before - replied the boy - and would have left you where you were! For now, let my head in place, because we have to consult other people.- Other people, other people! You say what they want, you will receive the reward you deserve. Do you think that I have been locked up so long in this bottle to me a favor? No, it was for punishment. I am the powerful Mercury. Whoever set me free, I have to break his cuello.- Little by little! - she replied the student -. We do not rush. Before I know if really you who was imprisoned in the bottle and if it is in fact a genuine spirit. If you are able to re-introduce it, I'll believe; and then you can do whatever you want with me in gana.- This is very easy - said the spirit, full of arrogance; and will shrink to be so small and subtle as before, he slid down the neck of the bottle and got inside. Just it was put, the student quickly applied the cap and returned the bottle in the place where her out, among the roots of oak, thus leaving outwitted the espíritu.Disponíase the waiter to return with his father, when the spirit he exclaimed plaintively: "let me out, let me out!." - no - Then said the boy - I'll catch you no second time! I not drop again who would take my life, now that I have reduced the impotencia.- If you let me free - cried the spirit - I'll give you riches enough for all LIFE.- No. I engañarías as antes.- you jugándote your happiness - insisted the spirit -. Not you no harm, but reward you with largueza.Pensó the student: "I will venture, perhaps keep his word Anyway, I will not fish.." He took off his cap, came the spirit and dilating as the first time, prontoquedó transformed into a gigante.- Now I will give the promised reward - he said, and extending to the boy like a cloth patch, continued -. Rub a wound with one end of the cloth, he will be cured in the act; and if you rub the other end an iron or steel, to the moment will become PLATA have to try it before - said the student. He approached a tree with his ax and tore some bark; then rubbed the trunk with the end of the patch, and then was covered with corteza.- Well, you have not deceived me - told the spirit - we can now separarnos.El spirit thanked him for having freed, and the student he gave, in turn, by the gift and returned to his FATHER Where were you? - asked him the old -. Apparently you have forgotten work. I always thought you would not do anything Thumbs Up Do not haste, father. I'll get the time perdido.- Ya see it! - he grumbled the old -. It is not that the way of portarse.- Look, father, how short that tree. Hear how creaks. He rubbed the ax with his patch and struck a strong blow; but because the iron had turned into silver, the cutting edge twisted -. Father the meanest ax you've given me! Behold how he twisted Asustóse is old and said: - Dear God, what have you done! Now I will have to pay the ax and I have to do. This is the benefit I got from your ayuda.- Do not be haste, - said the son -; I will pay the herramienta.- blockhead! - he cried the woodcutter -. What you think you pay it? You have but what I give you. Wiles of student you are not lacking, but the office of woodcutter do not understand a palabra.Al After a while the student said: - Father, because I can not continue working; the better it dejemos.- What! - she replied the old -. You think I'll be hand over hand like you? Walk away if you want, that I have yet to hacer.- Father, it is the first time I've gone to the forest and do not know the way. Come along old conmigo.Al he relented and allowed anger to convince. They began, therefore, return, and along the way the old man said to the boy: - Go and sell the damaged ax. Get all you can for her; the rest I have to earn to pay the waiter vecino.El went with the tool to the city, and, entering the shop of a goldsmith, he offered it for sale. Examinóla the silversmith and then weighing said - worth four shields; but now I do not have much money here.- Give me what you have; I'll pay the rest later - he proposed the muchacho.Pagóle the three hundred shields goldsmith, and he was indebted to another hundred. Boy return home: - Father - he said - because I have money. Go and ask the neighbor what you owe by the hacha.- not have to ask - said the woodcutter -. Worth a shield Give him six Rooms.- For three shields; He is twice and be happy. Behold, I have money - and, handing his father a hundred crowns, he said -: Nothing will be missing. You can live tranquilamente.- My God! - cried the man -; And how has he gotten all this wealth? Then he told the child what had happened and how, trusting in luck, had made that rich acquisition. With the rest of the money he went to continue his studies at the university; and how, thanks to its patch, healed all wounds, soon convirtióse the most famous doctor worldwide.
The glass coffin	1555	410	Spanish	No one say that a poor tailor can not go far and achieve high honors. It suffices to who guesses the opportunity, and this is the main thing, get lucky. A gentle and witty oficialillo of this class, went one day running world. He came to a great forest, unknown to him, and got lost in the thicket. He closed the night and had no choice but to look for shelter in that dreadful solitude. Certainly she could have found a soft bed in soft moss; but the fear of wild animals not kept quiet, and so, he decided to climb a tree to spend the night in it. He chose a tall oak and climbed up the cup, giving thanks to God for bringing up your iron, because, otherwise, the wind blowing through the treetops, it would have been flying. He spent several hours in complete darkness, between tremors and anxieties, until, in the end, he saw walking distance shining a light. Assuming that this was a house that would offer better shelter than the branches of a tree, down gingerly and walked to the place where the light was coming. He found himself with a hut built of plaited reeds and rushes. He called encouragingly, the door opened and the glow of the lamp, he saw a little old gray-haired, wearing a dress made of scraps of different colors. - Who are you and what do you want? - the old man asked him shrilly. - I am a poor tailor - he answered - who has surprised the night in the woods. I strongly urge you to give me accommodation in your hut until morning. - Follow your road! - old replied irritably -. I do not want dealings with vagabonds. Go find accommodation elsewhere. And was about to close the door; but the tailor grabbed the edge of her dress and begged so vehemently, that in the end, the man, who at heart was not as bad as it looked, relented and took him into the hut; She fed him and prepared a good bed in a corner. He did not need the tailor who mecieran tired and slept a sweet sleep late into the morning; and God knows what time he would not have been awakened by a great uproar of shouts and roars that echoed suddenly through the flimsy walls of the hut. Feeling born in his soul an unexpected value, he rose to his feet, he dressed quickly and went out. There he saw, very close to the cabin, a huge black bull and a magnificent deer were locked in furious fight. Acometíanse each other with such ferocity, that the ground shook with their trampling, and the air vibrated with his screams. For a long time he was indecisive victory, until at the end, deer antler sank into the body of his opponent, he collapsed with a roar horrible, and was topped by the deer horns. The tailor, who had attended, astonished, into battle, yet still remained when the deer running leaps and bounds toward him, without giving him time to escape, so powerful ahorquilló with his antlers. He could not surrender to man much reflection, for the animal in wild race, cross country led him by mountains and valleys, meadows and forests. Clutching tightly to the ends of the cuerna abandonóse to the destination. It seemed to be flying. To order the deer stood before a wall of rock, and gently deposited the tailor on the floor. This, more dead than alive, regained his senses cape long. When he was, to some extent, in his right mind, he saw the deer horns with great fury against a door in the rock and burst open. The gap left by large flares, followed by a dense steam that hid the deer in his eyes. Man did not know what to do or where to go to escape those solitudes and found again among men. He was indecisive and frightened when he heard a voice coming out of the rock and told him: - Come without fear, you will not suffer any damage. The tailor hesitated a moment, until, driven by a mysterious force, walked, obeying the voice dictation. Through an iron gate he came to a spacious living room, whose ceiling, walls and floor were brilliantly polished stone blocks, each of which was engraved an indecipherable sign. All he stared in mute admiration, and was about to leave when allowed himself to hear the mysterious voice again: - Put on the stone in the middle of the room; I expect a great joy. Both had emboldened our man, no longer hesitated to follow the voice instructions. The stone began to give way under his feet and was sinking slowly inland. When he stopped, the tailor looked around and saw that it was in another room of equal size to the first; but she was more worthy things to be seen and admired. In the walls it was hollow as a niche containing glass vessels filled essences transparent color or blue smoke. On the floor, placed face to face could be seen two large glass urns, which immediately attracted his attention. At the approach one could see inside a beautiful building, resembling a palace, surrounded by stables, barns and other outbuildings. Everything was miniature, but subtle and delicately carved as the work of a skillful workman. Surely he would have continued plunged in contemplation of that magnificence, he has not been heard again the voice, inviting him to turn and look the other glass case. Whats would be astonished at seeing a girl in her divine beauty. He seemed asleep, and her hair wrapped her long fair as a precious mantle. His eyes were closed, but ruddy color of his face and a tape moving to the rhythm of his breathing, left no doubt that he was alive. The tailor watched the maiden beautiful beating heart, when suddenly she opened her eyes and distinguishing to the waiter, broke into a cry of joy: - Good heavens! It has come time for my release! Hurry up, hurry, help me out of this prison! If descorres the bolt of this glass coffin, I will be disenchanted. He obeyed without hesitation tailor; it lifted the glass cover of the coffin and left ran at an angle of the room, where it was covered with a large mantle. Then he sat on a stone, called his young side and, after kissing him in friendship, he said - Libertador mine, who was pining so long! Kindly heaven sent you to put an end to my suffering. The same day when they end, start your bliss. You are the husband who has destined me heaven. Loved me and full of all earthly goods, you will experience filled with joy until it sounds the hour of your death. Sit and listen to the story of my misfortunes. "I am the daughter of an earl opulent. My parents died when I was still very young, and in his will I entrusted to the care of my older brother, who looked after my education. We wanted dearly, and were leaving so consistent in all our thoughts and . leanings, we made the decision never to marry and live together until the end of our days There were always visitors in our house, neighbors and strangers came often and all we gave them splendid hospitality "One evening came riding to our castle. , a foreigner who asked us accommodation for the night because he could no longer go to the next town. We attended his prayer with the courtesy of the case, and during dinner we were entertained with his talk and his stories. My brother felt so comfortable in his company, which will remain begged a couple of days, which he accepted it after some objections oppose us. We got up from the table and late at night, assign us a room at the stranger, and I, feeling tired, I went to ask the rest soft feathers. I began to doze when I revealed the strains of a delicate and melodious music. Not knowing where I came, I wanted to call my maid, who slept in an adjoining room. But with great astonishment I realized that oppress my chest like a nightmare horrible, was deprived of voice and deliver sound not get smaller. At the same time, in the light of the lamp, I enter my chamber abroad, despite being double door firmly closed. Coming close, he told me, using the magical power that he was gifted, had produced this beautiful music to stay awake, and now came without locks obstacle they were to offer me his heart and hand. "But my distaste for his diabolical arts was so great that neither I deign to answer Remained him motionless while standing, no doubt expecting a favorable response;. But seeing that I persisted in my silence, I said angrily that he would find the means of revenge and punish my pride, after which he went out of the room. "I spent the disquietude night, unable to sleep until dawn. At the wake, I ran for my brother to tell him what happened; but I did not find in your room. His servant told me, to the point the day had gone hunting with the stranger. "Stirred by forebodings dark dressed hurriedly sent saddled my horse and followed by a servant, I turned to gallop into the forest. The horse of my servant stumbled and broke a leg, so the man could not come with me while I continued my route without stopping a few minutes I saw the stranger coming towards me driving a deer beautiful tied a rope felt in my chest an irrepressible anger, pulled out a gun and shot against the monster.. but the bullet bounced off his chest and went to bruise the head of my horse. I fell to the ground, and the stranger muttered some words that left me senseless. "at the back of me, encontréme in this underground pit, enclosed in the glass coffin . He again presented the witch and told me that my brother was transformed into a stag; my palace, reduced to miniature, with all its dependencies, held in this glass ark, and my people, turned into smoke, trapped in glass jars. If I agreed to his claims, it would be very easy return everything to its original state. He had only to open jars and urns, all recover their condition and natural way. I did not answer him, as before, and then he disappeared, leaving me in my prison, where he was mired in deep sleep. Among the visions that passed through my soul I was one, consoling: that of a young man who came to my rescue. And today, opening my eyes, I've seen, and thus has bartered the dream into reality. Help me now to make other things that happened in my dream. The first is placed on slab great that the ark glass containing my palace "As soon gravitated on the stone the weight of the ark, began to rise, dragging the maid and the boy, and the opening of the roof, reached the top, from which it was easy to go outdoors. There, the girl opened the lid and it was wonderful to see how quickly widened the palace, houses and units to reach its natural size. then Returning to the underground vault, loaded onto the stone jars filled with essences and vapors, and, as the maid's were uncovered, they left them blue smoke, becoming living persons, in whom the countess recognized his servants and servants. and their joy reached the height when the brother who, being deer had killed the witch in the shape of bull, was presented the forest coming to them. Here the same day, the maid, fulfilling his promise, gave the fortunate tailor his hand before the altar.
Faithful John	50	516	Spanish	Once upon a time an old king, he felt sick and thought: It is certainly my deathbed this where I lie. And he ordered: "Tell Faithful John to come." It was his favorite servant, and was so called because he had been faithful throughout his life to his master. When he was at the foot of the bed, said to the King: "My most faithful John, I sense approaching my end, and there is only one thing that haunts me.. My son is still young and does not always know to guide himself if I do not promise to teach him everything you need to know and velarás for him as a father, I can not close my eyes in peace. " - "I promise I will never abandon you," answered Faithful John, "I will serve you faithfully, even if it cost me my life." Then the old King said: "So quiet and die in peace." And he went on. "When I am dead show him around the palace, all the rooms, the halls, the underground and saved them treasures But take heed to show the last chamber of the long gallery, where the picture is the princess of the it Golden roof, as if he saw it, fall in love lost with her, lose consciousness, and his cause would be exposed to great dangers, so hold fast to it. " And when Faithful John had renewed the promise to his king, he fell silent this and, resting his head on the pillow, I murió.Llevado to his grave the body of the old King, Faithful John realized his young lord than promised his father on his deathbed, and added: "I will do it promptly and will keep faithfully as I saved him, although I would have to cost you your life." It celebráronse the funeral, the mourning period passed, and then Faithful John told King: "It's time you see your inheritance; I will show you the palace of your father." And she accompanied him through the palace, up and down, and let him see all the treasures and magnificent apartments; just stopped opening which hung the dangerous picture. This was positioned so that it looked just opening the door, and was of such perfection that seemed to live and breathe, and that the whole world could not find anything more beautiful and more delicate. But the young King did not escape that faithful John always walked past this door without opening it, and so he asked, "Why do not you open ever?" - "It is in this piece there is something you would cause fear," answered the servant. But the king replied: "I have seen all the palace and I also know what's in there, and heading for the door, tried to force her." Faithful John held him back and said, "I promised your father before he died, you would not see what's in this room, we could bring great misfortune, you and me." - "To the contrary," he replied the young King. "If you do not go, my downfall is safe. No rest day or night until I had seen it with my own eyes. I do not move from here until I you open this door." Then Faithful John saw that there was no other remedy, and with heavy heart and many sighs he took the key from the great bunch. When I had the door open, he entered the first intending to cover the box, so that the King did not see it. But what will it served? King, standing on tiptoe, looked over his shoulder and seeing the portrait of the maiden, resplendent with gold and precious stones, fell to the ground senseless. Levantólo Faithful John and took him to his bed, thinking. with great anguish: "The misfortune has befallen my God What will happen now.!?" And he gave wine to revive him. King regained consciousness, his first words were: "Oh !, Who is this portrait so beautiful" - "Is the princess Golden Roof," answered faithful servant. And the King: "So great is my love for her, that if all the leaves of the trees were tongues, would not suffice to express my life put into play to achieve it, and you, my faithful John, you must help me get it.." the faithful servant was ruminating long time on how to undertake the business. because only reach the presence of the princess was already very difficult. Finally, he came up with a means, and said to his master: "All you have around you is gold. Tables, chairs, dishes, glasses, cups and all the furniture of the house in your treasure is, there are five you tons of gold, "commands to give one to the goldsmiths of the kingdom, and with it manufactured all kinds of glasses and utensils, all kinds of birds, vermin and fabulous animals; this will like; thus we will path to fortune. "The king summoned all the goldsmiths of the country, which worked tirelessly to end those precious objects. Then it was loaded everything into a boat, and Faithful John and the King they dressed merchants to not be known to anyone Then they put to sea, and sailed until arriving in the city where the princess of the roof of Oro.El faithful John asked the King to remain on board, and wait for back alive. "a Maybe back with the princess, "he said." Procurarás therefore everything is well arranged and tidy, the gold in sight and the boat well bunting. "He filled the girdle of all manner of precious objects, landed and she went out of the royal palace. a coming into the yard he saw next to the well to a beautiful girl busy filling water two buckets of gold. at the turn to take the water reflecting the flashes of gold, saw abroad and asked who he was. he answered: "I am a mer cader, 'and opened his belt, showed it contained. "Oh how nice!" I said it, and leaving the cubes on the floor, began to examine the jewels one by one. Then he said: "We need to see the princess, he likes both things of gold, which no doubt you will buy them all." And, grabbing the man by the hand, led him into the interior of the palace, as it was the main waitress. When the King's daughter saw these wonders, he was very happy and said, "It is so beautifully worked, that I buy you everything." He replied Faithful John: "I am only the servant of a rich merchant's nothing what I bring here compared to what my master has on the boat. The most beautiful and precious than has ever been done in gold." Apprentice must give her to take him to the palace, but he replied: "There are so many things that would require many days and has more rooms than your palace." These words only served to stimulate the curiosity of the princess, which told to "Come with me to the boat, I myself go to see the treasures of your master." Faithful John, very pleased, led then to the boat, and when the King saw her, it seemed that her beauty was even greater than that of the portrait, and heart beat so violently that it was about to explode. He climbed aboard Princess and King accompanied her to the interior of the ship; but Faithful John stood beside the pilot and ordered him to sail, "displays all the candles, so that the ship fly faster than a bird!" Meanwhile, King showed the princess gold plate, piece by piece: dishes, glasses and cups, as well as birds and wild animals and prodigies. It took many hours so and the princess, absorbed and enraptured, did not realize that the ship had made to the sea. When he had already covered all thanked the merchant and prepared to return to the palace, but climbing on deck saw that he was very far from land and that the ship was sailing under full sail, "Woe is me!" he exclaimed. "I have betrayed, have kidnapped me! I'm in the hands of a merchant! A thousand times die!" But the King, taking her hand, said, "I am not a merchant, but a king, and birth no less honorable than yours If you've kidnapped a ruse, has been for the immense love I have for you.. it is so great that the first time I saw your picture I fell to the ground senseless. " These words calmed the princess, and as affection felt by the King, gladly accepted to be his wife. It happened, however, as were still at sea, that Faithful John, sitting in the bow of the boat playing a musical instrument, seen in the three air crows came flying. Then he stopped playing and started to listen to their conversation, because he understood their language. He said one: "! Look takes home the Princess of the Golden Roof." - "Yes," he replied the second. "But there is not yours." And the third: "How that is not yours If you are with him in the boat." Returning to speak first, he said: "What matters As disembarking is closer to trot a brown horse, and he will want to mount it, but if it does, will fly both through the air, and never again the King! see his princess. " He said the second, "And there is no remedy?" .? - "Yes, there is: if another comes forward to ride and a gun goes in the horn of the animal, kills him with a shot Only in this way can save the King, but who will know Y if someone knew and revealed, I would be turned to stone from his toes to his knees. " Then he spoke the second.. "is still more even if they kill the horse, nor will the King to his girlfriend When you come together in the palace, will find a tray shirt wedding will look like woven gold and silver, but in reality is sulfur and fish. If the King puts it, it will burn and burn until the marrow of his bones. " He asked the third, "And there is no remedy?" - "Yes, there is," he replied the other. "If someone grabs the shirt with gloves and throws it into the fire, King will be saved. But what good is! If anyone knows and says to the king, I will become stone from the knee to the heart." Then said the third, "For I know more still Although the jacket burn, nor the King will have his girlfriend when, after the wedding, start dancing and she comes queen dancing, suddenly turn pale and fall down as dead.. . If nobody comes to lift it right away and he sips of her right breast three drops of blood and spit them out again immediately, the queen will die. But who knows it and says it will become stone statue from the toes to the crown. " Having thus spoken, the crows took flight, and faithful John, who had heard and understood everything remained since then sad and taciturn; for if shut, would disgraced his master, and if he spoke, he would pay with his own life. Finally, he said to himself: "I will save my master, even if I lose me." He happened to land what the raven foretold. He approached a magnificent sorrel trot: "Aha!" He exclaimed the King. "This horse will take me to the palace." And he was about to mount it when Faithful John, anticipating, and climbed into it jumped up and drew his gun the pommel, struck down the animal with one shot. Servers King, who had a grudge against the faithful John, burst into shouts: "What a scandal To kill such a beautiful animal, that was to lead to the King at the palace!" But the king said, "Shut up and let him do my faithful John He knows why he does it..." To get to the palace and enter the room, put on a tray, came the wedding shirt, clear as if it were woven of gold and silver. The young king was about to catch her, but faithful John pushed him away and taking the garment with gloved hands, threw it quickly to the fire and stood watching until he saw consumed. Other servers in murmurings untie again: "Look, now burned wedding shirt King!" But he said: "Who knows why he does Let him who is my faithful John!." Then the wedding, and started dancing. The bride went to dance; Faithful John not lost sight, watching her face. Suddenly he turned pale and fell to the ground as if dead. John lunged at her, picked her up and took her to a room; laid her on a bed, and, kneeling down, sipped her right breast three drops of blood and then spat. A Queen instant recovered breath and recovered; but the King, who had witnessed the scene and was unaware of the reasons which induced Faithful John to act in that way, cried out in anger: "Lock him in a dungeon!" At the next day, the loyal servant was sentenced to death and taken to the gallows. When he had climbed the ladder, raised his voice and said, "To all who have died are given the grace to speak before being executed Did not I also grant me this right.?" - "Yes," said the King. "I'll grant you." Then Faithful John spoke thus: "I have been convicted unjustly, because I've always been faithful." And he explained the colloquium had heard ravens at sea and how he had to do those things to save his master. Then said the king, "Oh, my most faithful John Grace, grace Bajadlo!" But the the last word, the loyal servant had fallen lifeless statue piedra.El become King and Queen were pricked in their heart. "Oh my!" King lamented. "What have underpaid their great fidelity!" And, sending lifting the stone statue, she made her place in her room at the side of his bed. Every time I looked, could not hold back tears and said, "Oh, I wish I could give you back your life, my most faithful John!" Some time passed and the Queen gave birth to twin sons, who grew up and were the joy of his parents. One day the Queen was at church and the two children had been playing with his father, he looked sadly at the stone statue and sighed: "Oh, my faithful John, if I could give you back your life!" And behold, the statue began to speak, saying: "Yes, you can bring me back to life, if this sacrifice for what you love." To which King replied: "For you I will give everything in the world!" - "That being the case," continued the stone, "cut with your own hand head to your children and your blood Untame Only in this way I will live." He trembled to hear that King had to kill their dear children; but remembering the great faithfulness of John, who had died for him, drew his sword and cut off his head to the two children. And as soon as he sprayed the statue with his blood, he was lifted up the stone and Faithful John reappeared before him, alive and well, and said to the king: "Your selflessness will not go unrewarded," and, grabbing the heads of children, duly applied to their little bodies and smeared the wounds with their blood. At the ceremony the children were lush and full of life, jumping and playing as if nothing had happened. King was full of happy. When she heard the Queen coming he hid Juan and children in a large closet. At the entering her, and said, "Have you prayed in the church?" - "Yes," he replied his wife, "but I was constantly thinking of Faithful John, who sacrificed his life for us." And the king said: "My dear wife, we can restore life, but this sacrifice will cost us our two little children." He blanched Queen and felt a terrible anguish in my heart; however, he said: "We owe it, for his great loyalty." The king, pleased at seeing his wife thought as he ran to the closet and, opening it, took out his two sons and John, saying, "Praise be to God, is saved and have also recovered our little children!" And she told him everything that happened. And since then they lived together happily until death.
Cat and mouse in common	13	15	Spanish	A cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and such protests made him affection and friendship, to the last the mouse agreed to bring home with him and to live together. "But we have to think about winter, because otherwise go hungry," said the cat. "You, little mouse, can not venture out everywhere, so would fall into a trap." Following, then, that farsighted advice, they bought a little pot full of butter. . But then the problem where it would keep until after long reflection, he proposed the cat was presented. "Look, the best place is the church there nobody dares to steal anything I hid under the altar, and not touch it until necessary. " Thus, the pout was put in a safe place. But a long time had not passed when, one day, he felt cat eager to try the candy and said to the mouse, "Hey, little mouse, a cousin of mine has Godfather fact his son me, just born to him one little one white skin spots brown, and wants me to take him to the baptismal font so is that today I have to go,.. watch your house " - "Very well," he answered the mouse, "Go in God's name, and if you get something good to eat, remember me I would like to drink some of the wine from the party.." But everything was a lie; nor he had any premium or cat they had no godfather. It was straight to the church, crept up the pot of fat, he began to lick and all the outer layer licked. He then took the opportunity to take a little walk across the rooftops of the city; then he stretched out to the sun, licking his whiskers whenever he remembered the tasty pot. He did not come home until dark. "Well, we're back," said the mouse, "surely you've had a good day." - "It was wrong," he replied the cat. "What name did put it to the little boy?" He inquired the mouse. "Started," dryly replied the cat. "Started?" his companion exclaimed "Wow weird and bizarre name! Is it common in your family?" - "What did you find of particular?" said the cat. "No worse than Robamigas, as they call your parents." Shortly after he came to the other cat will, and said to the mouse: "You will have to do me the favor of taking care of the house, then again they asked me to be godfather and as the little has been born with a white band around the neck, I can not refuse. " The good-natured little mouse, concurred, and the cat crept behind the town wall to reach the church, half the contents of the pot ate. "Nothing tastes as good," he said to himself to himself as what one eats. And the sea was satisfied with the task of the day. A coming home the mouse asked, "How did you put it this time to the small?" - "Half," answered the cat. ""Half? What an idea! In my life had I heard such a name; I bet that is not on the calendar. "It was not long before a cat will do him again salivating thinking of butter." Good things always go in threes, "said the mouse." Another once I have to act as sponsor; This time, little is black of the whole, only has white paws; Besides them, no white hair all over the body. This happens very infrequently. Do not mind if I go, right? "-" Begun, Half "answered the mouse." These names give me much to think about!. "-" As you are all day at home, with your gray frock coat and your long braid , "said the cat," Sure, you pick hobbies. These ruminations are you from the never leave "During the absence of his companion, the mouse was dedicated to organize the house and leave her as silver, while the wolverine the remaining fat the pout cat devoured". It is very true that one it is not quiet until it has cleaned everything, "he said to himself, and ahíto like a barrel, did not come home until late at night. a mouse lacked time to ask what name had been given to the third kitten." Surely you will not like either, "said the cat." it's called Done. "-" Finished "cried the mouse." This one is the most outlandish of all name!. I never saw him writing in print. Finished! What the hell do you mean? "Then she shook her head, curled into a ball and began to dormir.Ya not again invite the cat to be godfather, until, come winter and scarce pittance, because nothing was by . the streets, mouse remembered their reserve provisions "Go, cat, let's find the pot of butter to keep; Now we will taste good. "-" Yes, "answered the cat," you know how when you get your tongue out the window "They went therefore, and getting to the cache, there was the pout, indeed, but. . empty "Woe" cried the mouse, "Now I understand everything.; now clearly I see what a good friend you are. You ate it all when you told me you were going to sponsor First top off, then half done, then ... "-" Will you shut up "cried the cat." If you add another word, I devour "" Finished,! "I had already poor mouse on the tongue. he could not stand the word, and hardly was released, the cat jumped and seized him, he swallowed a mouthful. so are things in this world.
The giant and the tailor	1742	1049	Spanish	A tailor who was so boastful as bad payer, metiósele in his head going for a walk in the woods. As soon as he could, he left his workshop and marchó.por village and hamlet, by bridge and walkway, aimless constantey always adelante.Desde far discovered in the blue distance a mountain steep and behind a high tower, jutting from a thick, dark selva.- Hell! - he exclaimed the tailor -. What is that? - and, driven by an irrepressible curiosity, he went to the place with renewed bríos.Pero, what a mouth and eyes opened when, approaching, saw that the tower had legs and, clearing a jump mountain steep, plantóse to him in a giant figure awful - What you want here, mosquito contemptible? - gritóle the monster with a thunderous voice like trueno.Respondió, softly, the tailor: - I came to take a walk through the woods, hoping to win at poderme a piece of pan.- If you have time - said the giant - can enter my service.- If there is no other choice, why not? What salary pay me - What salary? I'll tell you. Three hundred and sixty five days a year, and when the year is a leap year, one more day. Is it all right - for me, is well - he replied the tailor, thinking: ".. You have to keep warm as the blanket already seek the means to sneak" mandole then the giant: - Go, rascal, bring me a jug of water .- And why not well with the source? - asked the boaster, away with jug to seek water.- What do you say? Does well with the source? - he growled the giant, who was goofy and awkward; and he began to feel fear. "This guy knows more than roast apples.!. Takes a devil in the body Beware, old, this is not a servant to you" When the tailor returned with the water, ordenóle the giant cut off a couple of logs and carry your casa.- Why not the whole forest with an ax, the whole forest, leaving a smooth maderoni or cornered or straight or curved? asked the little tailor, heading to cut the Madera.- What say ? the whole forest, leaving a smooth maderoni or cornered or straight or curved? and then the well with the source? - he muttered in their beards, giant credulous feeling grow your fear. "This guy knows more than roast apples: wearing a devil in the body care, old, not a servant to you.." When he had finished with wood, his master ordered him cazase two or three wild boars for dinner.- and why not a thousand with one stone and all who are out there? - asked, emboldened, the sastre.- What do you say? - he cried the giant goose, terrified. Quit work for today and go to dormir.Era such fear of the giant, who all night could not sleep a wink, and passed pondering how he would compose to shake off that warlock servant. Time is good counselor. The next morning they went to the edge of a swamp, around which grew numerous willows and giant said: - Hey, tailor, sit on one of the branches of a willow; I would like to see if you can !, doblarla.¡Up jumped got the tailor get up and, holding my breath, convirtióse in heavy enough to tip the branch. But when, can not resist, had to breathe again, and as was that he was not had happened brought an iron in his pocket, he shot so high, that was out of sight, to the great satisfaction of the gigante.Y if it has not fallen yet, it's still floating through the air.
The sparrow and his four gurriatos	1495	157	Spanish	A sparrow had four gurriatos in a nest of swallows. When they began to fly, some mischievous boys took the nest, but the birds happily escaped. A father will hurt their children they had to launch into the wide world before he could prevent them from its dangers and aleccionarlos debidamente.Un summer day, many sparrows gathered in a wheat field. And behold, the old man found his four children and very happy, he took them to his casa.- Alas, my children, how much anguish I spent this summer, knowing that andabais by those worlds of God without haberos able aleccionar! Hear my words: Follow the advice of your father, for you must always keep in mind one thing: the tender birds are exposed to many peligros.Y then asked where the major had spent the summer and what was alimentado.-I was prowling gardens, looking for worms and oruguitas until they matured the cerezas.- Oh, my son! - he exclaimed the father -. No sweets are bad, but they hide many dangers. Henceforth you must go very cautiously, especially when you see men walking around the grounds wearing long green sticks with a hole in the extremo.- Yes, father; But what if you plug the hole by a little green leaf stuck with wax - Where have you seen that? - In the garden of a trader - said the pequeño.- Oh, my son! - he exclaimed the father -. Folks are wily merchants! If you were among them, you will have acquired enough experience. Use it well and do not trust then demasiado.Dirigióse to the second: - where you earned your life - in court - said the gorrioncillo.- not unexpected place for sparrows and birds fools;? there is too much gold, velvet, silk, weapons, harnesses, hawks, owls and hawks. Stay in the stable of horses, which winnowed oats, or thresh. There, with a little luck, they will be spoiled your everyday bumps, and you can eat them alone without sobresalto.- Yes, father - said the small -. But the young men prepare stable traps with rowan berries and tied with straw her tights and bows; and this is not without its risks.- Where did you see that? - In court, among boys of caballerizos.- Oh, my son! The children of grooms are bad gentezuela. If you've been in court between those characters without leaving your feathers, you say you've learned a lot and know despabilarte the world. Anyway, go carefully. How did you you fixed it - - on roads and paths, between carts and horses, and stinging grains of barley encontraba.- Good food: Often wolves also eat the dogs avisados.Llamó the father to the third - noted the father -; but beware of the skin, and eye alert, especially when you see one bend over and pick up a stone. So it's not something you say entretenerse.- Truth - replied the son -. But what if they bring and the pebble in your pocket - Where did you see that - Among the miners, father. When they leave, always they carry stones escondidas.- Miners, workers, cunning people whoa! If you've been with them you have seen many things and not miss you experience "Anyway, go with caution, that the children of montañerosmataron with stones more than a sparrow." Finally, he turned the father to the youngest of his little children.: - as for you, little, you always were the most sappy and puny, Stepmom. In the world too brutal and wicked big birds with long beaks and claws corvos, that threaten the birds to zampárselas. Stay with yours and looking spider veins and oruguitas of trees and houses, and live forever contento.- O my father! Who lives without harming anyone, come away, and no sparrow hawk, goshawk, eagle or kite will cause no harm if he, every morning and every night, is entrusted and offers his honest food Our Lord God, creator and sustainer of all the birds of the forest and the people, and listening even croak and prayer of cuervecitos; for without his will not fall to the ground or a sparrow nor reyezuelo.- Where did you learn that? - she Asked the father. And the hijorespondió: - When I escaped from the nest, I got into a church, where I spent the summer catching flies and spiders in the windows, and heard preach this sermon. And the father of all sparrows fed me all the time and protected me against all misfortune and ill pajarracos.- lot right you, my son. Fly to churches and helps clean spiders and flies, and Piale God as the cuervecitos, and commend to the eternal Creator, and live safe and quiet, although the world is full of perfidious and Wild Birds of prey: "For who in the Lord He entrusts his things, silent, suffering, hopes, prays and amended, and keep faith and conscience pure, He will sustain and help in tough times. "
The tap	1574	610	Spanish	Once upon a time a King - I've never known where he reigned and what was his name - he had no sons, and his only daughter was always sick, but no doctor chanced to heal. They prophesied to the king that the princess would heal eating apples, so the monarch sent a proclamation throughout the kingdom who provide him with apples that would heal, would receive a wife and be king in turn. Heard the cry a farmer who had three sons, and said to the mayor: - Go up to the barn, filled a basket of the most beautiful apples, red skin well, and carry them to the Court; perhaps the princess eating them heal, so you marry her and be rey.Obedeció the boy and stood in the way. He had walked a little way when he met a gray-haired man, who asked him what was in the basket. Answered Ulric (such was the name of the groom): - frog legs, to which he replied the dwarf: - For frog legs are and will be - and alejó.Al get Ulrico to the palace, announced that it had apples to heal the princess. King was glad and ordered Ulrico which would lead to his presence. But oh, surprise !, to opening the basket was that instead of apples contained frog legs, which were still moving. King wroth and ordered arrojasen the palace. At home, he told his father what had happened, and the man sent to the second son, whose name was Samuel. But it happened to him what his older brother. Topóse also with the same man and his question of what was in the basket, he replied: - Well Cerdas.- bristles are bristles will be - said the enano.Cuando was presented at the palace claiming to cure apples carrying the princess, not wanted to admit it, saying he had done announce another fool with the same cuento.Pero Samuel insisted that brought apples and that allowed him to enter. They believed, to the end, and brought him to the King. But when he opened the basket, they appeared bristles. Was both anger of the ruler, who ordered Samuel to throw lashes. At the waiter arriving home, she recounted her mishap and misfortune. He advanced the youngest son, who always called the fool, and asked his father if he would go, in turn, with manzanas.- That's good! - she replied the man -. Look you who to ask to the recadito! Stand ready go wrong, and you intend to leave the small airoso.Pero not relent: - Anyway, let me go, Go away from here FATHER, stupid! You'll have to wait to be smarter - he replied the father, turning espalda.Pero Juanillo, tugging at his jacket, insisted strongly: - Let me go, father - To me!. you can go! We'll see how back! - he shouted at the end, man. But the boy jumped for joy -. Yes, you're always doing crazy things. Every day you become more bobo father repeated. Juanillo but did not flinch nor lost his contento.Como this evening came, thought it better to wait for the next morning. "Today would not come to court," she told herself. He spent sleepless night, and the few times he was drowsy, he dreamed of beautiful maidens, palaces, gold and silver and other things like that. At dawn stood in the way, and the little time he met a grumpy dwarf dressed in gray, who asked him what was in the basket. Juanillo answered wearing apples for the daughter of the King. Eating them is expected curaría.- Well - answered the little man, apples and apples are serán.En the Court flatly refused him entry, saying it had been pretending to take two apples, then one had been brought frog legs, and the other sows. But Juanillo begged and insisted strongly, ensuring that not wearing flippers or anything, but the most beautiful apples produced throughout the kingdom. And as he expressed so naively thought the goalkeeper was not lying, and left him free passage. Thus it proved to be very prudent, because when Juanillo opened his basket before the King, came to light a few blocks magnificent gilded. Sovereign rejoiced and ordered to immediately serve some to his daughter, he being impatient waiting until he would realize the result. And indeed, on a very short time they came to report it. But who think that wine? For the princess in person, which, no fruit tasted good, jumped out of bed, miraculously healed and replaced. It is impossible to paint in words the joy of the King. However, he was reluctant to give his daughter to wife Juanillo, and thus put the boy on the condition that before you construyese a boat able to navigate better land than by water. Juanillo accepted, returned home and told his family his adventure. Then the father sent Ulrico to cut wood to make the boat, and the boy began to work with verve and whistling. At noon, when the sun was at the top, a gray-haired presentósele enanillo and asked what he was doing: - Ladles - said Ulrico.- Well - replied the other -, ladles serán.Al evening, thinking the boy finished the boat , he wanted to climb it, but it turned out they were not ladles and other cosa.Al day following Samuel went to the woods and what happened to Ulrich. The third was Juanillo, which he began to work with such fervor that reverberated throughout the forest its vigorous hatchet; and also he whistled and sang cheerfully. He returned at noon the man, when the heat was sweltering, and asked what he was doing: - A boat that best surf ground water and, he added, that when completed had would grant the hand of the daughter of the KING: Well well - he said the dwarf -: a boat será.Al decline the day when the sun set between gold gleams, Juanillo had finished building the boat and all its accessories and, settling into her rowing He went to the city-residence of the King; and the boat ran like the wind. King saw him from afar, but still refused to give his daughter's hand, telling him that before had to keep a hundred hares from dawn to dusk; and if one escaped, he would not marry the princess. Conformóse Juanillo, and the next day went to the meadow with his flock, making sure that no hare flee. A little while appeared the one of the maids of the palace to ask one of the pieces, for he had reached an outsider. But the young man, turning his perfidy well aware, negóse to give it, saying that the king would have to wait for the next day for roast hare. The girl, however, did not relent, getting angry, at the end, and directing insults to the pastor. Juanillo then that would deliver a hare, provided that it was to look for the princess in person he said. He returned the maid with the message to the palace, and the daughter of the King fell to the meadow. Meanwhile Juanillo had been submitted to the dwarf's Eve, asking what he was doing. Almost nothing! He had to keep a hundred hares, trying not escape even one; If he succeeded, he would marry the princess and would KING: Well - answered the dwarf -; Here you have this whistle; If you miss one, you just have to whistle and will enseguida.Vino the princess, and Juanillo put a hare on the apron; but when things had turned away a hundred steps, the boy blew the whistle, and the hare, jumping apron princess in the blink of an eye was again with the flock. At dusk he whistled again the pastor, and, after checking that no lacked any hare, led the flock to the palace. Admiróse the King to see that Juanillo had managed to save a hundred hares escape without being one. Despite this, he still refused to give his daughter before must bring a pen tail the Grifo.Juanillo bird was immediately on his way, walking briskly in the direction marked his nose. Obscured and came to a palace, where he sought shelter, because in those days there still estilaban homestays. Acogiólo happily lord of the castle and asked where he was going. He replied Juanillo: - A house of the Grifo.- Conque to the house of the Gryphon, huh? Well, you do me a favor, if it is true that the Gryphon knows everything, as they say. I lost the key of an iron chest, and I want preguntasesdónde está.- him gladly - said Juanillo -. Haré.A so the next morning, at dawn, set off again, and reached another palace, where he also spent the night. When the inhabitants heard that he was going in search of the Gryphon, they told him that a daughter of the house was sick, and despite having gone to every conceivable remedies, there was no way to cure it. Could he ask the Gryphon how to heal the girl? Brindóse Juanillo to do so and resumed the route. Then came a river in which, instead of a boat, there was a tall man, burly leading to travelers one another bank. also asked Juanillo for the purpose of his viaje.- A house Grifo - said to the mozo.- In this case - added the giant - if you manage to find it, ask why it forces me to take passersby through the río.- I will, - promised Juanillo. The man threw his back and led him to the shore after opuesta.Poco Juanillo came to the house of the Gryphon. Only found the woman; the monster was absent. The woman asked what he was looking there, and the boy told him everything: it needed a tail feather of the Gryphon; in a palace that had lost the key to a safe and should ask the Gryphon his whereabouts; in another palace had a sick girl and wanted the Grifo indicate to them a remedy, and finally to a short distance away, at the edge of the river, was a man charged with passing pedestrians and wanted to know why he ello.- forced Keep in mind, friend - she said - that no Christian can talk to the Gryphon, then devours them all. But if you hide under your bed, sleep at night when you approach him and arrancáis a feather tail. As for the things you wish to know, I was the preguntaré.Juanillo agreed to it and hid under the bed. At the close the night, came the bird. As soon as he entered the room, said snooping: - Woman, here smells cristiano.- Yes - she replied - today one came, but he left no insistió.A Grifo and midnight, while sleeping, snoring loudly, man came Juanillo, and a jerk, he tore a feather tail. Startled monster awoke and exclaimed Woman smells like Christian, and also say that someone has thrown me of cola.-'d be dreaming - reassured his wife - and I told you I had been a Christian, but that he marched. Contóme endless things. In a castle they have lost the key to an ark and not found in any Parties- The fools! - said the Gryphon -. The key is in the wooden house, behind the door, under a pile of leña.- then told me also that in another palace was a sick girl and did not find the middle of curarla.- The fools! - he repeated the bird -. At the foot of the stairs from the cellar, a toad has made a nest with her hair; if the girl gets her hair, she sanará.- finally told me that in a river there is a condemned man to spend the viandantes.- The very stupid! - said the Gryphon -. If you leave one of them in the center of the runway, no need to continue transporting the Gryphon gente.De arose early and left. Juanillo then he left under the bed provided with its beautiful pen; In addition, he had heard what the bird prodigious said about the key, girl and man. The woman repeated all over again so that you will not forget, and the boy started back. He came, first, to the man of the river, which immediately asked him what he had told the Gryphon. Juanillo promised he would tell what had once been the other side. Pasólo man, and then the boy told him to leave as in midstream one of the carrying, would be free of the forced occupation. Alegre extremely giant, brindóse, proof of gratitude, to go back to Juanillo, but he told her he had had enough and did not want to bother anymore. He continued his route. Then he came to the palace in which resided the maid sick. Loading it on their shoulders, since she could not take care, he carried it aside to the foot of the stairs from the cellar and, taking the nest of the frog that was on the bottom rung, and set him in the hand of the girl. In the event it jumped to the floor, up the stairs on their own feet, completely healed. His parents felt great joy and regaled Juanillo with gold, silver and all that wanted to take. In the second palace, the boy went straight to the wooden house, and, indeed, behind the door, and under a woodpile, appeared lost key. Carried it aside to the owner, which thrilled, rewarded Juanillo, giving much of the gold that contained the ark, besides many other things, like cows, sheep and cabras.Al present Juanillo to the King with all riches those: money, gold, silver , cows, sheep and goats, the monarch asked him where he got all that, and the boy replied that the Gryphon gave him handfuls to anyone who asked. He thought the King who could take advantage of the occasion and, without thinking twice, made his way to the mansion of the bird. But getting to the river, it turned out to be the first to appear there after Juanillo, and man, to the pass, left him in the middle of the channel, where he drowned. Juanillo married the Princess and was proclaimed King.
The skilled hunter	1051	304	Spanish	Once there was a boy who had learned the trade of locksmith. One day he told his father he wanted to run the world and seek his fortune. - Very good -respondióle the father; I have no problem -. And he gave some money for the trip. And the boy went to look for work. At the after a while he got tired of his profession, and left to become a hunter. In the course of his wanderings he found himself a hunter, dressed in green, who asked him where he came from and where he was going. The youth said he was a locksmith, but he did not like the job, and yes, however, the hunter, so he begged him to take him as an apprentice. - a thousand loves, as long as you come with me, 'said the man. And boy spent several years with him learning the art of hunting. Then wanted to go on his own and his teacher, all salary gave him a shotgun, which, however, had the virtue of never err marksmanship. Then he set the boy and reached an immense forest, which could not be covered in one day. At dusk he seated himself in a tall tree to take shelter of wild beasts; around midnight it seemed to see shining in the distance a little light through the branches, and fixed well in it not become disoriented. To be sure, took off took off his hat and threw it in the direction of the place where the light appeared, in order to serve him when signal had come down from the tree. On the ground, he went to his hat and went straight forward. As we walked, the light was stronger, and being near it he saw that it was a big fire, and three giant sitting next to her were busy roasting an ox that had on a spit. One said: - I'll try what is -. He tore off a piece, and was about to put in their mouths when shot, the hunter did fly hand. - Caramba! cried the giant, the wind has taken me - and he took another piece; but going to bite him, again he took it off the hunter mouth. Then the giant, dealing a slap to the one beside him, he said angrily: - Why take away my flesh? - I do not've removed replied the other; It will have been a good shooter. The giant took a third piece; but as soon as he had in hand, the hunter did fly too. Then said the giant: - Very good shooter must be one who is able to remove the bite of the mouth. How much would please us a guy like that! -and gritaron-: Come, shooter; come sit by the fire with us and hártate, hártate us and that we will not hurt. But if not you come and we fished, you are lost. He approached the hunter and explained that it was in the office, and wherever he fired his shotgun he was sure of hitting the target. Propusiéronle that join them, saying he would gain, and then explained that at the exit of the forest was a great river and its opposite bank a tower where lived a beautiful princess, they planned to abduct rose. - According 'he answered. It will not be difficult undertaking. But the Giants added: - There is a circumstance that should be taken into account: a little dog that monitors there, as soon as someone approaches, begins to bark and wake the whole court; because of him we can not approach. ¿You cope to kill the dog? - Yes replied the hunter; For me, this is a cinch. And climbed up into a boat sailing down the river, soon reached the opposite bank. As he landed, salióle puppy to the meeting; but before he could bark, she dropped him a shot. In the see the giants rejoiced, and assuming his princess. But before the hunter wanted to see how things were, and told them to stay outside until he called them. He entered the palace, where there was absolute silence, as everyone slept. At the open door saw the first room, saw hanging on, hanging on the wall, a solid silver sword that had recorded a gold star and the name of the King; next to him, on a table, there was a sealed letter. She opened it and read that whosoever had the sword could take the life of all to put himself within reach. Picking up the gun, he girded himself and went forward. Then he came to the room where he slept the Princess, which was so beautiful that he stood staring as petrified. He thought then, 'How can I let this innocent maiden fall into the hands of a giant heartless, how bad intentions lead !. " He looked around, found at the foot of the bed, a pair of slippers; the right hand embroidered the name of the King and a star; and the left, the princess also a star. She wore also a large scarf silk and gold embroidery, the names of the King and his, left and right respectively. Taking the hunter a scissors, he cuts the right edge and put it in his backpack, and then he saved himself in the right shoe, which bore the name of the King. Princess still asleep, wrapped in his shirt; man also he cuts a slice from it and put it to other objects; and everything did not touch the girl. then he left, careful not to wake her, and the reach to the reach the door, found the giants who were waiting for him, sure that would bring the princess. Gritóles him they entered, the princess was already in his possession. But as he could not open the door, they should be introduced through a hole. A hovering the first, the hunter grabbed him by the hair, cut off his head with his sword and then threw his body until he was inside. then she called the second and the operation repeated. He did the same with the third, and was thrilled to have been able to save the princess from his enemies. Finally, she cuts the tongues of the three heads and tucked in the backpack. "I will return home and teach my father what I have done, he thought. Then I resume my wanderings. I never lack God's protection." A waking the King at the palace, he saw the bodies of three beheaded giants. He then entered the room of his daughter, awoke and asked who could have killed those monsters. - I do not know, my father she replied. I slept all night. He jumped out of bed and going to put on his shoes, he noticed that had disappeared of the right foot; and then he also realized that they had cut off the right end of the scarf and a piece of his shirt. The king commanded that all the Court would meet with all the soldiers all the soldiers of the palace, and asked who had saved his daughter and killed the giants. And going a captain, very ugly man and also eyed man claimed that he was the author of the deed. Then said the old king who, in payment of his heroics, would marry the princess; but she said: - Father, rather than marry this man would rather leave to wander the world as far as my legs can carry. To which the king replied that if he refused to accept the captain husband, she should take off princess dresses, she dressed peasant and abandon the palace. He would go to a potter and open a trade in earthen vessels. He took off his maiden his fine clothes, went home of a potter and credit asked an assortment of pottery, promising to pay them fees that night if he had managed to sell them. King decided to seat herself in a corner, then he sent some peasants bring up their carts over his merchandise and again unto pieces. And so, when the princess had placed her stall in the street they came the cars and made all shattered. He broke to mourn the girl, crying - my God, how will I pay now to the potter! King had done this to force his daughter to accept the captain. But she went to the owner of the goods and merchandise and asked him to fiase other heading. The man refused: Before you had to pay the first. He attended the princess to his father and, amid tears and groans, he said he wanted to leave the world. He answered the King: - built for thee a house in the woods, and she will spend your life cooking for all passersby, but without accepting money from anyone. When the hut was finished, the door hung a sign that said: "Today, free, tomorrow paying." And there ran a princess long time, and soon word got out that a maiden was there who cooked free, as announced a hanging sign on the door. This news came to the ears of our hunter who thought, "This would suit me because I'm poor and I have white," and, carrying his shotgun and his backpack, which was keeping what was taken from the palace, go to the forest. Not soon discovered the house with the sign: "Today, free, tomorrow paying." He wore a sword belt that behead giants, and thus entered the house and asked for food. Charmed with the girl, for she was beautiful, and the ask her where she came from and where he was going, and said the hunter: - I'm wandering around the world. She then asked him where he had taken that sword that was engraved the name of his father, and the hunter, his hunter, in turn, wanted to know if it was the daughter of the King. - Yes said the princess. - Well, with this said the hunter cut sable then head to the three giants-and in proof of his assertion, pulled out of the backpack the three languages, showing below the shoe, the edge of the handkerchief and the piece of shirt. She, mad with joy, he realized that he was in the presence of his Savior. Going together to the palace and the princess calling the old king, brought him to his room where he told the hunter was the man who had saved her from the giants. A King seeing the evidence could no longer doubt longer wanted to know how the event had occurred, and said that gave him the hand of his daughter, so I was very happy girl. She dressed the huntsman as if it were a foreign nobleman, and the king held a banquet. He placed himself at the table captain left the princess and the hunter on the right, assuming that it was some stranger prince. When they had eaten and drunk, said the old king to the captain, who wanted to put to a conundrum: If an individual who claimed to have killed three giants were to declare where the languages ​​of their victims, what would you say to the check were they were not in the respective mouths? He said the captain: - Well, they had no tongue. - Could not this - it is this possible replied the king, because all animals have language. Then he asked what that dealt deserved to deceive. To which he replied the captain - deserves to be quartered. Then the King said he had pronounced his own sentence, and thus the man was arrested and then quartered, while the princess married the hunter. He sent for his parents, who lived happily to the side of his son and the death of the King, the young man inherited the crown.
The rejuvenated man	1397	753	Spanish	In the days when our Lord still walked the earth, came one evening, accompanied by San Pedro, in a smithy, where he received host hospital. A poor beggar, burdened by age and infirmity, came to the door to ask limosna.San Pedro took pity on him and said, 'Sir and Master, cure, please, this man of his infirmities, so you can pan.Dijo then earn their Lord sweetly: - Herrero, lend me your forge and put coal. I'm going to renovate this old man and enfermo.El smith gladly obeyed, and San Pedro was ready to handle the bellows. And when the fire was lit and flaming Our Lord raised up the man and put it in the forge, in the midst of the burning fire. And man, red as a rose in bloom, never stopped singing his praises to God. Then the Lord passed to the water tank, introduced him to the man incandescent and once it was conveniently cooled, imparted his blessing. And behold, the old man came out quick, stiff and healthy as if you did not count more than twenty years.The blacksmith, who had witnessed the operation, invited everyone to dinner. But mother had an old, half-blind and hunchbacked that addressing the new lad, very seriously asked if had burned much fire. He replied that his life had felt so comfortable; amid the flames seemed to him that she was dancing in a refreshing rocío.Aquellas words of the young resounded throughout the night in the ears of old. The next morning, when our Lord was gone after to thank the blacksmith, he thought he would know also rejuvenate her mother, because she had observed very closely the whole process of operation the day before, besides the thing came in his office. Asked him, then, if you do not like to turn him into a girl of eighteen and APRs to jump and corretear.- With all the soul! - said the old, remembering how well the new jovenzuelo happen. So the blacksmith forge lit and put it to the woman; but everything was squirming and screaming launch desesperados.- Shut up! Why do you cry and fret about this? Wait, I'll stoke the fuego.Y again put into action the bellows, until the old was turned into a heap on fire. And she is screaming and shouting so much that the blacksmith thought, "Things are not going!"; and drew it into the water. There's screams rose point, and reached the ears of Herrera and her daughter, which, rushing down the stairs, found the old yelling and screaming, submerged in the trough, all of it shriveled and curled, his face wrinkled and disfigured. The two women, who were pregnant, so were horrified at the sight, the next night gave birth to two children who had no figure of man, but of monkey, and ran, fleeing into the woods. And it ensures them family descends from monkeys.
Iron furnace	1203	425A	Spanish	At those times still desires were once performed, an old sorceress loved a prince, condemning him to live in a forest tucked into a large iron furnace. happened in many years, no one could redeem him, when behold one day a princess was lost in that forest, so that he could not get out of it and find the way back to the kingdom of his father. At the end of nine days wandering through the jungle, he came to the big iron box, and heard left her a voice asked: - Where did you come from and where you are going you answered the princess -'ve lost your way which leads to the kingdom of my father, and I can not go back to casa.Dijo then the iron furnace: - I'll help you return to your home in a very short time, if you agree, in writing, to do what you ask. I am the son of a powerful king your father, and she'll marry me contigo.Espantóse, thinking: "God of heaven What would I do with an oven ?." But as he had a great desire to return to his own side, he signed the pledge. Said to him: - You must come back with a knife, and opened with a hole in the hierro.Diole then a guide, who accompanied her without uttering a single word, and two hours later was on his back casa.La caused princess great rejoicing at the palace. The old king embraced and kissed affectionately. She however, looking sad and desolate, said: - Father mine, What has happened to me! I would not have made it out of the vast wild forest, not having run into an iron furnace, to which I have had to promise in writing that he would return to redeem and marry él.Asustóse the King so much, he almost fainted falls, as it was his only daughter. After discussion, they agreed that, instead, would send the miller's daughter, who was a very beautiful girl. Condujéronla to the oven, giving a knife, ordenáronle that abraded iron to needling. It was the girl working for twenty-four hours without getting to nick lower in iron. At the first light dawn a voice from inside the oven, said: - I think it starts to be day.- also to me it seems to me - said the girl -. I think I hear the sound of the mill of my FATHER So you're her daughter the miller. Begone, and tell princess girl venga.Fue to communicate to the old king of the forest that did not love her, but the princess. At the hearing asustóse King, and her daughter began to mourn. But I was still the daughter of a swineherd, who was even more beautiful than the miller's wife, and decided to offer an amount of money for it to replace the princess and went instead to the furnace of the forest. Acompañáronla there, and the girl also spent scraping twenty-four hours without results alguno.Al dawn rang again the voice out of the oven: - I think it starts to be day.- also to me it seems - she replied -. I think I hear sound the horn of my FATHER Then you're the daughter of the swineherd. Go immediately to tell the princess to come and remind him that will happen what I promised, and if it does not come, the whole kingdom will fall into ruins and piedra.Al not left a stone upon hearing these words, Princess burst to mourn . But there was no other choice: he had to deliver. He took leave of his father and went to the forest, equipped with a knife. When he came to the place, stood scratching, and iron yielded easily, so that the end of two hours had opened a small hole in the plate. He is looking out he saw inside a young man so beautiful and so bright gold and precious stones, that his soul was smitten on the spot. He continued scraping nonstop, until the hole was already large enough that the prince could go out él.Díjole then the doncel: - You are mine and I am yours; You're my fiancee and I have redimido.Y wanted to take her directly to his kingdom; but she begged him to let him go to say goodbye to his father. Avínose him, with the condition that his father did not speak more than three words, returning immediately afterwards. The princess went and spoke more than agreed. And at the same instant he disappeared the oven, being transported to a very remote place on mountains of glass and sharp swords. However, the son of the King was desencantado.Despidióse princess and her father, taking some money, he returned to the immense forest. But, however much he sought the oven, will not find it anywhere. At the end of nine days of wandering in those places their hunger was so great that she felt himself falter at times. In the twilight he seated arrive on a small tree, intending to pass it at night, fearing the beasts of the jungle. At midnight he found the distance a small light, and thought, "Surely, there would be safe." He climbed down from the tree and went to the place where saw the light, and during his way praying. He reached a house surrounded by abundant grass in front a pile of firewood. "Oh - he thought -, where I will come to stop ?." He looked out the window and saw inside large and small toads and a table beautifully prepared, with wine and roasted; and the glasses were silver. Gaining courage, tapped on the glass. Gordote immediately cried the frog, "Love green and arrugadatrasto tronada.pata serves mujerque not all: who's out there, ready go see." He left open a tiny toad. A going into the princess, they gave him all welcome and invited her to sit, asking: - Where did you come from and where you are going Contole her all that had happened, and how, for missing the prohibition to speak more than three words? not now found the oven with the prince. also told them that his purpose was to seek over hill and dale, to find it. He then spoke to the fat toad, "green and tronada Ama, wrinkled paw gizmo mujerque is useless. that big box're going to bring" It was the little hopping, and returned immediately with caja.Sirviéronle then dinner, and when he had eaten and drunk, accompanied her to a bed neatly made, all of silk and velvet, which lay down and slept all night in holy peace. At the get the new day, he arose, and the old toad gave her three needles out of the big box, saying that the carry, the need, as should cross a high glass mountain, three cutting swords and a great river; if I could save those obstacles, he recovers his beloved. He gave him also other objects, keep them recommending great care: a wheel plow and three nuts. With all the maid left, and reach the mountain the glass, so smooth and slippery, that he went three needles first behind the front feet and then, and so could pass. And once had passed, guardólas in a place that tried to be recorded in memory. At the meet after facing sharp swords, stood on the wheel of the plow and went rolling over them. Finally, he came to a rushing river and, when he had crossed a vast and beautiful palace. He entered and asked for a job, posing as a poor girl who wanted to serve; but he knew that there lived a prince who redeemed of the oven in the forest. Corno was admitted kitchen helper for a reduced salario.Era the case that the prince already had another fiancee, who was to marry, believing that the first had died. A going to wash and groom the girl, at dusk, found in his pocket three nuts to give him the old toad, cracking one with teeth to extract its contents, behold, came a gorgeous dress worthy of a princess. At the hearing this the bride, went to examine the garment and eager to buy, he said: - This is not a proper dress for a criada.Contestóle the other did not want to sell, but I would give away in exchange for one thing: to let him sleep one night in the room of her boyfriend. Avínose promised, because the dress was beautiful, and she had none alike. In the evening came, she told her boyfriend: - That stupid want to sleep in your aposento.- If you agree, I am too - replied the príncipe.Pero she gave him to drink a glass of wine containing a narcotic. Were therefore both in the same room, but plunged him into such a deep sleep, there was no means of waking. The maid spent the night between tears and exclamations: - save you from the wild forest and the iron furnace. To reach you had to save a glass mountain, climb over sharp swords and through a mighty river. And now you refuse to listen to me! The servants guard at the door, they heard mourn and lament, and the next morning they told it to his master. The next afternoon he broke the second nut, finding it even more beautiful dress; and girlfriend also wanted to buy it. But she did not accept money; Instead, he gave the pledge provided to spend a second night in the bedroom of his beloved. The bride turned to supply a sleeping pill, keeping him fast asleep, unable to learn anything. The girl also spent that night crying and repeating their lamentations: - save you from the wild forest and the iron furnace. To reach you had to save a glass mountain, climb over sharp swords and cross a large river. And you still do not wanna hear! The servants, from the other side of the door, they heard their cries, and in the morning again speak to his master. And the third evening, after washing and grooming, opened the nut he had left, and appeared even more beautiful dress, sparkling pure gold. Girlfriend wanted to stay with him, and again the girl gave it in exchange for permission to sleep in the room of the prince. This, however, poured narcotics instead of drinking it, and when the girl began to mourn and exclaim: - My treasure, I saved you from the wild and terrible forest and the iron furnace - incorporating the sharply prince said: - You you are my true bride. You are mine and I am yours! And that night she came up with a float, after removing the clothes to the other, so could not get up. To the reach the wide river in a boat crossed it; then they passed through the three cutting blades on the wheel of the plow and then used needles to save crystal mountain. Finally, they went to the old house, and entering it became a great palace. The toads were disenchanted, recovering its original condition princes, and there was immense joy. Then the wedding, and the couple remained in the palace, which was much more spacious than her father. But as the old complained of her loneliness were looking for him and they brought with them, and thus had two kingdoms and lived in most felicidad.Y arrived a little mouse, and the story is over.
Bone cantor	264	780	Spanish	There was once great alarm in a country because of a boar ravaging the fields, killed the cattle, and ripped up people tusks. King promised a great reward to anyone who could deliver to the country of this scourge; but the beast was so big and strong that no one dared to approach the forest where he had his abode. Finally, the King brought out a crier wife saying that would give her only daughter to him who would capture or death to give alimaña.Vivían at that time two brothers in the kingdom, sons of a poor man, who volunteered to try the company. The eldest, cunning and clever, did it for pride; the youngest, who was naive and silly, moved by his good heart. King said: "To be sure to find the animal, enter the forest from opposite ends." The biggest burst through the west side, and the lowest for Levante. In a little while to move it, man came a little man who was carrying a small spear, and said, "I give you this spear because your heart is innocent and kind to him can face without fear the wild boar, will not make you. any harm. " The waiter thanked the man and throwing the gun to his shoulder, he went on his way without fear. Shortly after he spotted the beast, which rushed at him; but the young man presented the javelin, and animal, in his mad rage, rammed blindly and heart pierced with the gun. The boy was charged beast on his back and turned to present to the Rey.Al out of the woods on the opposite side, he stopped at the entrance of a house where there were many people who enjoyed dancing and steepening the elbow. There also was his older brother; I had thought that the boar would not escape him, and could first take a few sips. A seeing his younger brother coming out of the forest with wild boar on his back, his envious and evil heart and would not let him rest for a moment. "Come, brother," he said, "calling him" a little rest and refresh yourself with a glass of wine. The small, did not think evil, he went in and told his encounter with the man who had given him the javelin to kill as jabalí.El held him until nightfall, and then left together. At the arrival, already dark, a bridge across the river, the largest made the other go first, and when he was in the middle, treacherously struck him a blow and killed him. He buried him under the bridge and carrying the boar, took him to the King, saying that he had hunted and killed, a feat for which he received the hand of the princess. To the surprised people not to return the brother he said: "Surely the animal will be torn to pieces," and everyone believed así.Pero as God nothing is hidden, that black misdeed also had to come to light . A few years later, a shepherd leading his flock over the bridge was down, the sand, a white huesecillo as snow, and thought that he could be made a mouthpiece for his horn. He did, and the test the instrument with the new part, the small bone began to sing, with great astonishment of the shepherd. "Ay, friendly touch pastorcilloque with my huesecillo My brother has matadoy me under this bridge enterrado.El boar llevabay princess robbed me. " "What a wonderful horn, singing alone!" the pastor said. "I'll take it to the Lord King." No sooner had he reached the presence of the King, Horn returned to sing his song. The King understood the meaning, sent to dig the ground beneath the bridge and appeared whole skeleton of the murdered. Evil brother could not deny the fact. They sewed in a sack and thrown into the river to die drowned. The bones of the dead were deposited in the cemetery, in a beautiful burial, and there rest in holy peace.
The spindle, the shuttle and needle	1786	585	Spanish	He remained orphaned young shortly after birth, and her godmother, who lived alone in a hut at the end of the village, no more resources than the shuttle, its needle and spindle, took her with him, taught to work and raised her in the holy piety and fear of God. When she arrived at fifteen, she fell ill her godmother, and calling her near his bedside, and said: My dear daughter, I know that I will die; I leave my cabin to protect you from wind and rain, and I also bequeath my spindle, shuttle, and needle, which will serve to win the bread. Then she laid her hand on his head, blessed her, adding: -Conserva God in your heart, and you will become happy. Thereupon she closed her eyes, and the poor girl accompanied her coffin crying, and made the last honors. Since then he lived alone, working with the greatest activity, engaging in spinning, weaving and sewing and blessing of the good old woman was on all that you put hand. Could say that the provision of thread was inexhaustible, and had only a piece of cloth fabric or sewing a shirt, it is presented once a buyer, who paid generously; so that it not only was not in misery, but also could help the poor. Around the same time, the son of the king began to travel the country to find women to marry. I could not choose a poor but did not want a rich, so marry said that it was both the poorest and the richest. To get to the village where the maiden lived, asked, as usual, where they lived the poorest and the richest of the site. He was immediately appointed the second; Regarding the first was told it was the girl who lived in a secluded cabin at the end of the village. When the prince passed, the rich, dressed in his best suit, he was outside the door; He got up and went to meet him, making him a courtesy deep; but he looked at her without saying a word and went on his way. He came to the house of the poor, who had not come to the door and was locked in her room; He stopped his horse and looked out the window to the interior of a room lit a ray of sunshine; the girl was sitting at her spinning wheel and with the greatest ardor. He not stopped looking furtively to the prince, but he got very red and continued spinning, lowering her eyes but I do not dare to ensure that your thread out as the same as it was before; He continued spinning until he left the prince. As soon as I saw him no longer, she got up to open the window, saying, 'What's hot in here! And he followed with the view while could see the white feather in his hat. He sat back down, finally, and continued spinning, but not going from memory a saying she had heard repeated frequently to his godmother, who began to sing, saying Corre spindle runs at full speed, look that is my husband and must return. But behold the spindle suddenly escaped from his hands and went out of the room; the girl stared at him, not without astonishment, and saw him run across the fields, leaving behind a golden thread. In the short time he was far away and could not distinguish. No spindle, the shuttle reached and began knitting. The spindle continued to run, and when he ran out of thread, and had met the prince. -What is this? exclaimed; This zone wants to take me somewhere. And he turned his horse galloping following the golden thread. She continued working and singing Run, shuttle run after him, bring me my husband, soon tráemele. Quickly escaped his hands the shuttle, heading for the door; but getting out of the doorway began to weave, she began to weave the beautiful tapestry that has never seen; on both sides adorned her garlands of roses and lilies, and in the center green branches could be seen on a gold background; the foliage distinguished hares and rabbits, and passing the head through the branches, deer and roe deer; elsewhere he had birds of many colors, which lacked only sing. The shuttle was still running, and the work ahead swimmingly. Corre, needle, run, run all, prepare it all, and it will come back. The needle leapt out of her fingers, ran across the room with the speed of lightning, looking like he had at his command spirits invisible, as the table and benches were covered with green baize, chairs dressed in velvet and walls seda.Apenas a colgadura of the needle had its last stitch when the maiden saw through the window in front of white feather hat prince, who had brought the golden thread; He entered the hut passing over the carpet and the room where the girl was dressed as before, with his poor suit; but spinning, however, amid this improvised luxury, like a rose in a bush. 'You're the poorest and the richest exclaimed; Come, you will be my wife. Presentole her hand without answering, he kissed her, and making her up on his horse, took her to court, where the wedding was celebrated with great joy. The spindle, shuttle, and needle were preserved with the utmost care in the royal treasury.
The young giant	855	650A	Spanish	A farmer had a son who no bulged more than the thumb; there was no way to make it grow, and Cape several years, its size had not increased the thickness of a hair. One day the farmer was about to leave to the field for tillage, and said the little boy: - Father, let me go contigo.- You, go to the field? - she replied the father. - Stay at home; there I would serve no nothing and still run the risk of perderte.Echóse little to mourn, and to the peasant, to leave him alone, metióselo into his pocket and took it. To get to the field, let him sitting in a newly opened groove. While he was there, drew near a huge giant who came from across the montes.- You see that big man over there? - said the father to the child, to scare him. - Then you come and llevará.En two or three strides of his long legs, the giant came to the groove. He carefully lifted the little two fingers, stared a moment and walked away with him, without uttering a word. Father, paralyzed with fear, could not even emit a scream and considered lost her son, with no hope of seeing him again in his giant life.The took the little boy to his mansion and gave him suck her breast, thereby that the kid grew both in stature and strength, which is typical of the giants. After two years, the old giant took him to the forest and to prove it, he said - plucks a vara.El child was already so robust that uprooted a sapling as one who does nothing, but the giant thought, "Ha to get stronger, "and returned to take him home and continued to breastfeed for two years. In the submission again to test the strength of the youth had increased so much that has already been able to uproot an old tree. However, there was satisfied still the giant, and still suckled for about two years, at the end of which he returned to the forest, and ordered: - Arráncame now a staff of verdad.Y the young extracted from the ground the burly oaks, with a lightness such that it seemed as though bromeaba.- is now well - said to the giant; -'re done learning - and returned to the field to meet him. In him was his father guiding the plow, and the young giant went to him and said: - Look, Father, that big man has become your son The farmer turned and exclaimed scared: - No, you're not my son! Anything you want! Get out! - Of course I am your son; let me work; I know plow as well as you or better - No, no! You're not my son, nor plow you know. Go, Go away from here! But this giant was afraid, dejóle the plow and went to sit at the edge of the field. The son took up the plow with one hand, and knelt down with such force that the grating sank deep into the ground. The farmer could not contain himself and shouted: - Do not squeeze so hard to plow; is a bad work which are haciendo.Pero young, desunciendo horses and getting to throw himself from the plow, he said: - Go home, father, and tell my mother to prepare a good meal; I, meanwhile, will finish faena.Fuese the farmer and instructed his wife to prepare food, and meanwhile the boy plowed the whole field, which measured two yugadas, unaided, after which he raked entirely , managing two harrows at once. When he was done, he tore two oak forest, he threw to his shoulder, and even put up a dredge and a horse in front and another behind Dredge and another horse; And as if all together was no more than a bundle of straw, brought him to her parents. In the enter the era, his mother, not recognizing him, asked: - Who is this big man so terrible? And her husband answered: - It is our hijo.- No, it is not possible to be our son; we never had one like that; ours was very tiny. - And gritóle: - Get out here do not want the boy, without hesitation, took the horses to the barn, hay and oats echóles, and fixed it properly!. When he was ready, he entered the house and sat on the bench, said: - Mother, I have much appetite; Will it be soon the food? - Yes - she replied - and sirvióle two full sources, with whom she and her husband would have had enough for eight days. But the young man gobbled it all and asked if he could give something more.- No - answered the mother, - I gave everything I had in me casa.- This only served to whet my appetite; más.Ella need, not daring to contradict him, went to put the fire a pan full of food and, when he was already cooked, the entered the mozo.- Well, here, at least, a couple of bites - said it , and ate it all without leaving crumbs; but not enough to appease hunger, and then said: - Father, I see well that your house would never be fed up. If you bring me a bar of fairly thick iron so it can not break with his knee, I will leave to run mundo.Alegróse the farmer hitched the two horses to the car and went home from the blacksmith in search of such a large and thick bar as could carry animals. The young man applied it against his knee and crack !, the broke in two as if it were a stick, and threw the pieces aside. Hooked father then four horses and returned with another big and thick bar as animals could lead; but the son also folded and throwing the fragments, said - no use, father; have to put more horses and bring a more bar then the peasant fuerte.Enganchó eight horses, and brought home a third bar, so big and thick as the animals could carry. The son took it in hand, broke a piece from one end, and said: - Father, I see well that you can not give me the stick I need. I do not want to continue aquí.Marchóse intending to register as official blacksmith. He came to a village, where he lived a very stingy blacksmith, who wanted everything for himself and nothing for other people. Presentósele the waiter and asked if I needed a oficial.- Yes - answered the blacksmith, and, seeing it from head to toe, he thought: "It's a stocky lad, handle well the hammer and earn his bread." - How do you ask for salary? - Nothing preguntó.- him - answered the boy, - only a fortnight, when you pay to other workers, I will give you two punches and thou aguantarás.El declared as blacksmith, thinking that would save a lot of money. The next morning, the new official was put to the task; when the teacher brought the bar to the red, the first iron hammer departed into two pieces, flying through the air, and the anvil dug into the ground so deeply that there was no means of returning him out. Enfadóse the miser, and exclaimed: - You do not serve me; hit too harshly. What do I owe you for this one blow - I just want to give you a tap, nothing else - answered the boy, and he lifted one foot, kicked sent him flying to the other side of four wagons of hay. After choosing the brunt of the iron bars that were in the smithy, cogióla as a walking stick and left.
The Jew in Hawthorn	1041	592	Spanish	Once upon a time a very rich man who had a servant who served him diligently and honestly; every morning was the first to rise, and at night, the last to go to bed; when a heavy duty which all presented fled, he went there willingly. He never complained, but he always looked cheerful and happy. Completed year of service, his master did not pay him any welded, thinking: "It's the best I can do, thus spare you something, and he will not leave, but will continue to serve me." The waiter did not claim anything, worked a second year with the same assiduity than the first, and when, at the end of the term saw also paid him, resignóse and continued to work. After the third year, the master thought a moment and reached into his pocket; but he returned to empty it out. The servant, decided upon at the end, he said: - Lord, I have been serving loyally for three years; So I hope you know what law to pay me my duty. I want to go running world.- Yes, my good servant - answered the miser - have served me assiduously and I will reward with equity - and getting back into his pocket, took three-quarters to the criado.- Behold, a reason fourth year; It is a good pay, and generous; Few masters you would darían.El handsome, who understood little money, pocketed their capital, thinking: "I have good coins in my pocket, I will not have to worry or do heavy work." And marchóse, uphill and downhill, singing and jumping happily. A passing by some weeds, left including a dwarf and said: - Where are you going, brother Alegre? From what I see, they do not weigh much the preocupaciones.- Why should I be sad? - he answered the boy -. I wear well-stocked bag with three years.- salary And how much is your wealth? - he asked the hombrecillo.- How much? A three-quarter Constants and sonantes.- Hey - the dwarf said - I am poor and needy; Give me your three quarters. I can not work while you're young, and you will easily win the pan.El waiter had a good heart; He pitied the man and handed him three coins, saying: - Be in God's name. One way or another will go out of apuros.Y then he told the enanito: - Since you have a good heart, I grant you three graces, one for each room; Ask, and you will otorgadas.- Go! - he cried the waiter -; Yea you're one of those who understand in spells! Well, the first thing I want is a blowgun that never fails marksmanship; then a violin while touch, make dance to all who hear; and thirdly, I wish that, when addressing a request to someone, can not it stop satisfacerlo.- All that you will - said the little man, and, thrusting his hand into the brush, who would have thought !, he took the violin and blowgun, as if had prepared beforehand. Giving objects to the waiter, he said: - Whatever you ask, no human being can negártela "What else ambicionas heart ?," the boy while he thought again on a journey.. In a little while he found himself a Jew, long goatee; had stopped to hear the song of a bird perched on the highest branch of a árbol.- It's a miracle of God - he said - that such a small animal has such a powerful voice! Ah, if it were mine! Who could throw salt on its tail - if not more than that - said the boy - soon I will send down to the bird-and, pointing the blowpipe, to the instant fell the animal in the middle of the espinos.- Come on , rascal! - he told the Jewish -; Scope out the bird there - to my faith, I will - he replied -. Whoever does not care for his estate, he takes the devil! I'll pick up the bird, since you're right - and, lying on the ground, dragged introdújose among the brambles. When he was in the midst of thorns, it occurred to the handsome the idea to play a trick and sliding down the violin began to play. Immediately, the Jew, raising his legs, he began to dance, and the more scratchy the musician, dance is encouraged. But the thorns he broke his clothes threadbare, he scoured the goatee and tore the skin around the Body.- Hey! - exclaimed the Jew, at what sales now with your music! Quit the violin, I have no desire to dance it the waiter kept scratching scuffing you, thinking, "Enough you've flayed people, see how Hawthorn flays you now you !," and continued playing with older vigor. Redoubled the leaps and bounds of the Jew, whose dresses, torn by thorns, they were hanging in tatters, the zarza.- Enough, enough! - she shouted the man -. I will give you whatever you want, provided you stop playing. A bag full of gold - If you're so generous - replied the lad - I'll stop playing!; I must admit one thing, however, is that dance is a beauty - and, taking the bag, he continued his Jewish way.The stood, following him with his eyes without flinching until the boy had disappeared in the distance . Then I started to scream with all his might: - Wretched musician, violinist tavern waits catch you! I swear I'll run until you run out of soles! Pelagatos, starving, you're not worth two farthings! - and continued spewing expletives all that came to the mouth. Once it was vented a little, ran to the city and presented to the judge: - Lord judge, justice ask! A fiend has stolen in the middle of the road and left me as you see. Even the stones compadecerían! Dresses broken, the whole body scratched and bloodied. My poor money stolen bag and all! They were gold ducats, if one beautiful, the other more. For God's sake, send them to arrest the ladrón.- Was it a soldier lashed sabers with you? - asked him the juez.- God save us! - said the Jew -; He not even is wearing a bad sword; only a blowgun and a violin hanging from his neck; the rascal is easy to reconocer.El judge sent his men in pursuit of the culprit. They soon reach the boy, who walked slowly, and found the bag with money. Brought before the court, he said: - I have not touched Jew nor I have taken the money; it was he who offered voluntarily, for him to stop fiddling, it seems that my music will not gustaba.- God save us! - cried the Jew -. This fighter lies like flies in pared.Tampoco the judge wanted to believe, and said: - Very bad is this excuse; no Jew would do such a thing - and, considering that it was a crime of assault and robbery in public, he condemned the young man to the gallows. When already led to the torture, the Jew did not stop yelling: - Haragán, musician hits! ! Now you will receive your deserved condemned quietly climbed the stairs of the scaffold with the executioner; But the get-up, she turned to tell the judge: - Give me a grace before morir.- In agreement - answered the judge - as long as it is not LIFE.- I do not ask life - replied the waiter - but only you will allow me play the violin last Jew vez.El put the cry in heaven: - for the love of God, is do not let, do not you ALLOW But the judge said: - Why did not grant this short pleasure? You are entitled to it, and no other party privárselo.Por because he could not deny, if we remember the gift that had been given to the waiter. He cried the Jew: - Alas! Atadme, atadme strong! Meanwhile, the handsome picked the violin and began to play. In the first note, everyone began to shimmy and sway: the judge, the clerk and the sheriffs; and the rope fell from his hand that he was about to tie up the Jew. A second note, raised all legs, and the executioner, releasing the prisoner, also started dance; the third, everyone was already jumping: the judge and the Jew first, and with the greatest enthusiasm. A few moments danced all the people that curiosity had gathered in the square: old and young, fat and thin, in great confusion. Even dogs who had come jumped on his hind legs. And the more he played, the higher were the leaps of the dancers, who, giving each other of halters, began shouting unfortunately. In the end the judge, panting, raised his voice - I forgive life if you stop playing the handsome, pitied, interrupted the music and violin hanging neck, descended the stairs of the gallows!. Approaching the Jew lying on the ground, trying to catch his breath, he said - Rascal admits now where did you get this money or again take the violin - I stole it, I stole it - cried the Jew - while you earned it honestly! And the judge ordered hanged for the Jew thief.
Plowman and devil	1794	1030	Spanish	Once upon a labradorzuelo as clever as clever, whose tricks could be counted more than a few stories, but the funniest of all is the mockery and tricks he did to the diablo.Un day the farmer had completed its work and was available to return home at the time of twilight, he saw, in the middle of the field, plenty of hot coals. He approached very surprised and saw a black devil sitting encima.- Are you sitting on a treasure? - asked him the labrador.- Yes - answered the devil -. On a treasure in there more gold and silver ever saw in your life.- The treasure is in my field, and therefore it belongs - said Tuyo labrador.- will be - replied the devil - if for two years you promise to give me half of what you produce your field. Money left over me, but I like the fruits of the farmer land.The accepted the deal with an objection: - That no fights when dealing, you'll stay with what you have on the ground, and I, which has debajo.Parecióle either the devil, unaware that the wily farmer had sown turnips. When the time came to harvest the devil presented himself to take his part; but only he found withered yellow leaves, while the farmer, happy and satisfied, stayed with the nabos.- This time has taken advantage - protested the devil - but the next will not be worth it. Be yours what grows above the ground, and what is my debajo.- As - said the peasant. But when planting turnips planted not, as before, but wheat. Ripe cereal, the man went to the field and mowed stalks flush with the ground, and when he presented the devil, not finding more than stubble, enraged rushed down despeñadero.- So he hunted foxes - said the farmer while carrying the treasure.
The thief and his master	645	325	Spanish	John wanted his son to learn a trade; He went to church and prayed to God our Lord to inspire you to be more convenient. Sexton, who was behind the altar, he said, "thieving, and thieving." Returned John with his son and told him he had to learn thieving, for he had so said the Lord God. I set off with the boy in search of someone who knew that office. After much walking, they came to a great forest, and there they found a small house in which lived an old woman. ? John asked him: - Do not know of any man who understands the thieving - Right here, and you can learn very well said the woman; My son is a master in the art. - And John spoke with the son of the old: - Could not teach my son the thieving To which the teacher: - will teach him as it should. Come back in a year; If you know him then, renounce charge anything for my teaching; but if you do not know, you have to pay me two hundred ducados.Volvió home father and son learned with great application art of witchcraft and thieving. It passed the year, was the father looking for him, thinking sadly, during the way how they compose to recognize her son. As he went deep in his musings, he stared at himself and saw that he was leaving to step a little man, who asked him: - What is it good man? preocupado.- you seem very Ay! exclaimed Juan, a year ago I placed my son home of a teacher in fullería, which told me to return to the end of this time, and if you did not recognize my son, would have to pay two hundred ducats; but if recognized, he should not pay him anything. And now I feel great fear of not acknowledge it, because do not know where I'll get the dinero.Díjole then the man a crust of bread carry and placed her under the hood of the fireplace. On the hanger racks hanging was a punnet of which protruded a little bird; this was his hijo.Entró Juan and cut a crust of brown bread in front of the basket. Immediately he came out a little bird and stared mirando.- Hello, my son, are you here? said Father. The child was glad to see his father, while the teacher grumbled: - The devil has said. ? How, otherwise, would have recognized your son - Father, let muchacho.El said the father embarked with his son coming home; Along the way they passed a car. then the boy said: - I will transform myself into a large greyhound, and then you can make money conmigo.Y shouted the lord of the car: - Good man, will you sell your dog? - Yes answered the FATHER How ask - Thirty ducados.- A lot of money is, my good man; but, finally, the lebrel I like and I stay with it.The Lord went up to the car; but scarcely had run a short distance when the dog, jumping from the carriage through the window, through the glass, disappeared and went to join the two together supadre.Llegaron home. At the next day there was a market in the neighboring village, and told the boy to his father: - Now I will transform into a magnificent horse, and you will sell me. But after the deal you must take off the bridle, because otherwise could not return to my condition persona.Encaminóse man to the market with his horse, and was presented with the master thief comes and buys the animal per cent ducats; but the father, distracted, forgot to remove the flange. The buyer took the horse home and put it in the barn. A maid passing by the hall, said the horse: - Take off the flange, take my bridle The girl was stopped, the listening ear: - What! You know, talk? It was and took the bridle and the horse becomes a sparrow, flew away over the door. But the teacher also becomes a sparrow and went after him. To the reach the other started the fight; but the teacher, who had to lose, turned into fish and plunged into the water. Then the young man turned and fish also fighting resumed; the teacher went wrong, and had to be transformed again. It took the shape of a chicken, and the waiter, that of a fox, and, throwing himself on his master, cut off the head of a bite. And there you have a dead teacher; and remained dead to this day.
Marine lebrato	1812	329	Spanish	He once lived a princess who was on the top floor of his palace a lounge with twelve windows, open to all points of the horizon, from which they could see every corner of his kingdom. From the first, he saw more clearly than others; from the second, even better, and so on, until the twelfth, from which no escape was nothing that had happened in their domains and, on the surface or underground. As it was in superb end and would not submit to anyone but retain power for himself alone, he sent a proclamation that she would marry the man who was able to hide so that she could not find it. But one who would risk a trial and lost, he would be beheaded and his head stuck on a pole. Standing before the castle and ninety seven poles, topped by as many heads, and long without seeing even more suitors. Princess, satisfied, thinking, "free as long life." But behold, three brothers appeared willing to try their luck. The biggest believed to be sure getting into a splash of lime, but she saw him from the first window, and ordered to take him out of the cache and decapitate. The second slid to the cellars of the palace, but it was also discovered from the same window, and his head held the post number ninety-nine. then the child presented himself before His Highness, and begged him to grant him a day of time to reflect and also the grace to repeat the test three times; If the third failed, renounce life. As he was very handsome, and begged so hard, I said to the princess: - Well, I grant you; but you do not get away with tuya.Se passed the waiter most of the day thinking about how to hide, but in vain. then picking up a gun, went hunting, he saw a raven and pointed; and when he was about to shoot, gritóle animal: - Do not shoot, I reward she lowered the boy the gun and walked to the edge of a lake where he surprised a large fish which had risen from the bottom to the surface!. At the take aim, he said the fish: - Do not shoot, I reward Perdonóle life and continued on his way until he came upon a fox, who was limping!. He shot her, but misfired; and then she told the animal: - You'd better serves me the spine of the pata-. He did so, but with intent to kill the fox and skin; but the animal said: - Let me go and I'll put young recompensaré.El released and, as night fell, he returned home.The next day had to hide; But as much as the head broke, he found no place on purpose. He went to the forest, to the meeting of the raven, and said - I let thee life; Now tell me where I should hide so that the princess did not descubra.Bajó the bird's head and thought for a long time, until at the end, croaked: - I have it -. I brought an egg from its nest, cut it in two and got to the boy inside; then he reattached the two halves and sat encima.Cuando the princess appeared at the first window could not discover, nor from the second; He was beginning to worry when, at the end, saw him from the eleventh. He gave orders to kill the raven shot and bring the egg; and the break appeared the boy: - I forgive you for this time-but as you do best, perdido.Al are next day was, the waiter at the edge of the lake and calling the fish, he said - I I forgave life; now direct me where to hide myself so that the princess vea.Reflexionó me the fish for a while and so he exclaimed: - I've got it! I lock myself in my vientre.Y swallowed it, and went down to the depths of the lake. King's daughter looked through the windows, and even from the first eleven, with the consequent anguish; but since the twelfth she saw him. He sent fish to the fish and kill him, and the open, out of his belly young. It is easy to imagine the disgust that was. She said: - For the second time I forgive life, but your head will adorn, irretrievably, the pole number cien.El last day, the boy went to the field, disheartened, and found the zorra.- You who know all the -díjole- hideouts, advise me, because I forgave life, where I hide so that the princess did not descubra.- hard is putting the fox said looking worried; But in the end, he exclaimed: - I've got to go with him to a spring, he dipped himself in it, came out in the shape of treating cattle!. Then there were plunging, in turn, boy, I was changed into lebrato of sea. The merchant went to the city where he exhibited the graceful animal, meeting many people to see it. In the end, also he dropped princess and love with it, bought it from the merchant for a good amount of money. Before handing it over, said the attending to the lebrato: - When the princess go to the window, hide under the tail of his vestido.Al get time to look, looked out the girl to all windows, one after another. unable to discover; and seeing that from the twelfth could not find him, entróle such fear and rage, that, blows, shattered the windows of all windows, making tremble all palacio.Al retire and find the lebrato under his tail, she picked it up and throwing him to the ground, exclaimed: - behind me the animal went to the meeting of the merchant and together they returned to the font. They plunged back into the water and recovered their own figures. The waiter thanked the fox, saying - the raven and the fish are few apprentices, compared with you. No doubt that you are the most astuto.Luego was presented at the palace, where the princess was already expecting him, resigned to their fate. Then the wedding, and he was king and lord of the whole country. He never wanted to reveal where he had hidden the third time and who had helped him, so she lived in the belief that everything was fruit of his ability, and therefore, he always held him in great respect, and he thought: "This is more ready than I am."
The lion and the Mouse	4359	75	Spanish	It was a mouse trapped in the clutches of a lion; the unfortunate in this mousetrap was not imprisoned for stealing bacon or cheese, but because other molestabaal León, who rested his retirement. He asks for forgiveness, crying his insolence. A hearing imploring royal clemency, said the king in majestic tone: No more Tito said, you perdono.Poco later, hunting, Lion stumbles into a hidden network in the undergrowth: Dating is more prisoner; thundered the jungle, fierce roars. Free Mouse, who feels, comes running: Roe diligent nodes of the network in such a way that, in the end, broke the shackles of the beast. Befits the powerful to be pious unhappy, maybe you can see in need of the help of that most unfortunate.
The lion and the Mouse	9026	75	Spanish	Once upon a time a mouse emerged from his burrow and found a huge león.El lion wanted comérselo.- Please do not eat me lion. Maybe one day I necesites.El lion replied: 'How would you need, so you're the little lion took pity at seeing how small was her mouse and soltó.Un day, the mouse heard a terrible roar .it Mr. león.Cuando came to the place, he found the lion trapped in a red.- Iyo will save! - said ratón.¿Tú? Are too small for both mouse esfuerzo.El began to gnaw the rope of the net and the lion was salvarse.Desde that night, the two were friends forever.
The lion and the Mouse	9064	75	Spanish	A sleeping lion in his lair was awoken by a mouse scampering across his face. He angrily grabbed his claw with intent to kill. Mouse, terrified, begged him to spare his life. "Please let me go," he shouted, and someday I will reward you for your kindness. "The idea that such an insignificant creature would ever be able to do anything for him amused both the lion began to laugh out loud laughter, and happy he let her go. But the chance of the mouse came after all. One day the lion was caught in a net that had been placed by hunters, and the mouse heard and recognized his roars of anger and ran to the place. No more . set to work to gnaw the ropes with its teeth, and soon managed to free the lion "! Ves" said the mouse, you laughed at me when I promised to reward you in return, but now you see, even a mouse can help a lion.
Blue lily	3789	780	Spanish	(Valencian version) once and once was a King who had three sons, who said he would give the crown to one of the three to bring her children Lily azul.Echáronse each for different course to look for those mundos.El he found smaller flower and stuffed very happy in the middle, in case he found his brothers, not to be seen. In the midst of a dry creek were found, and they knew them wearing flower, and one said to another: What will we do to take it off and win the crown The other replied: -Matarle.Y they did, burying him after in arena.Como were two, one flower, drew lots to see who won, and favored greater. He was very happy home, and when he came and gave his father the flower, the King declared heir to the corona.En this happened a pastor for the site was buried younger brother, and saw out white land a straw, which started and made her a flute. He touched her, and said: Tap, tap, Bon Pastor, not ennamenesper flower blau lliri, man mort in riu de arenes.Fue playing this to pass in front of the palace of the King, who, having heard the flute, came to call the pastor, and said, Come up to touch the flute, I want oírla.Entró the pastor and began to touch her, and repeated his song. King summoned his children, and told the pastor that he should say where he got that flute. The pastor led them to the place where he had found his flute, and the King said to his sons: -¿Sois you who have killed your brother But they said no.Su father commanded to lift the sand in that place, and? they found alive and healthy child, only lacking a finger was left out when he was buried, and was the one who had served for the flute, and the father gave the crown to the child and punished his hermanos.Vivió and reigned many years, but always without cash dedo.Cuento, already it finished, and the fire went to the housetop.
The wolf and man	682	157	Spanish	One day the fox was talking to the wolf man force: no animal that resisted, and all were obliged to employ cunning to guard him. Wolf answered: - How has the chance to meet a man, what if him notwithstanding - can help you find the zorra- said;! Come tomorrow morning, and I'll show you early uno.Presentóse wolf, and the fox led him to the path that every day was the hunter. First he spent a discharged soldier, and very viejo.- Is that a man? asked lobo.- not answered the zorra-, has sido.Acercóse after a boy who went to escuela.- Is that a man? - No, it will be a día.Finalmente, came the hunter, the double-barreled shotgun to his shoulder and cutlass at his belt. He said the fox to the lobo.- See? That's a man! Thou must attack him, but what I'm going to hide in my madriguera.Precipitóse the wolf against man. The hunter, on seeing him, said - shame it does not carry the gun loaded with bullets! -and, aimed, and fired small shot in his face. Wolf intensely wrinkled snout, but without panic, went straight to the opponent, which fired the second charge. Repressing their pain, the animal threw himself against the man, and then he unsheathed his gleaming cutlass, struck him three or four stab wounds such, the wolf came to escape, bleeding and howling, and went to find the fox .- Well, brother wolf is- he said, how has the man - Ouch! He replied the wolf, so I did not imagined the strength of man! He first picked up a stick carrying shoulder, he breathed into him and threw something on my face that gave me a tingle terrible, then she blew again on the same staff, and I found it on the snout receive a discharge of lightning and hail; and when he was next to him, he removed the body of a brilliant rib, and gave me so with it that I stay almost dead on the terreno.- You're already seeing what a braggart you are! -díjole the zorra-. Miss the ax so far that he can not go get it.
The wolf and the seven little goats	40	123	Spanish	Once upon a time an old goat who had seven little ones, I wanted as tenderly as a mother can love their children. He wanted a day out to the forest to look for food and called them all round her. "Daughters," she said, "I'm going to the forest, very careful with the wolf, because if you enter the house you devour all without leaving a hair Very often scoundrel disguise, but known by his gruff voice. and legs black. " The cabritas responded: "We will very carefully, madrecita Can you go away quiet.." Old took leave with a bleat and confident, began his camino.No much time had passed when the doorbell rang and a voice said. "Open, daughters am your mother, I'm back and I bring something to each. " But the little kids knew so rough voice, which was the wolf. "Do not they'll open," exclaimed, "You are not our mother She has a soft, loving voice, and yours is anger.. Are the wolf" It was this to the store and a good chunk of plaster was purchased. He ate to soften the voice and returned to the house. Calling back to the door: "Open daughters," he said, "your mother brings you something to each." But the wolf had put a black paw on the window, and seeing her the goats, exclaimed: "No, we will not open you; our mother has no black paws like you You're the wolf." He then ran the rascal to a baker and said, "Look, I've hurt my foot, I úntamelo with some pasta." Wiped already had the leg, he went to the meeting of the miller: "Échame white flour in the foot," he said to him. The miller, realizing that the wolf was up some outrage, negóse at the beginning, but the beast threatened: "If you do not, I devoured them." The man, frightened, he blanked the leg. Yes, that's gente.Volvió the ruffian for the third time to the door and knocked, said. "Open, small, Your dear mother, who is back and brings you good things in the woods" The cabritas replied: "Show us the leg, we want to ensure that you are our mother." The beast put his paw on the window, and seeing them it was white, they believed they were true his words and rushed to open. But it was the wolf who entered. What a shock, my God! And what a rush to hide all! That he went one under the table; the other, in bed; the third, in the oven; the fourth in the kitchen; the fifth, in the closet; the sixth under the sink, and the smallest, in case the clock. But the wolf was discovering them one after another and unceremoniously spend, it's engulfed all but the littlest that hidden in the watch box, escaped their inquiries. And satiated and satisfied, the wolf went away to a light jog and reached a meadow green, tumbóse to sleep in the shade of a árbol.Al shortly after he returned home the old goat. Good God, what I saw! The door open wide; table, chairs and benches, all thrown; the basin, broken into a thousand pieces; blankets and pillows on the floor. He looked for his daughters, but did not appear anywhere; llamólas all by name, but no answer. Until the turn came to the last, which, little voice, said. "Mother dear, I'm in the box of the Clock" Goat drew it, and then the small explained that the wolf had come and had eaten the rest. You may think how she cried for the loss of their dear children did not when were no more tears, went on the field with his small, and getting to the meadow, saw the wolf asleep under the tree, snoring so loudly that the branches shook. In the closely observe, it seemed that something was moving and shaking in her bulging tummy. Oh my GOD! he thought, if will they be my poor little daughters, who has bitten the and are still alive? And he sent home the small, hastily, looking for scissors, needle and thread. He opened the belly of the monster, and had just begun to cut when one of the goats stuck his head. A further cutting the six jumped out, one after another, all alive and unharmed as the beast in his gluttony, had swallowed the whole. There he was to see his joy! With much affection embraced their mammy, jumping as a tailor at weddings! But the goat said, "Bring me now stones fill them condemned the belly of this beast, taking advantage of sleeping." The seven little goats ran for rocks and were getting into the belly, until they no longer fit anymore. The mother sewed the skin so quickly and smoothly, the beast has not noticed anything or made any movimiento.Terminada and his nap, the wolf rose, and as pebbles that filled the stomach should give him very thirsty , she went out a well to drink. As he walked, moving from side to side, pebbles her belly bumped into each other with great noise, so he said, "What will this sounds ruidoque in my tummy thought they were six goats, but now I seem chinitas?. " A getting to the well and stooped to drink, the weight of the stones dragged and dropped to the bottom made where was drowned. Seeing the goats, they came running and shouting jubilantly: "Dead is Dead the wolf is the wolf!" And, with his mother, they stood in a circle dance around the well.
The wolf and the fox	691	41	Spanish	The wolf lived with the bitch, and she had to do what he commanded him, because he was the weakest; gladly he would have gotten rid of his master. One day when the two roamed the forest, the wolf said: - Redheaded, I'm hungry; Find me something to eat or you will devour the fox ti.Respondió: - Be a farm where there are a few lambs; if you want, go for uno.Asintió the wolf headed to the farm, the fox stole the lamb, took it to his master and ran. Wolf lamb ate; but not having been satisfied, also he wanted the others and went in search. But so clumsily did, that the sheep mother felt and began to bleat so hard and put so much noise that the peasants came running and caught a wolf, handing him such a beating, the beast came to the lair of the fox yelping and limping: - A good place took me! -lamentóse-. When I wanted to take possession of another lamb, peasants caught me and put me as nuevo.- Why you being so greedy? zorra.Al -replicóle the next day they came back out to the countryside, and the glutton of the wolf repeated what Eve: - Redheaded, bring me some food or I will devour it.And answered the fox: - I know a farmstead, where today the woman frying donuts; let's get some cuantos.Dirigiéronse to the farmstead, and the fox slipped around, spying and nosing until, having discovered the source of donuts, half took a dozen and took them to the wolf: - There you go snack 'I he said, and left. The wolf bite donuts gobbled up and said: - They know más.Entró in the pantry and threw himself on the source, with such bad luck that it fell to the floor and shattered, with a crash. He came women and the sight of the wolf, called people. They all came running and zurraron to the animal so that he had to flee two-legged lame. In lamentable state came to the den of the fox - Damn place you took me! -gritóle-. Men caught me and grinded to palos.Pero the fox replied: - Why are you being so gluttonous A third day out together, the wolf, who walked with difficulty and limped back to his old ways: - Redheaded Bring me something to eat or you will devour the fox ti.Dijo: - I know a man who has done the killing and keeps the meat salted in a barrel in the cellar; we are on her.- But you'll come with me, 'said the wolf, to help in case you can not huir.- For me, there is no problem said the fox, and showed him rodeos and paths where to order , reached the bodega.Había her meat in abundance, and the wolf immediately began the task: "it There for a while, before not end !," he thought. Neither the fox fell short, but while he ate, looked in all directions, and often ran to the hole through which they had entered, to monitor your body is not too swell and prevented him from leaving. Said to the wolf: - Friend bitch, what are these constant comings and goings, and this jump from the outside in and inside out - I watch someone that does not come -respondióle the sly. You do not eat too much but the wolf replied -! What is not leaving me to leave the empty barrel in these peasant came to the winery, for he had heard the noise of the fox jumps!. This, in the view of a jump escaped through the hole; the wolf wanted to follow, but by dint of eating had filled so that could not pass through the hole and was imprisoned him. He armed himself the owner of a big stick, and killed the wolf with cudgels, while the fox jumped through the woods, glad to be rid of the old glutton.
The knapsack, the hat and horn	514	569	Spanish	Once upon three brothers were; things had fared worse, and end their misery was so great that they left nothing to eat or drink. Then they said: - So we can not continue; the better we leave for these worlds to try fortuna.Pusiéronse therefore underway and toured many places and trod much grass, but nowhere are they submit good luck. Thus they arrived one day at a forest dilated in the middle of which stood a mountain, and approaching it saw that all was silver. He said then the mayor: - I have found the fortune he wanted, and I desire nothing mayor.Cogió all the silver that could carry and returned home. But the other two said: - A Fortune asked more than silver-and, without touching the metal, followed his ruta.Al after two or three days' march came to a mountain, that was pure gold. The second brother stopped and he reflected; I was hesitant: "What should I do - preguntábase- Does taking all the gold I need for the rest of my life, or go?.?." Decidióse to the end; metal pockets filled, he said goodbye to his brother and returned to his home.The third reflected thus: "Gold and silver do not tell me much keep looking fortune, maybe I reserve something better.." He walked on, and after three days came to a forest, even more vast than the previous; is never finished, and of course find anything to eat or drink, the waiter was on the verge of starvation. He then climbed a tall tree to see if he discovered that forest limit; but the tops of the trees stretched to infinity. He started to go down to the floor, thinking, tormented by hunger, "If only I could fill my gut !." And behold, on touching the ground, watched in awe beneath the tree, a beautifully set table covered with viands abundant that gave off a pleasant whiff. "By this time, he thought, my desires are met in a timely fashion," and, without stopping to consider who had stewed and served the banquet, drew near to the table and ate their fill. When he was finished, it occurred an idea: "It would be a pity that this beautiful tablecloth were to be spoiled in the forest," and then folding it carefully, put it in his backpack. then resumed the road until nightfall, when, returning to acuciarle hunger, he wanted to put the tablecloth tested. He spread it and said - I want to cover yourself seeming good manjares.Y hardly had expressed his desire, the canvas was covered with plates full of scrumptious dishes. "Now I see what -díjose cooking stew for me. Better is this gold and silver," for he was well aware that he had found a table tablecloth prodigiosa.Pero considering that this was not a treasure enough to retire live at home quietly and play continued his wanderings, always in pursuit of fortuna.Un evening he found himself in a lonely forest with a coal all sooty and covered with black dust, was making charcoal and had the fire some potatoes intended for dinner.- Good evening, blackbird black! he said, saludándolo-. How about you spend so alone - For every day the same, and every night for dinner potatoes replied the charcoal-burner. If you fancy, you invito.- Thank you! He said the traveler, I do not want to deprive you of your food; you were not expecting guests. But if you are content with what I can offer you, it is you my huésped.- And who will bring the viands? Well, from what I see, do not take anything, and in two hours in all directions no one can sell comida.- Still replied the other, I'll offer a dinner and never saw igual.Y, making the tablecloth knapsack, spread it on the floor and said: "Mat, cover yourself !," and immediately appeared cooked and cooked, all hot as if from the kitchen. Saithe orange eyes opened, but did not pray, but reached out and got larger and larger mouthfuls fist. They had dined, saithe said smugly: - Hey, I like your placemat; I would pearl here in the woods, where nobody cares Bake Me nothing to be appetizing. I propose a change. Look at that soldier's knapsack, hanging there in the corner; It is true that it is old and does not look; but it possesses prodigious virtues. As I do not need it, you change it for your mantel.- first have to know what prodigious virtues are those that say you said the viajero.- I'll tell explained the charcoal-burner: Every time the hand hit , a corporal comes with six men armed to the nines, to obey any order them des.- Well, if you have said something else the other, accept the trato.Dio tablecloth saithe, picked up the backpack hook, colgándosela to the shoulder, despidió.Después having walked a little way, wanted to try the wonderful virtues of the backpack and gave him a shock. Immediately appeared the seven warriors, the corporal said - What Your Honor orders - Return to the meeting of saithe, forced marches, and exigidle that will deliver the mantelito.Los soldiers they turned to the left, and the short time they were? back with the tablecloth, which, without spending compliments, had been taken from the coal. Then commanded them to retire and went on the road, hoping that fortune would show even more favorable. The setting sun came to the camp of another collier, who was making his dinner.- If you want to have dinner with me potatoes with salt, but without butter, sit here she invited the sooty desconocido.- No -Rejection him. By this time, you will be my invitado.Y unfolded the tablecloth, that the moment was filled with splendid delicacies. They ate and drank together, with great humor, and then said saithe: - There on the bench, an old hat, and dog-eared, but has unique properties. When you put it and turns it over in his head, put out twelve culebrinas row, which are set to shoot and shoot down as lies ahead, no one can resist its effects. To me, the hat is useless to me and I'll change it for the mantel.- Sea in good time, 'said the waiter, and, taking the hat he plopped it, delivering the same time the tablecloth to the carbonero.Cuando had advanced another will stretch, hit the knapsack, and his soldiers had to fetch the tablecloth. "Everything goes without a hitch, he thought, and I think I'm still not at the end of my fortune." And he was right, because the term of the next day he found a third saithe, who, like the previous ones, invited him to dinner potatoes without dripping. He also offered a lavish dinner at the expense of the magic tablecloth, leaving the satisfied saithe, who proposed trocar fabric by a gifted horn greatest virtues still the sombrerillo. When touched, walls and fortifications fell, and the final, towns and villages were reduced to piles of rubble. The young man accepted the change, but the little time sent his troops to reclaim it, which was in possession of the knapsack, hat and horn. "Now -díjose- have made my fortune, and it's time to come home to see how it is going to my brothers." He reached his village, he found that his brothers, with the silver and gold collected, had built a beautiful home and gave great life. They presented himself to them, but as he went with his backpack, shabby hat on his head and a half-torn jacket, refused to recognize him by his brother. They said, taunting him: - You pretend you through our brother who despised gold and silver because it called for something better. There is no doubt that he will return with great magnificence, in a chariot, like a true king and not made a beggar-and gave the door in the narices.Él indignantly stood banging his backpack so many times that went it perfectly hundred armed men, who formed and aligned militarily. And he charged around the house, while two received order to provide themselves with sticks of hazel and spank the badana the two insolent until aviniesen to recognize it. All that caused a huge uproar; together, and wanted people to come to the aid of road kill; but nothing could against the troops of the groom. In the end, the fact came to the ears of the King, who angrily sent to the site of the incident to a captain in front of his company, with orders to throw the city to those spoilsport. But the man brought in a jiffy bag a much larger troop and rejected the captain with all his men, who had to retire with bloody noses. King said: - You have to stop the feet to the adventurer, whatever cueste.Y to the next day sent him hosts more numerous, but there was no better success than the day before. The adversary was opposed by more people and to finish sooner, giving a few laps his sombrerillo, he began to come into play Artillery, who defeated the army of the King and put it in fuga.- shameful Now I will not make peace - he said until the King gives me his daughter and me the name regent reino.Y, sending communicate its decision to the King, he told his daughter: - it is hard for the need! What choice have I but give in to what is required? If I want peace and to keep the crown on my head, I must give thee strength to their demandas.Celebróse therefore wedding; but the princess was vexed that her husband was an ordinary man, who was always a shabby hat and an old backpack. How gladly would have gotten rid of him! Thus, he spent day and night turning the head to implement your desire. He thought, "Will perhaps in his backpack prodigious forces?" And he began to treat him with affection pretended, until, seeing that his heart softened, he said - Why not throw that old bag? You disfigures so much that I am ashamed of you.- Dear -respondióle-, this backpack is my greatest treasure, while possessing, fear no power of the world -. And he revealed the magical power that was dotada.Ella threw her arms neck to hug and kiss him, but with a quick movement took the shoulder bag and ran off with him. As was alone, he began to beat him and ordered soldiers to seize their former master and take him out of the palace. They obeyed them, and the perfidious wife sent still others to order him out of the country. The man was lost, not having had the sombrerillo. I do not either had a free hand, gave him a couple of laps, and immediately began thundering artillery, destroying everything, so that the princess had no choice but to report to ask perdón.De time he was affectionate with her husband pretending to love him very much, and he knew upset you so, he confided that, even if someone from taking over his backpack, nothing could against him until he also laid aside the sombrerillo. So knowing her secret, she waited until he was asleep; then he snatched his hat and had him thrown to the calle.Pero still left to man the horn and, in a fit of anger, he blew it with all his strength. Soon he collapsed all walls, fortifications, towns and villages, killing the King and his daughter. And if he had not ceased to blow the horn, which had followed only by touching a little bit more, it would have been turned into a heap of ruins, leaving no stone unturned. Nobody dared to resist, and became king of the whole country.
The wonderful musician	70	151	Spanish	There was once a prodigious musician who wandered alone through the forest turns giving head. When I no longer knew what else to think, he said to himself: "In the jungle will take me long time, and I bore you, would have to find myself a good companion." He picked up the violin wearing suspended from his shoulder and began to scrape, making echoed through the trees. A little wolf, leaving the weeds appeared. "Oh! It's a wolf coming. It is my desire for him," said the musician. But the wolf approached him and said, "Hello, musician, how well you play I want to learn!". - "Well, it will not be difficult," the musician replied, "If you do everything I tell you." - "Oh, musician," said the wolf, "I will obey you like a pupil to his master." The musician told him to follow him, and after walking a while, came beside an old oak, hollow and split in half. "Look," said the musician, "if you want to learn to play the violin, he puts his front paws on this slot." He obeyed the wolf, and man, quickly picking up a stone and making it serve wedged his legs the animal so strongly, that it was caught, unable to let go. "Stay there until I get back," said the musician, and continued his camino.Al after a while he thought again: "In the forest I will make long time, and I bore you, would have to find another partner." He picked up his violin and sounded a new melody. He soon came a fox, slipping through the trees. "There comes a fox," thought the man. "I do not like your company." The fox came up to him and said, "Hi, musician, how well you play I want to learn!". - "Do not be difficult," the musician replied, "you just have to do whatever I command you." - "Oh, musician," then said the fox, "I will obey you like a pupil to his master." - "Then he ordered him follow me." And soon they reach a path bordered on both sides by tall shrubs. then the musician stood still and, grabbing a hazel growing in one bank, folded to the ground, holding the tip with a foot; then did the same with a small tree on the opposite side and said to the fox: "Now, my friend, if you want to learn, give me your left front paw." He obeyed the fox, and the man tied her to the trunk of the left side. "Give me right now," he continued. And he tied in the same way on the right trunk. After making sure that the knots of the ropes were firm, released two bushes, which, straightening, they raised the fox in the air and hung struggling. "Wait until I return," he said to the musician, and resumed his ruta.Al After a while, he thought again: "The time I will do very long and boring in the woods, let's look to find another partner." And, taking the violin, he sent his notes to the jungle. At sones he drew near skipping a lebrato: "Bah !, a hare," thought the man, "I do not want a partner." - "Hey, good musician," said the animal. "Tocas m, well, I like to learn." - "It's easy," he said, "whenever you do what I command you." - "Oh, musician," replied the little hare, "I will obey you like a pupil to his master." They walked, then together for a while, until you reach a clearing in the forest where stood an aspen tree. The musician tied to a string along the neck of the rabbit, and fastened to the other end tree. "Allah! Quick! Give twenty carreritas around the poplar," commanded the man to the animal, which obeyed. But when he had finished his twenty laps, the Bramante had curled so many around the trunk, leaving the prisoner lebrato; more jerks and jolts that gave only could hurt his neck with string. "Wait there till I come back," he said the musician, alejándose.Mientras So the wolf, a pulling force, and strive to bite the stone, had succeeded, after hard work, pull the legs of the slot. Irritated and angry, he followed the footsteps of the musician, ready to tear it apart. To see him pass the fox, stood wailing and shouting with all his might: "Wolf Brother, help me The musician has betrayed me." The wolf dropped seedlings, cut the rope with his teeth and freed the fox, who went with him to take revenge. Then they found the trapped hare, whom likewise they delivered, and the three together, set out in search of the enemigo.En that the musician had returned to try his luck with his violin, and this time with better fortune. The sound reached to the ears of a poor woodcutter, who instantly, whether he did not, had to quit his job and ax under his arm, went towards the place from which the music. "At last comes the right companion that suits me," exclaimed the violinist, "a man was what he wanted, and no wild beasts." And he began and played so beautifully and delightfully that the poor man stood there as if bewitched, and his heart leaped with gladness. And behold, in this approach saw the wolf, the fox and the hare, and their faces a few friends, he realized that had evil intentions. Then the woodcutter raised his glittering ax and placed himself before the musician as saying: "Be careful who wants to hurt, it must entendérselas me." Whereupon, the animals were frightened and ran through the forest, while the musician, grateful, regaled the woodcutter with another beautiful melody.
Bird truth	3779	707	Spanish	Once upon a time and once a poor fisherman, who lived in a shack on the edge of a river, very clear, very gentle, but deep, which run from the sun and the noise was coming through the trees, bushes and reed beds to listen the birds who rejoiced with his cantos.Un day, stuck in his small boat, the fisherman would cast their nets, saw down slowly by the current one Archite glass. Bogole to the meeting, so how was his amazement at seeing her lying on cottons two newborn creatures, boy and girl, the twins look! A poor fisherman gave very sorry for them and took them to his wife, who at that time was criando.-¡Eso is! He said this when they introduced them. We have eight children, and as if we had enough, bring me a few more.-woman said the poor fisherman, what did? ... let them go without projimidad or charity no to these little angels downriver to will starve or that the sea swallowed with large gullets? God, who sends us these two little children more care to help us raise And so it happened!; because children grew up healthy and robust pace of their eight children. They were both so good, so gentle and so compuestitos that the fisherman and his wife loved them very much, and continually be laid them by example to his other children, so these, envious and enrabiados, made them a thousand injustices and a thousand grievances ; so that fleeing from these humiliations, orphans were to take refuge among the groves and sugar cane fields on the banks of the river. Divertíanse with the birds, which had bread crumbs, and they gratefully flew to meet him and were taught the language of birds, they learned early; and so they entertained with them and taught them many good and beautiful things, one of them getting up early and one singing. One day the children were of the more rabid than ever fisherman, the twins were told: 'We are well-born and children of Christians; But you, with all your composure and dominion, are some bastards, with no father or mother more than the river, own toads and ranas.Al receive this insult orphans, who were ashamed, they both atribularon and shamed , which determined they go out into the world of God or seek his padres.A the next morning, they went thus without anyone felt, and started walking ... walking ... uncertainly, for those fields. At noon they had not glimpsed any people, nor seen viviente.Estaban soul tired, hungry and dejected, when the revolver one Montecillo, they found a small house; but when they reached it, the closed and absent found their dueños.Entonces, disheartened, sat down to rest on a bench that had the door. A little while they noticed that a portion of swallows gathered in the wing of the roof, and they are so picoteras, hung to a chat with others. And when they learned the language of birds, they understood what decían.-¡Hola, comadre city! 'she said one of them had the mood a little hick, to one that was very fine and distinguished. Blessed are the eyes that see you! I thought you had her friends in the neglected field; already! As you live in a palace! ...- I inherited my parents 'nest' said the other-, and as they have not disassociated, still continue to live, as you yours. But tell me, first of all he went on with political fine, how you will you and your entire family? Well, thank God, because even though I had my Beatricilla with an eye fluxión little lacked to me going blind, I was our choice, the "I pito-real" and ensalmo.-But was improved as what news you tell me Beatriz comadre? Do you sing well the nightingale? It is rises ever so graceful lark? Is engalana the goldfinch? Sister said the interrogada-, I have to tell you but pure scandals. Our flock, which was once so innocent and morigerada is lost and is taking the examples of men. It's a pain! What! Do decency and innocence are not in the field or among birds? Midwife! What you tell me -The truth and no more; Just imagine that the reach of our trip here, we find warblers, which leave when spring comes, the long days and flowers, looking cold and storms; to seeing the folly, the Compassionate wanted to deter, to which they answered us with the greatest insolencia.-How was that -The said:? Where are you going, crazy -where come, dissolute, that ye come many pocasy ? This was the answer we got, with which we made out the colors to the face.-what I hear! He cried his interlocutora-. Who has dared to label us never to us, the most honest and faithful of birds, dissolute? 'What do you think if I tell the First- continued the cogujada, who was so shy and so good woman is has made a thief insolent, and chelates cogujada in his grind, chop chickpea, pica corn, and to the sower that enfadaal see the damage it does, he says very brazen: "Sow again that this is not born" .- I'm flabbergasted! Well you do not know the half of it. When I came here and I wanted to get into my nest, I found him, very arrellenado, an impudent sparrow. "This nest is mine, 'I said. "Yours?" I replied very rude laughed. "My very mine." "Property is theft", I was happy with courage. "Sir ... Are you in it?" I said. "That nest is tilled my grandparents; in him my parents raised me, and he'll raise my children. " "No family," told me that emberrenchinado. A fainted seeing this, and all my companion began to mourn. When I came to, our husbands that thief had thrown a rogue. But you, sister, will not see such scandals by palacios.-¡Veo other! ... Oh! If you only knew! ...- Count you! Count you! swallows cried all at once and hastily; and then the silence was restored, thanks to a strong and prolonged "OID", which gave the dean, the palatial began his story in these terms: -Han of you know that the king fell in love with the youngest of the daughters a tailor, who lived near the palace, and married her; and the girl deserved it, because it was as good as beautiful and as humble as discreet. It happened that the King had to go to war, and Queen became pregnant and the feeling of separation, in those circumstances her husband. No wonder he was sorry! Because ministers and courtiers, who did not want her for queen, the daughter of a tailor, concocted lose; so when he came out of his time, giving birth to a beautiful twins, the very rogues wrote to the King that the Queen had given birth was a cat and a culebra.Cuando received new like the King, furious and embarrassed, issued a royal order, commanding what the Queen had given birth was thrown to the river, and she was walled; and it was done. Good Queen was walled, and the little angels, tucked into a Archite glass were thrown into the swallows río.Las, who are so good and so madreras, they began to feed in chorus about the fate of the poor Queen and innocent creatures, and the twins looked astonished, suspecting they might be if those children abandonados.La narrator continued: But you heard what God has allowed to outwit the evil plans. The Queen was walled; but his love, that much wanted, managed to make a hole in the wall, and there the food supplied, as we do our chicks; and this lady lives, but a life of martyr. The children were picked up by a good fisherman, who has grown up, as I told a friend of mine, "Martin Pescador" which is set on the banks of the twins río.Los, this heard, were alienated and increasingly happier He is having learned the language of birds; whereby test should never be wasted chances to learn, because when least expected, it may be useful as aprendido.-So they said joyfully Swallows that when these children are older, they may regain his place to the side of his father and free his mOTHER: This is not so easy, 'said the narradora-, because they can not identify him, but no way to prove the innocence of his mother, and the wickedness of the ministers, because there is only one means by which they could disabuse KING-And what is? Which? they asked with one voice all the swallows. How do you know I know the interrogada- said that spending a day in the garden of the palace, I found legs to peak with a peekaboo, as you know you is bird dowsing, and knows the future; and discoursing both about things palace, told me the following: (Children and swallows began to listen with redoubled attention, and even golondrinillas removed, with severe risk of falling, his bald head out of the nest, without notasen what their mothers, who have noticed, had given them a peck on punishment) .- the one who can persuade the King continued the palaciega- is the "Bird of Truth," which speaks the language of men, but they, more often, do not know or will not understand. And that bird, where is it? I asked the cucú.-That bird is in the castle he replied "you'll never go '; that castle keep it a fierce giant that never sleeps but a quarter of an hour in twenty-four. If the awakening reaches any outside or inside the castle, with its tremendous arm and hand pours gobbling, like us a mosquito.-And where is this castle? He asked the curious comadre BEATRICE That's what I do not know, 'said her friend; All I know is that not far away there is a tower, where he lives a witch impish, who is the one who knows the way and teaching it for as long as you bring the fountain running there "water of many colors "it used to its charms; but he will not say, but the kill, where the "Bird of Truth", to which has abhorred and wanted to kill; but because that bird nobody can kill, what makes her and her compadre giant is having him imprisoned and guarded by birds of lying, you have acogotado, without leaving respirar.-But no one else can give you right to the poor child if he were to go, where they have hidden the "Bird of Truth"? He -preguntaron the campesinas.-Nobody answered the ciudadana-, but a pious mochuelo that has become a hermit in that solitude; but the tongue of men do not know more than the word "Cross!", how hard he was when he witnessed the crucifixion on Calvary of the Redeemer of mankind, which sadly continues to repeat. This is not you can make the Prince understand, given the impossible even if there were. But friendly, stay you with God, that conversation so tasty I spent the afternoon in a Pipí say; the sun goes looking for her nest, which has made foam at the bottom of the sea. And I'll get mine; that my children are throwing me less. God ... Comadre "Beatriiiiz '! So saying, the swallow took his flight, and children, without feeling your hunger joy or exhaustion, they rose and went their way in the direction of the flight had taken the swallow. a touch of prayers came to a city, which they calculated would be one in which his father lived. They asked for a good woman to give them shelter for the night, she, seeing them so beautiful and so modositos, gave them gustosa.A the next morning, when the sun rose, when the child was sweeping the house, and the boy drawing water and watering the garden; so that when the good woman got up, made haciendas were found; so she was so happy that proposed them to stay children to live with it. The boy replied that his sister would; but as for him, he needed to conclude a business for which he had come there. Took leave, then, and he went on his way to good fortune, asking God would guide his steps to carry out such a risky empresa.Tres days went by these byways, finding no trace of tower, and the fourth sat, sad and hopeless the shadow of a tree. It came to pass after a while the saw reach a turtledove, which landed on the branches of the tree. Said to the child in your language: -Tortolita of the black collar Tell me want (so enjoyments your love for a century!) Where the castle Irásy is no return Poor child! -Responds the tórtola.¿Quién so bad you quiereque sends you there? It's my good or my bad luck! answer the rapaz.-For I know the AVE- -replícale want it, follow the wind blowing today there! The boy thanked him and went quickly on their way, fearing that the wind, as is so willful and mutable, give him desire to change rumbo.El growing field became more arid and sad, and at dusk spotted between shadows and bare rocks a black mole that both the tower was in dwelling witch. He daunted his sight; but as the child was willing, as everyone who takes very good purpose intended, he continued undaunted; When he had come, he took a stone and hit her three shots at the door, who repeated the hollows of the rocks, as sighs torn from their entrañas.Abriose the door and appeared in the doorway with a candle in hand illumined his face, an old so decrepit and so horrendous that the poor boy gave horror, three steps atrás.Rodeábala an army of lizards, geckos, cockroaches, spiders and other sabandijas.-How dare you, filthy street he cried , coming to disturb my door and wake me up? What do you want? Presto.-Lady Speaks said the boy, knowing that only you know the road leading to the castle "you'll never go," he indiquéis come to me, if you place.La old grimaced, which meant He grins, and said, Well; but it is now late; tomorrow you will go; comes in, and you sleep with these sabandijas.-I can not stop said the boy; I needed to go right now, to return before it day to the point where vengo.-¡Mal dog will bite and evil cat will scratch to the indócil prey! Rabid growled the old woman. If I tell you she added it must be on the condition that I bring this jar full of "water of many colors" which springs from the fountain which is in the courtyard of the castle; and if you bring me, I become a lizard for a whole eternity.-¡Convenidos! He replied the old niño.Entonces called a very thin and very sorrowful, poor dog had, and said: Aye, upa! Gurrapato that leads to the castle "you'll never go" and care you to tell my compadre your arrival.The dog growled, shook himself and stood camino.Al came after two hours in front of a very large castillote, very black, very sad ... whose doors were wide open, but without any light or noise indicate that it was inhabited; even the moonbeams, a sliding mass on that dark and lifeless, seemed more pálidos.El dog howled and moved on; but the boy did not know whether or not it was the time sleeping giant, stood and leaned fearful and agitated in the trunk of an embedded and "frondío" acebuche, which was the only tree that was in that barren and terse comarca.-¡Válgame my Jesus! He cried the child .- "Cross! Cross!" 'I said a sad voice among the branches of the olive silvestre.El child gleefully admitted to the hermit that had been mentioned the swallow, and said in the language of birds: Poor little owl, I beg you to me and me ampares you guide, since they come in search of the "Bird of Truth," and before I have to take the witch tower "water of many colors" .- Do not do that- said the mochuelo-; but fills the jug and pure clear water gushing from a spring at the foot of the source of the "water of many colors"; then enters the aviary, which is at the front of the door; choose none of the birds of bright colors that leave you encounter and you atolondren yelling at you all at par, they are the "Bird of Truth" but catches a white bird, whom the others have cornered, and who without being able to pursue relentlessly kill, because he can not die. But ... Hurry up !, because right now they just fall asleep giant, and his dream does not last more than a quarter of hour.The boy ran, entered the courtyard, where he found the source, who had many pipes, by pouring water of different colors; but he did not look, but filled her jug ​​the spring of clear pure water that flowed at the foot of the fountain, and went to the aviary. Just he came when he was surrounded by a flock of birds: one, black crows; others, peacocks; others, plovers, and they all claimed to be them the "Bird of Truth"; but the child is not left duped, but went straight, and discovering cornered white bird he sought, he took, he harbored in his chest and came out, not without carrying two separate pecks of the enemies of the "Bird of Truth." the child walked he ran toward the witch tower. When he had arrived, the old picked up the jug and threw the child all the water it contained, thinking it was of many colors, and that the child would become a parrot; but as it was pure and clear water, the child, the receipt, he became much more beautiful. They went immediately to soak it all scoundrels, who were the people who had gone there with the same attempt had taken the child, so all lizards became knights-errant; lizards, princess; crickets, musicians; the cigarrones, dancers; cicadas, journalists; spiders, maidens; the curianas, students; beetles, doctors; mosquitoes, singers; flies, widows, and weevils, niños.Cuando witch saw that, he took a broom, got into it and started volar.Los disenchanted, ladies, gentlemen and children, thanked his deliverer, and each threw his lado.Cuál would be the joy of seeing her sister to get to the child with the "Bird of Truth", presumably easy; but it was a very difficult thing, and it was to penetrate the "Bird of Truth" to the King without it would prevent all those courtiers who were interested in not came to know it and to discover the great crime that had cometido.Hubo more. Having rife court that she was the "Bird of Truth" was such a shock that inspired this story, few were those who slept tranquilos.Se prepared against him all kinds of weapons, each more sharpened, to which more poisoned; Hawks were provided to haunt him; cages that enclose dungeons if they failed to kill him; He maligned saying that its whiteness was hypocritical shave with which masked black plumage; he was depressed and ridiculed anyway, talented and without it. In the end, both spoke of the "Bird of Truth", which came new to the ears of the king, who insisted on seeing him; and although the intrigues of the people of the Court it wanted to prevent His Majesty strictly commanded a proclamation that made it known that he who had in his possession at the "Bird of Truth" to submit without stopping at the Rey.El is cast forth child who wanted nothing, went to the palace, carrying on his chest to the "Bird of Truth"; but as expected, they did not want you to let the cortesanos.Entonces the bird flew off, he entered the royal apartments by a balcony, was presented to the King, and said, 'Sir, I am the' Bird the truth"; to the child that brings me to his chest, they have not wanted to let her courtiers V. King M.el go up after the boy, who did with her sister, whom he had brought with him sent. Then they were in his presence, asked the King who eran.-Tell that to your Royal Majesty "Bird of Truth" replied the niño.E questioned this by the King, he replied that those children were their own sons, and he related what had sucedido.Apenas King learned so wicked plot, as he shook with tears of joy to children in their arms; He sent for masons, who opened the hole in which for many years had been walled good Queen, and which went so white poor girl, who looked like a queen marble; but as soon as he saw his children, when he sprang to his cheeks the blood of his heart and became more beautiful than I had ever been. King embraced her and sat on the throne, and beside the Princes, their children. Sent come to the good fisherman, and who made head of the Ministry of Fisheries; the faithful and gracious love will be the retired, he sat her on a chair spring, with a rosary in one hand and a fan in the other, and she was named "Duchess of the strike". Repartiéronse thank you very much and gifts, and went and came and gave me nothing.
The Golden Bird	543	550	Spanish	In ancient times there lived a king whose palace was surrounded by a beautiful park, which grew a tree that bore golden apples. As matured, the count; but he missed a morning. Diose part of the event to the King, and he ordered that every night guard were mounted at the foot of the tree. King had three sons, and the obscure sent the largest sentinel to the garden. At midnight, the prince could not resist sleep and the next morning another apple was missing. The other night had to watch the second son; but the result was the same: a twelve giving fell asleep, and in the morning was missing a block. It was his turn to guard the third child; he was willing to go, but the King did not trust him, and thought there would be more successful than his brothers; anyway, in the end he agreed to take charge of the guard. Instalóse the youngster under the tree, with wide eyes, and determined not to conquer sleep. A twelve giving heard a rumor in the air and the moonlight, he saw approaching a bird whose plumage flying shone like a golden ember. The bird landed on the tree, and as soon as I picked up an apple, the young prince shot an arrow. The bird could still escape, but the arrow had touched and fell to the ground a golden pen. The waiter picked it up and handed it to the morning to the King, telling what happened during the night. He called the King his council, and courtiers unanimously declared that a feather like this was as good as all reino.- If so precious is this pen said the King, I would not just her; I want to have the bird entero.El eldest son set off; it was to ready, and no doubt would find the golden bird. He had walked some distance way, when I saw the edge of a forest a fox and sliding down the shotgun, dispúsose to shoot her. But the fox stopped him, exclaiming: - Do not kill me, and instead, I will give you good advice. I know you're looking for the golden bird tonight and come to a village where there are two posadas face to face. One is brightly lit, and inside there is great fun; but beware of getting into it; sees the other, although its appearance is unattractive "How can you give me some advice this animal fool !," thought the prince, pulling the trigger.; but he missed the aim, and the fox quickly into the woods with a stiff tail. He followed young man keep his way, and dusk came to the people of the two inns, one of which everything was singing and dancing, while the other offered a miserable and sad. "It would be foolish if I hospedase -díjose- in that honky-tonk ramshackle rather than in this beautiful inn." So, he went into the merry inn, and it gave the revelry forgetting the bird, his father and all the good teachings that had recibido.Transcurrido time without the eldest son returned, stood second on the road, looking of the golden bird. Like his brother, he also met with the fox, which gave him the same advice, but he did not attend. He came to the two inns, and his brother, who was leaning out the window of cheerful, he called and invited to enter. He could not resist the boy, and, going inside, entregóse diversiones.Al pleasures and after a long time, the youngest son of the King wanted out, turn to try his luck; but the father is resistía.- is useless, 'he said. This will find the golden bird still less than his brothers; and if a misfortune happens you not know out of trouble; is the least wide-awake of tres.No However, as the young man did not leave him alone, he gave to his consentimiento.A the edge of the forest also found himself with the fox, which asked him to spare his life, and gave his good advice. The young man, who was kindhearted, said: - Fear not, little vixen; I do not do any daño.- not regret -respondióle the zorra-. And so you can move faster, climb in my rabo.No sooner had mounted on it, the fox began to run cross country, so fast that the wind whistled hair. A getting to the people you removed the boy and, following the good advice of the fox, hospedóse, without hesitation, in the little inn, where he spent a quiet night. The next morning, as he went out to the field esperábalo and the fox, who said: - Now I will tell you what to do. Always follow straight; to order, you will reach a palace, before which there will be a large number of soldiers lying; but do not worry, as they will be asleep and snoring; Go through the midst of them, enters the palace and runs all the rooms, until you get to a smaller one, in which there is a golden bird encased in a wooden cage. A side you will see another golden cage, beautiful empty but, as it is for decoration only, take heed very much to change the bird ordinary cage luxurious, because it would spend mal.Pronunciadas these words the fox again extend the tail, and prince rode on it. And again the cross country race began, while the wind whistled hair. At the lower front of the palace, he found everything just as he predicted the fox. He entered the prince in the room where the golden bird was in his wooden cage to the side which had another golden; and on the ground he saw the three apples from her garden. He thought the young man who was a pity that such a beautiful bird had to stay in a cage so ugly, so, opening the door, grabbed the animal and passed to the other. At that moment the bird uttered a shrill cry; despertáronse soldiers and, binding to the boy, locked him in a dungeon. The next morning he was brought before a court, and as he confessed his attempt, was sentenced to death. King, however, offered to spare his life on condition that he bring the golden horse, which was faster than the wind. If he did, he would also, in prize bird oro.Púsose the prince on the way, sighing sadly; So where would he find the golden horse? Suddenly he saw stop on the way to his old friend, zorra.- See! -Told him-. This has happened to you not listen to me. But do not be discouraged; I care about you and tell you how you can get to the golden horse. Always up front, and you come to a palace whose blocks is the animal. In front of the stables the grooms will be lying, sleeping and snoring, and you get the horse quietly. But one thing I must warn you: Put the bad wood and leather chair, not the gold you'll see hanging at his side; otherwise, you will have evil.And stretching the fox's tail, the prince rode him and started the cross country race, so fast, that the wind whistled hair. Everything happened as the fox had predicted; the boy came to the stall where the golden horse was. But going to put the bad chair, he thought: "It's a shame for such a beautiful horse not put the chair where it belongs." But just the gold he had touched the animal, it began to neigh loudly. They woke the grooms, seized the young prince and put him in jail. The next morning, a court sentenced him to death; but the King promised life and the golden horse if he was able to bring the princess beautiful of the Castle Oro.Se put enroute young very upset, and, his fortune, soon sprout a step the fox faithful. - Should I leave you to your misfortune 'I said animal- but I pity you and help you again. This road leads directly to the Castillo de Oro. Arrive to him at dusk and at night, when everything is quiet and peaceful, beautiful princess will go to the house of the bathrooms. When you enter, you throw over her and a kiss; she will follow and you take her; But, beware of let him say goodbye to his parents, because otherwise you will have bad! craned fox tail, montóse the son of the King, and again all cross-country running, while the hair whistled in the wind. to get to the Golden Castle, everything happened as predicted by the fox. He waited for the prince until midnight, and when everyone was asleep and the beautiful princess went to the baths, advancing suddenly kissed her. Said to her that would leave very comfortable with him, but pleaded with tears to let him before saying goodbye to their parents. At the beginning, the prince resisted his pleas; but seeing that the girl was crying and knelt at his feet, he relented. Princess just had touched his father's bed, awoke him and all the people of the castle; they seized the doncel and encarcelaron.A the next morning told the king: - You have risked their lives and lost you, however, you will grace of it, if you arrasas the mountain that rises in front of my windows and I removed sight - and this you must do it in eight days. If you succeed, you will receive a reward the hand of my hija.El prince began to handle the pick and shovel relentlessly; but when, after seven days he saw how little he had achieved and that every effort not even noticed, fell into a great depression, with all hope lost. But the evening of the seventh day the fox was presented and said - You do not deserve that worries me about you; but go to sleep; I will work on your apparatus.Bubble morning, waking up the boy and look out the window, the mountain had disappeared. He ran brimming with joy at the presence of the King, and he realized that his condition was satisfied, so the monarch, want it not, had to keep his word and give your hija.Marcháronse the two, and little time is the fox approached them: - you're the best, it is true; but Maiden Castle Gold also owns the horse GOLD.-, How can I earn it? He asked the young man.- I'll tell you. First of all, leads to the beautiful maiden to the king who sent you to the Castillo de Oro. It will overjoyed and give you the golden horse willingly. You ride it without delay and lengthen each hand to shake in farewell, leaving for last the princess. Then climb yank the croup and you rush to the gallop; nobody can reach you, because the horse is faster than viento.Todo happened so promptly and happily, and the prince walked away with the beautiful princess, both mounted on the golden horse. The fox did not stay behind, and told the doncel: - Now I'll help you conquer the golden bird. When you are in the vicinity of the palace where dwells the bird, make the princess apee; I will keep it. You show up in the courtyard of the palace with the golden horse; at the sight of it, there will be great joy, and deliver you the bird. When you have the cage in your hand, you gallop to where we are to pick up and preparing this princesa.Conseguido also the prince to return home with his treasures, the fox said to him: - Now you reward my Services.- What reward want ? asked the young man.- When we get to the forest, kill one shot and cut my head and Cute patas.- of gratitude would be this! She cried the waiter; this can not hacerlo.A what the fox replied: - If I refuse, I have no choice but to leave; but first I'll give you yet another good advice. Beware of two things: to buy meat hanging and sit at the edge of a well. - And these words, the boy entered the bosque.Pensó: "How strange is this animal, and go occurrences yours Who will buy meat hanging And as for ourselves to sit at the edge of a pit! has ever happened to me by lying. "he went on his way with the beautiful princess and had to go through the village where they had left their brothers. I felt him stir and uproar, and asking the cause, contestáronle they would hang two individuals. At the close he saw were his brothers, who had committed all sorts of outrages and squandered his estate. She asked him if I could not rescatarlos.- If you want to pay for them -replicáronle-. But why spend your money on freeing two criminals? But he, not listen to reason, bought them, and they all took the road to his casa.Al reach the forest where they met for the first time with the fox, as Since in him was cool and pleasant temperature, and was broiling sun fell, the brothers said: - Let's get some rest beside the well; eat a bite and drink one trago.Avínose the child and, forgetting, with animation of the talk, the recommendation of the fox, sat on the edge of the well without thinking anything wrong. But the two brothers gave him a shove and threw him to the bottom; They then set off, leaving the princess, horse, and bird. A coming home, said the King, his father - not only bring the golden bird, but also the golden horse and Princess Castle Oro.Hubo great feasts and rejoicing, and everyone was very happy, apart the horse, which he refused to eat; Bird, who did not want to sing, and the princess, who remained withdrawn and llorosa.El youngest brother was dead, though. Fortunately the well was dry, and it was to fall on a bed of moss, without damage; I just could not leave his prison. Even in this predicament he abandoned his faithful fox, who, coming hastily, he scolded for not following their consejos.- Nevertheless, I can not abandon you to your fate, 'he said; you out of this predicament again. - Indicóle cogiese that its tail, gripping tightly, and then pulled upward. You're still not out of danger, 'he said, because your brothers are not sure of your death, and have watchmen in the forest with orders to kill you if you let ver.El young bartered his clothes for a poor old man who found on the road, and thus he could reach the palace of the king, his father. No one recognized him; but the bird began to sing, and the horse to eat while the tears from the eyes of the princess dried. Admired asked the king: - What does this mean and the maid replied: - I do not know, but I felt very sad and now I'm glad. It seems as if it had come my lawfully wedded husband. - And she told him everything that had happened, despite the death threats he had made the two brothers, if discovered. The king summoned all who were in the palace, and thus also his youngest son appeared, dressed in rags like a beggar; but the princess recognized him at once and threw him to the neck. The wicked brothers were arrested and executed, and he married the princess and was the heir to the Rey.Pero, and what was the fox? You are going to know. Some time later, the prince returned to the forest and met the fox, who said: - You already have everything you could aspire; Instead, my misfortune has no end, even though it is in your hands the salvarme.Y again begged to kill her with one stone and cut off his head and legs. Prince did so, and at the same instant the fox became a man, who was none other than the brother of the beautiful princess, who, thus, was freed from the spell that weighed on him. And nothing missed the happiness of all, while they lived.
Bird Warlock	436	311	Spanish	Once there was a sorcerer who, taking the figure of old, would beg from door to door and caught pretty girls. Nobody knew where they took them, then disappeared forever. One day he appeared at the house of a rich man who had three pretty daughters; was, as usual, in figure ailing beggar with a basket on his back, to get her to do him alms. He asked for something to eat, and going out most to give a piece of bread, he tocóla with a finger, and the girl was found in an instant within the cesta.Alejóse then the witch with long strides, and took the girl home, which was in the middle of a dark forest. Everything in the house was magnificent; the old man gave her whatsoever she could possibly desire, and said: - Tesoro mine, here you'll have very good; have everything your heart could apetecer.Así spent a few days at the end of which he said: - I must go away and leave you alone for a short time. There you have the keys to the house, you can go everywhere and look everything in it. Just you not go into the room corresponding to this little key. I forbid it under penalty of death. - Also he gave him an egg, saying: - Preserve the egg carefully, and carry him always with you, because if you lose happen a girl desgracia.Cogió keys and the egg, and promised to obey all at the foot of the letter. When the witch had gone, she visited whole house from top to bottom, and saw that all the rooms glittered with gold and silver, as ever dreamed of such magnificence. He came finally to the forbidden door, and his first intention was to spend long; but curiosity would not leave her alone. He looked at the key and saw that it was like the others, slipped it into the lock, and almost without any force, the door opened. But what did you see his eyes? In the center of the room there was a large bloody pile, filled with human limbs, and, with it, a pit and a shiny ax. Such was his astonishment, he dropped onto the stack the egg in his hand, and although rushed to pick and dry blood, everything was useless; There was no means of erasing the stain, much as he washed and frotó.A just returned from his trip man, and the first thing he did was ask for the keys and the egg. You She gave them to her, but his hands were shaking, and he saw at the red stain, the girl had entered the bloody chamber: - Since you entered the room against my will - he said - will log back now against yours. Terminado.La your life has knocked the ground, dragged her by the hair, he put him head on the block and cut it with an ax, by flowing blood on the floor. Then he threw the body into the stack, with demás.- Iré now the second - the sorcerer said. And again taking the figure of a beggar, he returned to knock on the door of the man asking for alms. The second sister gave him a piece of bread, and the sorcerer seized her by touching it, as it did with the other, and he took it. The girl had no better luck than his sister, yielding to curiosity, opened the bloody chamber and the return of her captor, had to also pay with his head. The wizard then kidnapped the third, which was clever and cunning. Once was received the keys and the egg, the first thing he did as the man left, was put the egg in a safe place; then he recorded throughout the house and, finally opened the forbidden room. God in heaven, what a show! Her two dear sisters, pitifully you to pieces, lying on the stack. Girl wasted no time in lamentations, but soon began to gather their limbs together and: head, torso, arms and legs. And when you no longer miss anything, all the members began to move and welded, and the two maidens opened their eyes and regained life. With great joy, they kissed and embraced cariñosamente.El man, upon his return, immediately asked the keys and the egg; and not to discover in this no trace of blood, said: - You have passed the test, you will be my girlfriend But since that time had lost all power over her, and had to force what she required him!. - well - said the girl - first of all take my father and my mother a basket full of gold, carrying it on your back; In the meantime, I will prepare the boda.Y, ran to her sisters, who had hidden in another room, he said: - This is the time when I can save; the evil will take home the same; but once you are there, send help. - put the two in a large basket, overlaid with gold and calling the sorcerer, he said: - Now carry the basket to my house, and do not you dare stop on the way to rest, I'll be watching you from my ventanita.Cargóse the witch basket on his back and began his path; more he weighed so much that soon began to sweat streamed from his face. He sat down to rest for a few minutes; but immediately he came out of the basket a voice - I'm looking out my window and I see you stand. Go 'right away! He thought he was the voice of his girlfriend and he began to walk again. He wanted to stop the repeat after a while; but then he was heard the same voice: - I'm looking out my window and I see you stand. Go 'immediately !. - And every time I tried to stop, until finally arrived at the house girls, moaning and gasping, and she left the basket containing the two maids and oro.Mientras both the bride prepared at home wedding party, which invited all the friends of the witch. Then she took a skull with grinning teeth, put a decoration and a wreath and, taking up the garret-window, as if looking out. When I already had everything ready, she he went into a barrel of honey and then rolled between the feathers of a mattress, which split in two, with the feathers beat him all over his body and took the appearance of a rare bird ; no one would have been able to recognize it. Then she went home, and during the path crossed with some of the wedding guests, who asked, "- Where did you come from, bewitched bird - the house of the witch have let me - What it does. So the young bride - the house already has all swept away, and she composed and neat, looking is through the skylight of the entrance "Finally, he found himself with her boyfriend, who was returning trudging and like others. he asked: "- Where did you come from, bewitched bird - the house of the witch have let me - What does, then, my young bride - the house already has all swept away, and she composed and neat looking?.? it is through the skylight of the entrance. "he raised groom sight and seeing the skull composed, he thought it was his bride and gave her a friendly greeting nod. But as soon as he entered the house along with their guests, they stood siblings and relatives of the bride, who had come to her aid. They closed all the doors so no one could escape and set fire to the house, burned by the witch die and all that riffraff.
Bread	3807	750B	Spanish	There were once three brothers waiters, not finding what settle, they determined to go out into the world to seek acomodo.Llegaron to a place which separated the road in three, and agreed to follow each one of them, being summoned to to meet again right there at three years, to participarse each other how they had fared and what they had scrounged in that tiempo.Por then, you must know who was our Lord for the world as well as his disciples, and more brothers he met St. Peter, he asked if I wanted to serve him, what was he very dispuesto.-and why I want to serve the saint asked, for the glory of it, or for money? - for the money, 'said the older brother. And were conformes.Lo itself at every point happened to the eldest brother San Pedro, happened to the second, he found San Juan, whose service was for the money, as most remained at the San Pedro; but not to the youngest, who met with our Lord, and said he did not want to pay, but would do it for the glory of servirlo.Sirvieron the brothers for three years to their masters; Then they parted, for precisarles fulfill the promise he had given to meet the three appointed day in the place where they had separado.Cuando met, took the two older brothers much money they had earned during the elapsed time, and asked to the child what it was he had won; he replied that nothing had, because he only served his master for the glory of servirlo.Los brothers mocked him, and each went their separate ways. The two oldest are married rich women, they began to smuggle their money and some bigwigs of the most worshipful were made, spending a lot of luxury and a lot of fantasy. The boy, as he was poor, married another poor, had a bushel of children, and became much delay, he went to live in a shack at the campo.Al after many years passed the Lord and his disciples, that earth, and the Lord suggested that they were each to see the servant who had served him. He came therefore San Pedro home of the elder brother, and told one of the many servants who had: Go on and tell your master here is your master, if you want to hear that message hospedar.Al the señorón, He flew into a bull of fire.-¡Yo serve! he replied. I a master! My flows are inheritance; I have never served; That man is crazy; tell him to go, and if not, put her perros.Y same, point by point, happened to San Juan with brother segundo.Entre Therefore the Lord had reached the hut younger brother. This had gone to the mountain by a carguita wood, and his wife, when the Lord came, told her to pass ahead and sit back while her husband. When he saw them coming, he went to the meeting and said that the hut was his amo.-¡Mi love! My master! She cried the poor beside himself with joy. My master! He repeated crying and kissing the hands of Jesus. Soon I, Lord; but that little is his mercy. Woman, give master what I am at home; everything! And soon, soon! The woman said nothing had but pan.-What a shame! He said the husband afflicted. But if nothing else there, tráelo.El Lord sat at the table of the poor and ate the bread so good-hearted offered him and blessed him; and so, my children, is the blessed bread sustenance; why Christians never denied a piece of bread to the poor in the name of God asks; so he is not pulled, and when it falls to the ground, kisses in relief; why is there so much bread in the world and reaches to keep everyone, and is much food that he lives only healthy, robust man; why everyone likes, and is the only ground well ask the Lord commanded us; so the breeding field crops so beautiful, so rich and pins; So when the time makes them contrary, it makes our blessed mother rogativas holy Church, which is rare while leaving the Lord to serve; why, finally, the man appointed him with reverence and gratitude Dios.Después bread that was eaten, said the Lord to the poor: 'Do not reward your good host making you rich, that wealth does not give happiness in land and hinder much of the sky; but I promise you will not want bread you have given me, for when you can not win, I'll give charity. I am grateful for who you exercise it, that is so thank obligation as giving.
The Dog and the Sparrow	552	248	Spanish	A shepherd's dog had fallen to his lot a bad master, he was starving. Not wanting to endure any longer, the animal left, sad and regretful. On the road he met a sparrow who asked him: "Brother dog, why are you so sad" And he said the dog: "I'm hungry and nothing to eat." Aconsejóle the bird, "Brother, come with me to the city, I will make you sick." Encamináronse together to the city, and arriving in front of a butcher shop, said the sparrow to the dog: "Do not move you out of here, peck you'll drop a piece of meat," and, standing on the counter and watching anyone see, he began pecking and pull a piece that was on the edge, so that dropped to the ground. Then the dog snapped, brought it back into a corner and it licked. Then said the sparrow, "Come on now to another store, you will fall another piece for you sick." Once the dog had eaten the second piece, and asked the bird, "Brother dog, are you fed up?" - "flesh, yes," replied the dog, "but I need some bread." Sparrow said, "Come with me, I have also," and took him to a bakery, a pecking knocked rolls; and as the dog wanted still more, I led him into another bakery and provided another serving. When the dog had eaten, the sparrow asked him: "Brother dog, are you tired now?" - "Yes," he replied his companion. . "They're going now to walk around outside" They went both to the road; but as the weather was hot, and after a short distance the dog said: "I'm tired, and good to take a nap." - "Sleep, then," answered the sparrow, "meanwhile, I will perch on a branch." And the dog stretched out on the road and soon fell asleep. In these, he drew near a wasted three horses and wagon loaded with three wine vats. Seeing the bird Cartman had no intention of departing to not run over the dog, gritóle: "Carter, do not do it or ruin you!" But the man muttered under his breath: "No you who ruined me," cracked the whip, and the wheels of the vehicle passed over the dog, killing him. He cried the sparrow: "You killed my brother the dog, but it will cost the carriage and horses." - "Bah !, the carriage and horses!" the driver scoffed. "I laugh at the damage you can cause me!" and he went on his way. Sparrow slid under the tarp and started pecking a spigot until the plug was released, so started to leak wine without noticing the carter and the whole barrel emptied. A cape while, he turned the man, and seeing dripping wine barrels fell to examine, finding that one of them was empty. "Poor me!" he exclaimed. "Not yet you're pretty," said the sparrow, and flew at the head of one of the horses, pecked him out one eye. In the notice the carter, he took up a hoe and brought it against the bird with the intention of killing him; but she flew away, and the horse head received such a blow, he fell dead. "Oh, poor me!" He repeated the man. "Even you are not enough!" said the sparrow and when the carter went on with the remaining two horses, he returned the bird to get below the canvas and did not stop until he pulled the second plug, emptying, in turn, the second barrel. When the carter too late, and he returned to exclaim: "Oh, poor me!" To which he replied, his enemy, "you are still not enough!" and, alighting on the head of the second horse, and saltóle eyes. Again came the man with his hoe, and again mortally wounded the horse, the bird escaped while flying. "Oh, poor me!" - "Not wretch enough yet," he repeated the sparrow, to the time he drew the eyes of the third horse. Enraged, Cartman dealt a new azadonazo against bird and wandering again aim, killed the third animal. "Oh, poor me!" he exclaimed. "Even you are not enough!" He repeated once again the sparrow. "Now I'm going to ruin your house," and turned away volando.El carter had no choice but to leave the car on the road and go home, angry and desperate: "Ouch!" said his wife. "What a miserable day ever! I lost wine, and three horses are dead." - "Oh, my husband!" answered his wife. "What the devil is this bird which is brought home! He has brought all the birds of the world, and are now eating our wheat." He took the man to the barn and found thousands of birds on the floor eating up the grain, and among them was the sparrow. And again the man exclaiming: "Oh, poor me!" - "Not wretch enough yet," he repeated the bird. "Carter, still pay with life," and he started volar.El carter, lost all his possessions, down to the room and sat by the stove, sulky and angry. But the sparrow shouted from the window: "Carter, pay with life!" Grabbing the man hoeing, cast him against the bird, but only managed to break the glass without touching his pursuer. He jumped inside the room and, alighting on the oven, he repeated: "Carter, pay with life!" Mad and blind with rage, Cartman lambasted all things, wanting to kill the bird, and thus destroyed the oven and all household goods: mirrors, benches, table and even the walls of the house, without achieving their goal. Finally he managed to catch him with his hand and then she said, "You want me to kill him at once?" - "Do not!" he shouted. "It would be a death too sweet must suffer much;.'M going to swallow!" and he swallowed a mouthful. But the animal began to shake and flutter inside her body, and he climbed back into his mouth; and, poking his head: "Carter, pay with life!" he repeated last time. Then the carter, hoeing tending to his wife, he said: "Give to the bird in his mouth" The woman unloaded the blow, but, missing the aim, left her husband's head, who fell dead sparrow escaped while flying.
The fisherman and his wife	180	555	Spanish	There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a shack at the edge of the sea. The fisherman went every day to take his hook, and he angled and without cesar.Estaba missed one day sitting with his cane on the bank, with the view directed towards its limpid water when suddenly saw the hook and sink down to the depths and the get on the tip a very large barbel, who said to him: 'I beg you not to take away my life; I'm not a real barbel, I am an enchanted prince; What you would kill me if I can not be of much gift? Throw me to the water and let me swim. Certainly, he said the fisherman, had no need to talk so much, I do not not do anything to stop swimming at home to barbel who can speak. He threw water and flounder sank to the bottom, leaving behind a trail of blood long. The fisherman went to the hut with his wife: My Husband, he said, have not you caught anything today? No, he answered the husband; I caught a barbel who told me to be an enchanted prince, I let him swim the same as before. 'Do not you have asked for anything for you? He replied the woman. No, said the man; and what had to ask? Ah! He replied the woman; It's so sad, it's so sad always live in such a dirty hut and infects like this; because you'd ask a tiny house for us; returns and calls barbel, say we wanted to have a tiny house, because we give you the insurance. Ah! said the husband, and why should I go back? 'Do not you have caught, the woman continued, and left to swim as before? For what you do; seen running. The husband did not pay much attention; however, he went to the edge of the sea, and when he got there, he saw all yellow and every green, walked to the water and said Tararira Ondino, Ondino tararira, beautiful fish, small neighbor, my poor Isabel screams and rages, it must give it what it deserves. Barbel stepped toward him and said, What do you want? Ah! He said the man, recently I've caught you; my wife says he should have to ask you something. is not content to live in a hut of reeds, best wanted a wooden house. -You back, he said barbel, and tiene.Volvió because the husband and his wife was no longer in the hut, but instead had a small house, and his wife was at the door sitting on a bench. He took her hand and said: Come in and see; this is much mejor.Entraron the two and found inside the house a nice room and an alcove where her bed, a dining room and a kitchen with copper espetera tin very bright, and complete all other utensils. Behind it was a small yard with chickens and ducks, and a basket with vegetables and fruits. Do you see, he told the woman, how beautiful is this? Yes, the husband said; If we are always here, we will be very happy. We'll see what will suit us, he replied the mujer.Después ate and went to bed. and continued for eight or fifteen days, but at the end she said: -¡Escucha, my husband: this house is too narrow, and yard and garden are so small ... He would actually give us barbo because a house much larger. I would like to live in a stone palace; Go find barbel; it must give us a palace. Ah !, wife, said the man, this house is actually very good; What we would live in a palace? -Ve said the woman, barbel may well do so. No, wife, said the man, barbel just gave us this house, do not want to go back, he would fear importunarle.-Ve, insisted women can do and will do so gladly; see, I say. The husband felt in the soul take this step, and was not in a hurry, for she said: You do not seem me well-but obeyed nonetheless. When he came near the sea, the water had a violet and dark blue, appearing next to swell; It was not green and yellow like the first time; however, the most complete calm reigned. The fisherman came and said: Tararira Ondino, beautiful Ondino tararira, fish, small neighbor, my poor Isabel screams and rages, we must give it what it deserves. What do you want your wife? Barbel said. Ah! He said the average distraught husband, wants to inhabit a large stone palace. Go, said the fish, the puerta.Marchó find the husband, thinking back to his home; but when he approached her, she saw instead a large stone palace. His wife, who was at the top of the stairs, was to get inside; he took her hand and said, Come in with me. -He followed. Palace had an immense hall, whose walls were marble; Numerous servants opened the doors noisily large before him; the walls glittered with gold and covered with beautiful draperies; chairs and tables in the rooms were gold; thousands could be seen suspended from the ceiling crystal chandeliers, and had carpets in all rooms and parts; the tables were laden with the finest wines and delicacies, to the point that it seemed they would break under their weight. Behind the palace there was a very large yard, with stables for cows and stalls for horses and magnificent cars; In addition there was a large and beautiful garden, adorned with the most beautiful flowers and fruit trees, and finally, a park of at least one mile long, where deer, fallow deer, hares and all that could be seen apetecer. 'It Is all this really beautiful? said the woman. -Oh yeah! said the husband; Let's stay here and live very happy. -And will reflect, she said, we sleep first; and our people went to bed. The next morning he awoke the woman being already very day and saw from her bed the beautiful countryside that he offered to his sight; the husband stretched waking; she gave him with his elbow and said: Husband, my, get up and look out the window; You see ?, we could become kings of the whole country? Runs to get barbel and be kings. Ah !, wife, said the man, and why we should be kings, I have no desire to be. Well, if you do not want to be king, he replied the woman I want to be queen. Go find barbel, I want to be reina.-¡Ah !, wife, said the man, What you want to be queen? I do not want to say that. -And why not? said the woman; sees the moment; I must be queen. The husband was, but I was very sorry that his wife wanted to be queen. It does not seem right, does not really seem right, he thought to himself. I do not want to go; and it was though. When he came to the sea, he was a gray, water gushing up from the bottom to the surface and had a foul odor; He came forward and said: Tararira Ondino, beautiful Ondino tararira, fish, small neighbor, my poor Isabel screams and rages; it must give it what it deserves. 'What does she want? said barbo.-¡Ah! He replied the husband; She wants to be queen. Come back, which is already replied barbel. She left her husband, and when he approached the palace, saw that he had much larger and had a very high tower decorated with magnificent ornaments. At the door he stood sentry guards and a crowd of soldiers with trumpets and timpani. When he entered the building he saw marble all parts of the purest, enriched with gold, velvet tapestries and large chests of solid gold. Opened the doors of the room: the whole court was assembled and his wife sat on a throne high gold and diamonds; on her head a gold crown, in his hand a rod of pure gold enriched gemstone, and next were placed in a double row six young, whose heights were such that each head shorter the other. He stepped forward and said, 'Ah, woman !, Already a queen? Yes, he replied, I am already queen. He stood in front of her and looked at her, and as he had gazed for a moment, said: Ah, woman !, how good you are queen! Now you no longer have anything to be desired. -Of any way, my husband, he answered very agitated; I'm queen long ago, want to be more. Go find barbel and say that I'm queen, but I need to be empress. Oh, woman! He replied the husband, I know you can not make empress and I dare not say that. -¡Yo am queen, she said, and you are my husband! See, if he could make us kings, you can also make us emperors. Go, I say. He had to go; but it's away I was upset and told himself: not seem right. Emperor? It is asking too much and tire barbel. Thinking this was that the water was black and seethed in spurts, the foam rose to the surface and wind up blowing violently, shuddered, but came over and said: Tararira Ondino, beautiful Ondino tararira, fish, small neighbor, my poor Isabel screams and rages, he must give it what it deserves. 'What do you want? Barbel said. Ah, barbel! -I answer; my wife wants to become empress. Come back, said barbel; it is from this instante.Volvió husband, and when he came back, the whole palace was polished marble, alabaster statues enriched and adorned with gold. In front of the door there were many legions of soldiers, blowing trumpets, cymbals and drums; inside the palace barons and earls and dukes came and went as simple servants, and opened the doors, they were solid gold. As I entered, he saw his wife sitting on a golden throne in one piece and over a thousand feet tall, wearing a huge gold crown five cubits, garrisoned bright and carbuncles; on one hand he had the rod and the other the globe; aside his guards were in two rows, some smaller than others; There were also huge giants hundred feet tall and small dwarves who were not greater than the thumb. In front of her was standing a multitude of princes and dukes husband walked through the midst of them, and said: Woman, you are empress. Yes, he replied, I am already empress. Then I stood before her and began to look at her and he thought he saw the sun. As the well was seen a moment: Ah, wife, he said, what good thing to be Empress! But he remained stiff, very stiff and did not say palabra.Al husband finally said: 'Woman, you're happy, and you Empress! What more could you want? Let's see, the woman answered. They went immediately to bed, but she was not happy; the ambition prevented sleep and always thought to be even more. The husband slept soundly; He had walked all day, but she could not rest for a moment; he turned from side to side all night, always thinking about being even more; and finding nothing to decide. However, it began to dawn, and when he perceived the dawn, sat up and looked at the light, and seeing her window enter the sun rays ... Ah! -thought; Why should I not be able to send out to the sun and the moon? My husband said pushing him with his elbow, Awake, go find barbel; I want to be like God! The husband was still asleep, but so scared that fell off the bed. Thinking he had misheard, he rubbed his eyes and said, 'Oh, woman! What do you say? Husband, myself, if I can not send out the sun and the moon, and if necessary to see them leave without my order, can not rest and will not have an hour's quiet because I am always thinking that I can not send out. And saying this he looked so horrible scowl, he felt bathe his whole body in a cold sweat. -Ve at the moment, I want to be like God. Oh, woman! He said the husband fell at his feet; barbel can not do that; It could very well become a queen and empress, but I beg you, be content to be empress. Then he began to mourn; her hair flew in disarray around his head, he tore his belt and gave her husband kicked shouting: 'I can, I will not be content with this; up to the moment. The husband dressed quickly and ran like a madman. But the storm had unleashed furious and roared; houses and trees moved; pieces of rock were rolling on the sea, and the sky was black as pitch; thundering, lightning flashed and black sea waves rose as high as steeples and mountains, and all had at its peak a white foam crown. Stood screaming because he could barely hear his own words: Tararira Ondino, Ondino tararira, beautiful fish, small neighbor, my poor Isabel screams and rages, we must give it what it deserves. 'What do you, my friend? Barbel said. Ah, replied, wants to be like God! Come back and find the hut. And in these still live there.
The piojito and pulguita	281	2022	Spanish	A louse and a flea formed a partnership and cooked beer in an eggshell. Behold, the louse fell in and burnt to death. Faced with this misfortune, the little flea began to mourn loudly. At the hearing it, he asked the room door: "Why are you crying, Pulguita?" - "For Piojito he has been burned." Then he got the door to creak. And broom in the corner said: "Why grind your teeth, Puertecita?" - "How do I not Rechine Piojito has burned, Pulguita crying?." And the little broom began to sweep frantically. He came into this a cart and said, "Why barres, broom?" - "How can I not bar Piojito has burned, Pulguita cries, Puertecita chatters?." Then he exclaimed Cart: "For I will run," and ran desperately. And Estercolillo said, ahead of which ran: "Why run, Caddy?" - "How do I not run Piojito has been burned, Pulguita cries, Puertecita squeaks, broom sweeps?." And then Estercolillo said: "Well, I will burn desperately," and began to burn in bright flare. There was next to Estercolillo a sapling, he asked: "Why ardes, Estercolillo?" - "How can I not burn Piojito has burned, Pulguita cries, squeaks Puertecita, broom sweeps, Trolley runs?." And Arbolillo said, "Well I will shake me," and began to shake so vigorously that the leaves fell him . Violated a girl who happened to pass his water jug ​​and said, "Arbolillo, why do you shake?" - "How would I not shake Piojito was burned, Pulguita cries, Puertecita squeaks, broom sweeps, Trolley runs, Estercolillo burns?." Said the girl: "Well, I break my jug of water," and broke his jarrito. Then she said the little spring of water welling: "Little girl, why did you break your jug?" - "How would that do not break Piojito has abrasado.Pulguita cries, Puertecita squeaks, broom sweeps, Trolley runs, Estercolillo burns, Arbolillo shakes?." "Oh!" She cried the little spring, "then I'll get to flow," and began to ooze desperately. And all drowned in the water: the girl, the little tree, the estercolillo, the cart, the broom, the little door, the little flea and louse; all at once.
The poor peasant in heaven	1593	802	Spanish	He died a poor and pious peasant and came to the gate of heaven. But he found himself there with a very rich man and opulent, who also requested entry. San Pedro came with the key, opened the door and let go to the Lord. I certainly did not see the humble peasant, and let it out. From the outside, the man heard how rich he was received with great joy, to the sound of music and songs. When calm was restored, he returned San Pedro, opened the door and invited the farmer to enter. He also thought he would welcome with music; but I saw that all remained quiet. True kindly received him, and angels came to meet him; but no songs or music. Then he asked the good man to San Pedro why not singing in his gift as they had done with the rich. Apparently, the sky was the same inequalities on earth. San Pedro answered: - Do not say such a thing! For us, you are so well come like any other, and you can enjoy the same happiness as the rich. What happens it is that poor peasants and humble like you come every day; but what is rich gentlemen, just comes once every hundred years.
The poor fellow miller and the pussycat	1004	402	Spanish	He lived in an old mill miller who had no wife or children, but only three waiters to serve them. After they had been many years working with him, one day he said to them - I'm old and want to retire to rest. Come out to travel the world, and one of you to bring me the best horse, you give in the mill; but with the proviso that take care of me until my youngest muerte.El of the waiters, who was the apprentice, whose name was John, and the others were for fools and did not want it to become owner of the mill. Marcháronse all three together and getting to the outskirts of the village, said the two John the fool: - You'd better to stay here; in your life you can not make sure an jamelgo.Sin But John insisted on going with them, and the evening came to a cave where they took shelter to sleep. The two elders, who thought themselves very clever, waited until Juan was asleep, and then left, leaving his compañero.¡Ya will see how will the mouthy maid! When, at the sunrise, Juan awoke, he found himself in a deep cavern and, looking around him, exclaimed: - Oh my God !, where am I went up to the edge of the cave and out into the forest, thinking: "Alone and abandoned, how I shall try the horse ?."? As he walked deep in thought, retained him meeting a kitten, Mottled skin, he said amiably: - Where are you going, John - Bah! What can you do for me - I know very well what you are looking for - answered the cat -: a good horse. Come with me; . If you serve me for seven years, I'll give you one as beautiful as ever you saw in your life "What a wonderful cat - thought Juan -;! I will try if it's true what you say." She led him to the cat a small enchanted palace in which all servers were kittens; nimbly they jumped down the stairs, up and down, and seemed in good spirits. At dusk, when they sat at the table, three of them were in charge of livening up the food with music: one played bass; another, violin, and the third, trumpet, blowing full force of his lungs. After dinner, and raised tablecloths, said pussycat: - No - - Juan Come on, let's dance answered him - I do not dance with a cat;! never hice.- then carry him to bed - sent the cat with kittens. Acompañáronlo with a candle to her bedroom; one took off his shoes; another, stockings and finally turned off the light. In the morning they appeared again and helped him get dressed. Pusole one stockings; another tied his leagues; a third brought his shoes; the fourth washed his face, and finally another wiped with rabo.- What softness! - Juan said. But he had to serve the cat from firewood and engage in every day, for which they had given a silver ax, wedges and saws silver too, and the pit, which was copper. And behold, to cut firewood, was in the house where he lacked good food and drink and did not see anyone but the cat and her servants. One day he told the owner: - Go to mow the lawn and make the grass to dry - and gave him a scythe of silver and gold grindstone, recommending that return them all in good condition. He went to meet Juan instructed, and once ready work, came home with the scythe, the whetstone and hay and asked the housekeeper if she wanted and give her recompensa.- promised not - answered the cat -; before you get me something else. There you have silver tables, an ax, a square and other instruments necessary, all silver; thus going to build me a casita.Juan lifted a house and then reminded him that he was still without the horse, despite having met him as ordered; So without realizing just, they had passed the seven años.Preguntóle then the cat if he wanted to see the horses that had what John said yes. She opened the door of the house, and the first thing offered to his sight, twelve superb horses, polished and gleaming, he blew up the heart with joy. Diols the cat to eat and drink, and then said to John: - Go home, now do not give the horse. But within three days I will go to take it -. And he pointed the way to the molino.Durante all that time had not given him any new suit; still wearing his old tattered blouse, in the course of the seven years, he had outgrown everywhere. A coming home found that the other two boys were already in it, and each had brought a horse, although one was blind and the other, cojo.- Where is your horse, Juan? - preguntaron.- will arrive within three días.Echáronse others laughed, saying: - Look at the fool! Where you gonna get a horse that is not a balance! A Juan entering the room, the miller did not let sit at the table, because he was too broken and ragged. It would be a shame someone saw! Sacáronle to was a bit of food, and when it was bedtime, the others refused to give a bed, so I had to settle in the yard, on a bed of hard paja.A the next morning they had passed three days, and behold, it was presented a chariot drawn by six horses that gave them shining glory; He came also another servant carrying a flange, aimed at the poor fellow miller. Of the car beautiful princess, who entered the mill alighted; It was none other than the kitten, which poor John served for seven years. He asked the miller for the smallest of the boys, and the man replied: - I do not want in the mill, because it is too broken; is in the yard of the gansos.Dijo then the princess who were looking for him. The boy appeared holding her blouse, barely reaching hard to cover his body. The servant took gorgeous dresses and then it was washed and dressed, was so beautiful and elegant that even a king could be compared. Princess wanted to see the horses they had brought the other two, and it turned out, as we have said, were one blind and the other lame. then sent the servant to bring the seventh, which had not engaged in the carriage, and the sight of it, the miller had to confess that he had never entered the mill an animal like aquél.- This is the horse Juan - said the princess .- his will, then, the mill - molinero.Pero said the princess told him he could stay with the horse and the mill, and, taking his faithful John, brought him up into the car and drove off with him. They went first to the house he had built with the silver tools and, at the time, had been transformed into a grand palace, all silver and gold. There she married him, and John was rich, so rich that he no longer wanted for anything in his life. No one say, then, that a fool can not do anything right.
The poor boy in the grave	1761	1876	Spanish	Once upon a poor shepherd boy whose parents had died, so the authority entrusted their care to a very rich man, charging that would feed and educase. But both the man and his wife had hardened hearts, covetous and envious despite their wealth, and could not bear that someone would lead to mouth a piece of bread. The poor boy, with all his good will, received very little food and many azotes.Un day he was commissioned to leave his broody with chicks, and the animal was lost with small between a hedge; immediately shot down a goshawk, the captured and returned to soar, with the animal in the claws. The boy burst out screaming with all his might: - Thief, thief, bandit But what served their cries!? Goshawk did not return the brooder. He heard the man noise came hastily, and seeing that his goose was gone, encolerizóse and struck a little beat up such that spent two days without moverse.Entonces had to save the chicks without the mother, something more difficult still, it continually eluded him and scattered. It occurred that if all tied with string, the goshawk could not steal any; but the remedy was worse than the disease. After two or three days, he is having fallen asleep because of the long running and eating little, down the bird of prey and grabbed one of the chicks; but as we all were tied together, the whole brood took; It landed in a tree and devoured them all. At that time he came home the master and angered the realization of misfortune, gave such a spanking to the boy, who had to stay in bed for several días.Cuando had recovered, he told the farmer: - You're too stupid and not me serve to guard; You have to be recadero.Y it sent to the judge carrying a basket of grapes and a letter. Along the way, hunger and thirst tormented such a Raptor, a couple of bunches ate. Then he followed with the basket to the house of the judge, who, after reading the letter and count the grapes, said: - It's two racimos.El boy confessed honestly that had eaten, spurred by hunger and thirst. The judge wrote, in turn, a letter to the farmer asking him to send another basket, and the lad was taking him, also accompanied by a letter. Again beset by hunger and thirst, he could not resist and ate two bunches; however, before he took the letter from the basket, put it under a rock, he sat up, to not see it or could find out. But the judge questioned him about clusters faltaban.- Oh! - he exclaimed the boy - how do ye know? The card can not know, because I put it under a rock while I was eating uvas.El judge could not help but laughed so much simplicity, and wrote to the peasant warning him of his obligation to better treat the little and give food and drink enough. In addition, he should teach him to distinguish between good and mal.- I'll show you the difference - said the peasant ruthless -; but if you want to eat have to work; and if you make some misdeed, sticks learn to not repetirla.Al day after he pointed a hard work: should cut bundles of straw to feed the horses. And he addressed the following threat: - Be back in five hours; if not then the chaff, I'll spank you until you can not move a single miembro.Y marchóse the fair with his wife, the groom and the maid, leaving little for all food, a piece of bread. Stood the boy to work as hard, and as the arreciara heat, took off his jacket and threw it on the straw. Fearful not finish his homework on time, still cutting relentlessly, and in their zeal, cut also inadvertently jacket, not realizing the misfortune until it was too late to repararla.- Oh - he said - now I'm lost! This evil man has threatened me not in vain. When you come back and see what I've done, I will kill a beating. It is better that I take my vida.Un day he heard the boy say to the owner: "Under the bed I have a pot of poison." However, he said it just to scare away gluttons, because what was in the pileup was honey. The boy crawled under the bed and taking out the pot, comióse all its contents. "I do not understand how people can say that death is bitter - he thought -, I find it very sweet No wonder the owner want to die so often.." And, sitting in a chair, waiting for death dispúsose; However, rather than weaken, I felt himself strengthened, thanks to this nutritious food. "There must be poison - he thought - I remember now that the master once kept in his closet a bottle of poison for flies said,. Will surely be poison truth and produce me death." But it was not swatter, but came from Hungary. The boy took the bottle and drank. "This death is also sweet," he said; but alcohol soon produce its effect, he went to his head and stunned him, really believed that his end was near. "I feel I'm going to die - he said -, I'll get me a grave in the cemetery." And, staggering, she went out of the churchyard and lay in a grave they had just dug. The senses are increasingly troubled him. It turned out that at an inn nearby were celebrating a wedding, and when the boy heard the music, imagine that was already in Paradise; until finally he lost all consciousness of things. The poor creature no longer woke again; the heat of wine and relente cold night took his life, and stayed there forever in the tomb that he had elegido.Al heard the farmer's death the boy, had a fright, fearing which should be brought to justice; So great was his horror that fell senseless. His wife, who was in the kitchen with a pan filled with butter, ran to lend assistance; but, flaming grease, set fire to the dwelling, and Cape few hours, everything was reduced to a heap of ashes. They were the years of their lives were poverty and misery, beset by remorse.
Prince intrepid	1147	590	Spanish	Once upon a time the son of a king, who was tired of living in his father's palace, and knew no fear, he thought: "I want to go running world So I do not bore you, and I will long time, and I'll see. wonderful things." He took leave of his father and set off, walking tirelessly from morning to night without worrying about the site that will take the route. Is the case ended up in front of the house of a giant, and, feeling very tired, he sat down to rest by the door. And, rambling looked around, he saw some toys in the yard of the house; They were a huge bowls of the size of a man. Entráronle desire to try and placing the sticks in position, he began to throw the bowling, bursting into shouts and exclamations every time was right; and he enjoyed a great time. He heard the noise giant, he stuck his head out the window and saw that man, not greater than others of its kind, playing with her bolos.- Tadpole! - shouted him -. How can you play with my bowling? Where did you get the strength prince looked up, and seeing a giant, he said -? Chump! Do you think that only you have strong arms? I do everything that I antoja.Bajó giant and spent a watching while, admired how he handled the prince bowling, then said: - Little Man, if you can what you say, go get me an apple from the tree LIFE.- And what you want it? - he asked the AU-PRINCE Not for me - answered the giant -; but I have a girlfriend who calls me. I have traveled much of the world without being able to find the árbol.- Well, I'll find him - said the prince -. And nothing will stop me take the manzana.Dijo giant: - You think it's so easy? The garden where grows the tree is surrounded by an iron fence, in front of which there are many wild animals, placed one on the side of the other, who keep and do not allow anyone pase.- To me let you pass me - said doncel .- But even if you manage to get into the garden and see the apple hanging on the tree, still can not say it's yours. In front of it there is a ring, for which you have to move your hand if you want to reach out and take the apple; and this has not gotten anyone to ahora.- Well, I'll get it - said príncipe.Despidióse of giant and, through mountains and valleys, fields and forests, he did not stop until he found the wonderful garden. They beasts around him, effectively; but they had his head down and slept. They did not wake up on arrival, and he, passing over, climbed the fence and jumped without mishap, on the opposite side. In the center of the garden stood the Tree of Life, and colored apples hanging from its branches. He seated himself in the trunk, and trying to catch one of the fruit was hanging in front of each ring; He went through the hand without difficulty, and cut the apple. The ring contracted and tightened on his arm, and the prince felt, at the same time in her veins instilled a prodigious strength. That was lowered from the tree, did not want to jump the fence and arrival, but went toward the huge door, and the first shock was strong creaked. He went out and watched the lion, I wake up and approached him to his feet, but not fiercely, but meek and surrendered, recognizing him as their prince señor.El took the giant apple promised and said: - You see? I have obtained without giant dificultad.El, happy at seeing his desire as soon satisfied, ran to give the apple to his girlfriend. It was this a maiden as beautiful as intelligent, and not seeing the ring on his arm, he said: - Do not believe you've got the apple, until I see the ring ciñéndote the brazo.A which said the giant: - No I have more to go get it home - thinking that he could easily snatch a fragile little man, in case he refused to voluntarily give it. It was therefore to ask; but the prince did not want dar.- Where is the apple should also be ring - said the giant -. Or you give it to me for good, or will have to fight conmigo.Y filed a long fight without the giant could beat the son of the King, strengthened by the magical power of the ring. then came the giant cunning, saying - I have heated the fight, and you too. It will swim to the river to cool off before resuming combate.El prince, who did not understand perfidy, she went with him to the river, and, after taking off their clothes, and with them the ring, began to water. Giant immediately gripped ring and took flight. But the lion, who had witnessed the robbery, chased him, he snatched it from her hand and returned it to its owner. The giant then went to hide behind an oak tree, and when he saw his adversary busy getting dressed, treacherously attacked him and pulled the ojos.Y, so the prince was blind, helpless, helpless. and then returning the giant taking his hand as if to guide him, led him to the top of a high rock where you left off, thinking: "A few more steps and despeñará when I'm dead I can take the ring.." But the faithful lion had not deserted his master, and getting to the precipice he grabbed her dress and pushed it back slowly. A giant presented with the purpose of stripping the dead, she realized that her ruse had been futile. "There is, therefore, a way to end this as weakling ?," it said irritably, and again led the prince to the abyss another way. But the lion watching his perfidious purposes, this time also saved his master of the danger. When they were close to the cliff and the giant let go of the blind to follow alone, the animal gave a shove to the monster and rushed into the bottom of the summit, which was destrozado.El faithful animal again away to his master the dangerous place, guiding to a tree, with a stream which flowed limpid. Prince sat there, and the lion claw throwing and putting in water, sprinkled her face. Just a few drops touched him orbits saw a dim light and caught a bird flying very close and crashed against a tree trunk; then he plunged into the stream, and turning to leave, undertook rapid flight, passing between the trees, but without touching them, as if he had received his sight. Prince Realizing God's warning, went down to the water, washed and bathed his face in it. And, sitting up, was again his eyes, limpid and clear as never had tenido.Dio the prince thank God for the great favor he'd just give and, followed by his faithful lion, he resumed his journey. One day came to an enchanted palace, at whose door hallábase, standing a maiden of slender figure and pretty face, but black complexion jet. Addressing the young, he said: - Ah, if you could redeem myself from the sad spell I'm a victim - What should I do!? - asked the muchacho.Y she replied: - You must spend three nights in the great hall of this enchanted palace, but let fear take over your heart. They will make you a victim of the worst torments; but if you resist without uttering a cry, I will be disenchanted. Life, not you the quitarán.Dijo then the prince - I have no fear. I will try the company with the help of Dios.Entró happily in the palace and the night came instalóse in the great hall, waiting for what comes. Until midnight absolute silence reigned; but at that time he heard suddenly a great roar, and all corners and nooks entered the room a legion of tiny imps. Pretending not to see him, they sat in the middle of the room, lit the fire and began to play. When one lost, exclaiming: - This is not going as it should; there's someone here that is not ours and that is to blame that I pierda.- Wait, you who are behind the estufa.- I'll get you - said otroEl uproar intensified at times, and became such, no one could hear him without being frightened. However, the prince was sitting quietly, without feeling fear. But in the end, devils, jumping up, attacked him in such numbers that the prince could not defend themselves. brutally throwing him to the ground, they stood to haunt him, poking him, hitting him and martirizándolo thousand ways; but he endured undaunted, while hearing a complaint. At dawn they disappeared, leaving him so exhausted he could barely move his limbs. At daybreak the black maid entered the room, carrying a bottle in his hand. It is containing water of life, and washed with her, disappearing at the time all pain and feeling the prince that a new force driving on their venas.Díjole girl: - You have withstood one night, but you still have two delante.Y is he walked away, then watched the boy's feet he had turned white. The next night they came back the demons and the game resumed. Then they pounced on him, mistreating even more cruelly than the day before, so that he was left with the body full of wounds. He, however, valiantly resisted him, and the first light dawn maiden appeared again provided with the miraculous water, which cured him completely. And retiring saw the prince with great pleasure that the girl's skin had become white to the tips of the dedos.Quedábale a night of torment, and it was the worst. He reached the throng of devils: - Still looking here? - they shouted -. It'll pass as black, you lose the resuello.Y pricked him, beat him and threw from side to side, swinging arms and legs to pull them out. But he suffered all without exhaling a sigh. Finally, the demons disappeared, leaving him senseless dead. Could not even look up when presenting the girl with the water of life, he moistened and sprinkled it. At the moment she was free from pain, and fresh and healthy as if waking from a dream. And he opened his eyes he saw beside him the maiden, white as snow and beautiful as the light of the day.- Arise - said the girl -. Wield your sword three times over the stairs, and everything will be as it was desencantado.Y done, it was all free palace of the spell, and turned into a princess maid rich. They entered the servants to announce that in the great hall was set the table and served the food. They ate and drank, and that night the wedding was held amid the rejoicing general.
Mouse court and the field	4300	112	Spanish	A courtier invited mouse with a very urban way a farmer mouse. He gave him fat bacon, cheese from Holland, and a pantry full of pottage was his property, as there could be a room so magnificently prepared, even if in Ratópolis buscadocon great care, to accommodate Roepán first. His senses there are re-created; walls and ceilings decorated among a thousand ratonescas sweets, sausages, hams and sausages. They jumped pleasure, oh !, what embeleso of pork in pork, cheese cheese. In this very flattering situation comes despensera.Oyen noise, run, crouch, lose tino, more helter-skelter to escape by the way is open passageway tooth. -This !, we said the peasant, I reniego of the cheese, bacon, and who seeks tastes among frights and scares. He turned to his campaign at the moment and felt much more from then on, without anxiety, fear and sorrows, their little dirt and vegetables.
The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage	216	85	Spanish	A mouse, a bird, and a sausage formed a partnership. They had long been together in peace and good company and very congenial. The task of the little bird was flying every day to the forest to fetch wood. The mouse carried water and set the table, and the sausage was responsible for the cocina.¡Cuando things go too well, you get tired of them soon! So it happened that one day the bird met another bird, who boasted to how well they lived. But the other tried to fool, because it bore the hardest work, while others stayed in casita well rested because the mouse was as lit the fire and brought the water, could go to rest in his little room to time to set the table. And the sausage did not move from the side of the pot, making sure that the food is cociese well, and when he was about, he had only to dip a time when potatoes or vegetables, and these were pickled, salted and seasoned. The bird would not with its load of firewood, would eat their table and finished the meal, then sleep soundly until morning. It was, indeed, a life regalada.Al other day the little bird, yielding to the promptings of his friend, said he did not want to go looking for firewood; I was tired of doing servant of others and acting like a fool. It was necessary to turn the tables and organize otherwise the government house. Of no avail the prayers of the mouse and sausage; the bird stood his ground. We had to do, therefore lots; the sausage was obliged to go for wood, the mouse became the kitchen, and the bird, the agua.¿Veréis what happened? The salchichita went to look for firewood; the bird made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot; then the two waited until the sausage again providing wood for the next day. But it took so long to return, his two companions began to fidget, and the bird flew away in search. Not quickly found a dog, sausage considering the prize, had captured and killed. The bird upbraided the dog his wrongdoing, calling outright theft, but can replied that the sausage had incriminating documents, and had to pay with life.The it pajarillo loaded sadly firewood and back home, she told him he had just seen and heard. The two companions were brought very low; but they agreed to make the best advantage of the situation and keep doing life together. Thus, the bird set the table while the mouse prepared the food. Trying to imitate the sausage, he went into the stew of vegetables to agitate them and soften them; but he had not yet reached the bottom of the pot that was caught and subject, and had to leave there the skin and return the bird vida.Al ordered the food, but found no cook. Grouchy, he left the wood on the ground in any way, and began to call and to seek, but the cook did not appear. For his carelessness, the fire reached the wood and lit it. The bird rushed to fetch water, but the bucket fell into the well with him inside, and unable to get out, drowned.
The king of the golden mountain	874	810	Spanish	A merchant had two children, a boy and a girl, so small they still were not going. Two of his ships richly laden, was put to sea; contained all his fortune, and when he planned to make with this cargo a great benefit, llególe the news that they had been shipwrecked, which, instead of a rich man, convirtióse in a poor, no more real than a field on the outskirts the ciudad.Con the idea of ​​being distracted as possible from their sorrows, he went out one day to his home and while walking from one end to another man came a black man and asked him the reason for his sadness, but it did not seem he was the soul in it. The merchant answered: - I'd tell you if you could help me repair the desgracia.- Who knows! - cried the black dwarf -. Perhaps as I can ayudarte.Entonces the merchant told him that all his fortune was lost at sea and no longer left to him but that campo.- Do not worry - said to the man -. If you promise that within twelve years bring me here the first thing you touch your leg when you return to your home now, you'll have all the money quieras.Pensó the merchant, "What else can it be but my dog ​​?," forgetting for an instant his son, so he accepted the condition of the dwarf, suscribiéndola and sellándola.Al enter his house, his little felt himself so glad to see that, relying on banks, managed to reach him and He grabbed her leg. The father was alarmed, then, remembering his promise, Diose now realize the commitment. But not finding money in any drawer or box, she thought it would have been a joke of the black man. At the end of a month, on down to the cellar in search of old metal to sell, he found a big pile of money. Man stood a good mood, started buying, a trader becoming wealthier than before and forgot all preocupaciones.Mientras Therefore, the child had grown and showed very intelligent and willing. As the years passed grew anguish of the father, to the extent that he reflected on his face. One day he asked the child the cause of her distress, and although the father refused to confess, insisted both the son finally told her, not knowing what he did, he promised a black man in exchange for a amount of money; and when fulfilled twelve was the deadline and would have to give it, because I had so signed and sealed. The child answered: - Do not grieve for this, father; Everything will get fixed. The black has no power over me.The son asked the priest to give him his blessing, and when the hour struck, went together to the field, where the boy, describing a circle on the floor, placed himself inside with his father. He presented little the man and said to the old man: - Did you bring what you promised He did not answer, as the son asked: - What want you here to what said the black: - Is your father with whom I speak not contigo.Pero the boy replied: - you deceived and seduced my father - give me the contract.- no - replied the dwarf - I do not renounce my derecho.Tras a long discussion, agreed finally that the son, since he no longer belonged to his father, but the devil, embark on a boat anchored in a river flowing into the sea; the father would push the boat towards the center of the current and abandon the child at his mercy. The child took leave of his father and went to the little boat, and his own father had to push it with his foot. The boat capsized, leaving the keel up and covered in water. Father, believing that his son had drowned, he returned sadly to his house and cried for a long time.But the boat had not sunk, but they floated gently, with mocito on board, until at the end, it was stranded on an unknown shore. He landed the boy, and seeing a beautiful palace, she went out of him without hesitation. But passing the door he saw it was an enchanted castle. He toured all the rooms, but all were deserted, except the last, where a coiled snake. The serpent was, in turn, a maiden pleased that in the view, showed signs of great joy and said: - Have you come, my deliverer? For twelve years I've been waiting; this kingdom is bewitched and you must redimirlo.- And how can I do? - he asked him.- Tonight they will appear twelve black men, wearing chains hanging, and you wonder why your presence here; you must keep silent, not answer them, letting them do whatever they want with you. Haunt you, hit you and prick, you, hold on, but do not talk, will leave at noon. The second night twelve others will come, and the third, twenty-four, and you cut off my head; but at twelve o'clock their power will be over, and then if you have resisted and have not uttered a single word, I will be disenchanted. I will come with a bottle of water of life, you sprinkle it and will stay alive and healthy as antes.- rescue you willingly - said él.Y everything happened just as he had predicted. Black men could not get a word out, and the third night the snake became a beautiful princess that provided with the water of life, went to resuscitate him. Then, throwing herself on his neck, she kissed him, and jubilation and joy spread throughout the palace. Casáronse, and the boy was king, oro.Al mountain out of a happy life time, the queen gave birth to a beautiful child. When they had gone eight years, the young man remembered his father and entered the desire to go see him home. The Queen did not want to let him go, saying - I know it is my misfortune - but he did not leave her alone until he got his assent. At the firing him, she gave him a magic ring and said - Take this ring and wear it on your finger; With it you can move you anywhere you want; Only you must promise to not use to make me go to the house of your padre.Prometióselo him and, putting the ring on his finger, asked found on the outskirts of the city where his father lived. At the same time he was there and prepared to enter the town; but getting to the door, detuviéronle sentries to see him wearing strange clothes, but rich and magnificent. Then he climbed to the top of a hill, where a shepherd guarding his flock; changed with him his clothes and wearing the sheepskin of the pastor, he could enter the city without being disturbed. He presented himself at the house of his father and was released, but the man refused to lend credit, saying that while it was true that he had a son, had died many years ago; However, as he saw it was a poor shepherd, offered him a plate of food. Then the boy told his parents: - It is true that I am your son. Do not know any sign in my body for that you might recognize - Yes - he answered the mother - our son had a mole shaped raspberry under his arm derecho.Apartóse his shirt, and seeing the moon on site indicated, and ceased to doubt that they had with him his son. He then declared to them that he was king of the golden mountain, which his wife was a princess and had a beautiful little boy of seven years. Mother then said: - This really do not think so! ! What a king who appears dressed as a shepherd Irritated son, forgetting his promise, turned to the ring, conjuring his wife and son to compareciesen, and at the same time presented the two: queen, weeping and wailing, and accusing him of breaking his word and having made it desgraciada.Respondióle him - I did unpremeditatedly and without malice - and tried to apologize and persuade. She pretended to give in to their excuses, but it harbored resentment in his alma.Condujo his wife on the outskirts of the city and showed the river where the boat had been launched; then he said: - I'm tired; Sit down, I want to sleep a little about your regazo.Apoyó in his head, and the Queen was stroking until he fell asleep. Quitóle then ring finger and pulling his foot from under him, and left the chinela descalzóse; then she picked up her son and asked to return to his kingdom. A awakening, King found himself completely abandoned; his wife and son had disappeared, and the ring finger, giving them no more than the chinela as a pledge "to the house of my parents can not come back - thought - would say I'm brujo;. I have no solution to get in road and continue until you reach my domains. " He left, then, and so he found on a mountain where there were three giants who fought heatedly because they could not agree on how to bestow the inheritance of his father. A long pass to see him, they called and said that young men were shrewd intelligence, he was invited to act as arbitrator in the cast. The inheritance consisted of a sword, when one brandishing and shouting, "All heads to the ground, but mine !," in the blink of an eye, decapitating every living creature; secondly, a tunic made invisible to whom wore; and thirdly, of a pair of boots that were in an instant, who wore them to the place he wanted. King said: - Give me the three objects, because I have to examine them to see if they are in good condition, Alargáronle tunic and, no sooner had put it disappeared, turned into a fly. Retrieving his own figure, he said - The tunic is fine; come now espada.Pero the other replied: - Oh, no! Do not we give. Only you'd say, "All heads to the ground, but mine !," we would be beheaded, and only you'd stay with vida.No However, in order to give it were avinieron provided that the ProBase in a tree. Did so, and the sword cut the trunk cercén as if it were a straw. He would then examine the boots, but the Giants opposed: - No, do not give. If, when you have them on, giving you for moving to the top of the mountain, we would stay without nada.- No - he told them - do not let him haré.Y boots. Already in possession of the three parts, and thinking only of his wife and son, he said to himself to himself: "Ah, if I could find in the mountains of gold !," and immediately disappeared from the view of the three giants, which the lawsuit was resolved the distribution of herencia.Al get the King to the palace he noticed in him great joy; violins and flutes sounded, and people told him that the Queen was about to celebrate his wedding with a second husband. Angered, he exclaimed: - Perfidious! He has deceived me; I left while he slept! And putting on the robe, entered the palace without being seen by anyone. In entering into the great hall he saw a huge table laden with delicious food served; the guests ate and drank laughing and joking while the Queen sat in the place of honor, in a royal throne, appeared magnificently attired with the crown on his head. He went to stand behind his wife without anyone seeing him, and when they put on the plate a piece of meat, he took it and ate it, and when I filled the glass of wine, also cogióla and drank ; and although it served her time and again, it was always with nothing, as plates and cups disappeared instantly. It embarrassed and ashamed, she arose and, retiring to his room, began to mourn, but he followed her. then she said: - Is that dominates me the devil, and never come my savior He then hitting him in the face, replied: - Do not come your savior? It's here, fallacious woman! ? I deserved this treatment and, making himself visible, went into the room shouting: - No wedding; the rightful king has returned kings, princes and counselors gathered there and began to mock him escarnecerlo!; but boy, without spending a lot of words, shouted -¿Queréis left or not and seeing that were preparing to hold him and attack him, drew his sword and said: -! All heads to the ground, but mine and all heads rolled on the ground, and then he, master of the situation, again the king of the golden mountain.
King Thrushbeard	494	900	Spanish	There was once a king who had a daughter whose beautiful beyond any comparison, but it was so horrible in his spirit, so proud and arrogant that no suitor was right for her. The rejected one after the other, and ridiculed as much as podía.En once the king made a great feast and invited thereto for young people who were in a position to marry, whether neighbors or visitors from afar. The day of the festival, young people were placed in rows according to their rank and position. First came the kings, then the grand dukes, then the princes, the earls, the barons, and the upper class but not cortesana.Y the daughter of the king was carried through the ranks, and for every one she had some objection to do: too fat and looks like a pig, very thin and looks like a cane that seems very white and lime, very tall and looks like a rod, which looks like a ball bald, very ..., that. ..and that .... and always invent something to criticize and humillar.Así always had something to say against each other, but she especially merry over a good king who stood high in the row, and whose chin he had grown a bit too much. - "Well done." - shouted and laughed, - "he has a chin like a thrush!" - And since he got the name of King Peak Tordo.Pero the old king, seeing that her daughter did more than taunt people and offend the suitors who were gathered there, he was furious, and promised that she would have for a husband to the first beggar who came to their puertas.Pocos days afterwards a fiddler came and sang beneath the windows , trying to win a little something. When the king heard this, he ordered his servant - "Let him in." - So the fiddler came in, in his dirty, ragged clothes, and sang before the king and his daughter, and when he finished asked for a small gift. The king said - "Your song has pleased me very much, and therefore I will give my daughter to be your wife." The daughter of the King shuddered, but the King said: - "I made an oath to give in marriage to the first beggar, and keep it. "- Everything she said was in vain. Bishop was brought and she had to marry the musician left on the spot. When everything was over, the king said: - "It is not right for you, wife of musician, staying from now on in my palace, you may go away with your husband.." - The beggar took her hand, and she was forced to walk on foot with him. When they had walked a long way he came to a forest, and she asked: - "Who does that beautiful forest" - ".. Belongs to the king Thrushbeard If you had accepted, all that would be yours" - answered the musician beggar .- "Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had only accepted the king Thrushbeard!" later they came to a meadow, and she asked again - "who are these beautiful green meadow? "-". they belong to the king Thrushbeard If you had accepted, all that would be yours. "- said again the beggar musician .-" Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had accepted the king Thrushbeard "and then they came to a large town, and she asked again -" to whom belong this cute and great people "-" it belongs to king Thrushbeard If you had accepted, all that would be yours "?.. - replied the beggar musician .- "Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had accepted the king Thrushbeard!" - "that I do not like." - said the musi co, hear you always wishing for another husband. Do not I enough for you "In the end they reached a small hut, and she said -" Oh God !, what a small house. Who will be this miserable hovel "The musician said: -" This is my house and yours, where we shall live together "- She had to stoop to pass through the small door .-" Where are the servants. "? - said the daughter of the king .- "what servants?" - replied the beggar .- "you must do for yourself what you want it done. To start ignites the fire right now and put water on to boil for dinner. I'm very tired. "But the daughter of the king knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking, and the beggar had to lend a hand himself to get anything doing things. When they finished their scanty went to bed food, and he forced her that in the morning should get up early to tidy up the small casa.Por few days they lived that way as best they could, and spent all their provisions Then the man said. - "Wife, we can not continue eating and living here without winning anything. You weave baskets. "- He went out, cut some willows, and brought in then she began to weave, but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands .-." I see that this does not work. "- said the man. - "rather put spin, perhaps do it better." - She sat down and tried to spin, but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so that the blood .- "you see" - said the man, - "no tights with No work. I see that I made a bad bargain with you. Now I try to do business with pots and earthenware. You must sit in the plaza of the market and sell the items. "-" Wow! "- she thought, -" if anyone from the kingdom of my father come to the market and see me sitting there, selling, how you mock me "-. But there was no alternative she had to be there, unless they chose to die of hambre.La first time he was fine, since people were glad to buy the vessels of the woman because she had beautiful appearance. and everyone paid what she asked. and some even gave her the money and left him there the goods. so they lived on what she earned as the money lasted. Then the husband bought a lot of dishes nuevas.Con all that she sat in the corner of the square of the market, and placed them around, ready for sale. But suddenly appeared galloped a horseman apparently drunk, and passed over the dishes so that all broke into a thousand pieces. she he began to mourn and did not know hac er for fear .- "Oh no !, What will become of me?" - shouted, - "What will my husband say about this?" - She ran home and told him all his infortunio.- "who would seat herself at the corner of the square of the market with crockery?" - he said .- "Stop mourn, I see very well you can not do an ordinary job, so I went to the palace of our king and asked him if he could not find a golf maid in the kitchen, and they promised me they would take you, and you'll have food for free. "- the daughter of the king was now kitchen maid, and had to be in the sink and run errands and do the dirtiest work. In both bags of clothes she always wore a small jar in which it was incumbent threw his food to take home, and so remained. It happened that he was going to celebrate the wedding of the eldest son of the king, so the poor woman went up and stood near the door of the room to see. When all the candles were lit, and people, each more elegant one other, entered, and all was full of pomp and splendor, she thought of her fate, with a sad heart, and cursed the pride and arrogance that dominated and led to much pobreza.El smell of the delicious dishes served in and out they reached her, and now and then the servants gave her some of those snacks that kept their pitchers to carry casa.En one when the son of the king, dressed in velvet and silk, with gold chains around his throat as entered. And when he saw the beautiful woman standing by the door, took her hand and had danced with her. But she refused and was very frightened as he saw it was the king Thrushbeard, the suitor she had taken with derision. Their resistance was indescribable. He took her to the room, but the threads that held their pitchers were broken, pitchers fell, the soup ran out, and the sandwiches were scattered everywhere. And when the people saw it, he gave widespread laughter and derision everywhere, and she felt so embarrassed that would be kilometers underground at that time. She broke free and ran to the door and gone, but in the stands a man caught her and brought her back. He noticed again the king and confirmed it was the king Thrushbeard. Entonce he said affectionately: - "Do not be afraid I and musician who has been living with you in that hovel, we are the same person for love of you I disguised myself, and I was also the hussar who rode through your crockery.. . this was all done to bring down the spirit of pride that had you and punish you for the insolence with which you mocked me "- Then she wept bitterly and said: -". I made a mistake serious, and worthless for your wife "- But he said: -". comforted, the evil days are gone, now celebrate our wedding "- then waiting came and dressed with the most splendid dresses, and her father and the whole court came and wished. her the greatest happiness in her marriage with king Thrushbeard. And that happiness go growing. They are my wishes, for I too was there.
The frog king or Iron Henry	3	440	Spanish	In those ancient times, when it was still wish one thing to have it, there lived a king daughters were all handsome, especially the youngest, which was so beautiful that the sun, which has seen so much, marveled every time their rays They rested on the girl's face. Next to the royal palace extendíase a large, dark forest, and in it under an old linden tree, a spring flowed. In the heat of the day, the princess used to go to the forest and sit on the edge of the fountain. When bored, poníase playing with a gold ball, throwing her into the air and collecting it with the hand, falling; was his toy favorito.Ocurrió once the ball rather than fall into the little hand lifted the girl was, he did it on the floor and rolling, ended up in the water. The princess followed her gaze, but the ball disappeared, because the spring was so deep, so deep that you could not see the bottom. The girl began to mourn; and he was growing stronger, unable to console themselves when, in the midst of his lamentations, he heard a voice saying: "What's wrong, princess Lloras to soften the stones?" The girl looked around, searching for the source of the voice, and saw a frog stretching his thick ugly head over the surface of the water. "Ah !, are you, old plunge?" He said, "I weep because my golden ball, I dropped into the fountain." - "Calm down and do not cry anymore," replied the frog, "I can fix But what will you give me if I return your toy.?" - "Whatever you want, my dear frog," replied the girl, "my clothes, my pearls and precious stones to the golden crown I wear." But the frog replied: "No interest me your clothes, or your pearls and precious stones, nor your golden crown, but if you are willing to love me, if I accept for your friend and playmate, if you let me feel the table next to you and eat from your golden saucer and drink from your cup and sleep in your little bed, if you promise me this, I'll go down to the bottom and bring you the golden ball ". - "Oh yeah!" I said to her, "I promise all you want as long as you give me the ball." But she thought to herself: What nonsense happen to this little animal! Estarse must be in the water with their peers, croaking croaking you. How can partner people? Obtained the promise, the frog dived into the water, and the little time he came out, striding swimming with the ball in his mouth. Soltóla on the grass, and the little princess, mad with joy at seeing again his beautiful toy, picked it up and ran with it. "Wait, wait!" gritóle the frog, "take me with you, I can not reach you, I can not run as fast as you!" But it was useless hoarse and shout 'cro cro' with all his strength. The girl, without regard to their cries, kept running towards the palace, and soon forgot the poor frog, which had no choice but to return to dive into your charca.Al next day, the princess having dinner together with the King and all the courtiers, eating at his plate of gold, behold, plis, plas, plis, plas heard that something was up laboriously marble stairs of the palace and once up, knocked on the door: " princess, the youngest of the princesses, open up! " She ran to the door to see who was calling and unlocking, meet with the frog standing there. He slammed the door and returned to the table, filled with anxiety. A King observing how his heart beat, he said, "My daughter, what are you afraid Is there at the door a giant who wants to take" - "No," she replied, "it is not a giant, but a disgusting frog." - "And what does you that frog?" - "Oh, dear father was yesterday in the woods playing by the fountain, and I dropped to the water the golden ball And while I cried, the frog brought it to me I promised him, for me it demanded.. would be my companion, but I never thought I could get away from your pond is now out there and wants to come. ". Meanwhile, they called a second time and a voice was heard saying: "Princess, the girl, Ábreme queAyer Do not know what I dijisteJunto to source fresh Little princess, the girl, Ábreme!?!" And the king said: "What must fulfill promised Go and open the door.." The girl went to open, and the frog hopped in and followed her to her chair. A sitting princess, the frog stood at his feet and shouted: "Beam me up in your chair!" The princess vacillated, but the king ordered him to. Chair, the animal would move to the table, and settled in it and said: "Now acércame your golden saucer so we can eat together." The girl obliged, but could be seen clearly that obeyed reluctantly. Frog swallowed very comfortable, while the princess was all choked snacks. Finally, beastie said: "Oh I'm satiated and I feel tired, take me to your little room and make thy little bed silk: sleep together." The princess began to mourn; he hated that cold bug, not even dare to touch; and behold, now he insisted on sleeping in his bed. But the King, angrily said, "Do not you despise who helped you when you were needed." Cogióla, then, with two fingers, carried it aside up and placed in a corner. But when he had slept, hopping frog drew near and said, "I'm tired and want to sleep as well as you; Yea Beam me up to your bed, or I'll tell your father." The princess ran out of patience, grabbed the frog down and, with all his strength, threw it against the wall, "Now you shall rest, disgusting!" But when the frog fell to the ground, no longer frog, and convirtióse in a prince, a handsome prince with beautiful eyes and sweet look. And the King accepted him as companion and husband of her daughter. Contole then a wicked witch had enchanted, and that no one but she could desencantarlo and out of the pond; he said to him that the next day would leave his kingdom. ASLEEP was, and the morning, the sun wake came a chariot drawn by eight white horses, adorned with white plumes of ostrich and gold chains. Behind was standing, the servant of the young King Henry the faithful. This server had felt such grief loyal to seeing his master transformed into a frog, which was ordered to place three iron rings in volume to the heart to prevent him break out of pain and sadness. The carriage was to lead to the young King into his kingdom. Henry settled into her faithful partner and remounted on the rear davit; was beside himself with joy at the release of his señor.Cuando had already gone part of the way, the prince heard a crash behind her, as if something had broken. Turning, he said, "Henry, the car explodes!" "No, not the car which fails, it is a ring of my heart, which has been filled with grief While you lived in Fontana Turned into a frog". Second and third time was heard that click on the way, and always believed that the float Prince broke; but they were nothing but hoops leaping from the heart of faithful Henry to seeing his master redeemed and happy.
the wren	1633	221	Spanish	In very early times all sounds and noises had their meaning and significance. I had the blacksmith's hammer on the anvil hit, and brush the carpenter wood styling, and the mill wheel to the take action. Said this, his stutter: "Help us, Lord God, Help us, Lord God !." And if the miller was a thief, at the start the mill, he spoke in good Castilian and began asking, slowly: - Who is responsible? Who is there? - and then he answered quickly -: The miller! The Miller! - and finally at full speed -: Roba without fear, without fear steals! ! From the barrel, three sixths At that time, even the birds had their own language, intelligible to everyone; Today gurgling sounds day, cooing, whistling and, in some birds, music without words. But behold, they put the birds in the heart the idea that they needed a leader that command them, and decided to choose a king. Only one, the lapwing, manifested disconforme: had always lived free, and would die free; and so everything was flying from one place to another, distraught and crying: - Where do I go, where I'm going? - until he retired to solitary swamps and deserts without being seen in his other semejantes.Las birds decided to discuss the matter, and a beautiful May morning, leaving forests and fields, gathered: the eagle, finch, the owl, the jackdaw, the lark sparrow ... why mention them all? Even they attended the cuckoo and the lapwing, the sacristan, so called because always utters a few days before the lapwing. And also he appeared a little one bird, which still had no name. Hen, which, coincidentally, had not heard about the matter, admiróse to seeing this enormous concentration: - Ca-ca-ca-ca, what happens there? - stood to cackle. But the rooster reassured her, explaining the purpose of the asamblea.Decidióse Who Would Be King who was able to fly at higher altitudes. Zarzal a frog that included everything from a bush, said, in a warning tone at the hearing that: - Natt-Natt Natt-! Natt Natt--Natt! - convinced that the decision would shed many tears. But Rook replied: - Quark ok! -, meaning that everything would be resolved pacíficamente.Acordaron that this test would take place that morning, so no one could then say - I'd fly higher; but arrived at night and had to bajar.Ya according to a prearranged signal elevóse in the air that flock of birds. A great cloud of dust arose in the field, and prodújose thunderous flapping rumored, and it seemed as if a black cloud would cover the sky. Small birds were soon left behind; They out his forces returned to the land. Older resisted more, though none could rival the eagle, which rose so high that it could have draw eyes to the sun pecks. A seeing that no other followed him, thought: "Why climb over Undoubtedly, I am the queen?" And began to descend. Other birds, from the ground, welcomed the cry of: - Thou shalt be our queen; no one has flown higher than you -! Save me! - cried the little one nameless, who had hidden among the feathers of the eagle. And he had not fatigued, could rise further, therefore, that came to see God our Lord seated on his throne. And once up, he picked up the wings and dropped like a lead, screaming, with his thin, penetrating voice: - King me! King am - Do you king? - they protested the birds are angry -. Deceitfully and have won astucia.Y then they put another condition. It would be king who was able to get deeper into the earth. It was to see how the goose broad chest rubbed against the ground! With what force opened a hole cock! The duck was the least fortunate, because although he jumped into a pit, torcióse legs and ran, waddled up to the next pond, shouting: - Guek, Guek! - which means, "bad deal !." Instead, the small unnamed mouse hole was sought. He went into it, and from the bottom, shouted in his thin voice: - King me! King am - Do you king? - repeated birds still more indignant -. Do you think you will avail yourself your wiles? And decided to hold him prisoner in the den, condemning him to starve. To do this, they ordered their custody to the owl, with the slogan of not letting escape the rascal, under penalty of death. In the evening came, all the birds, tired of exercising flight because they had to undergo, retired to their respective abodes, with their wives and children; only the owl stood beside the mouse hole, with big eyes on the entrance. However, as she felt tired, she thought, "Well I close one eye will watch with the other, and this little devil not escape the mousetrap." And so, he closed one eye, keeping the other nailed to the burrow. The bird drew occasionally head for the purpose of escaping; but the owl was still watchful, and he had no choice but to get back into the hideout. In the After a while, the owl changed eye to rest first, with the idea of ​​relieving them until morning came. But once closed one forgot to open the other and fell asleep. The little one soon realize it and then escapó.Desde, the owl can not be seen during the day; Otherwise, all the other birds chase and peck sew. Hence only to fly out at night and that hate and persecute mice, because of the holes that open. Neither the bird is much appears in public, fearful of losing his head if he is caught. It is hidden among hedges, and. when he believes to be very safe, yet often he shouts: King me! - so the other birds call him in mockery are the reyezuelo.Pero no felt himself as happy as the lark, not having to obey the wren. As the sun appears on the horizon, it rises in the air and sings: - Oh, how beautiful! Beautiful beautiful! Oh, how beautiful!
The wren and the bear	965	222	Spanish	One summer day walk out of the wolf and bear. This, listening to the melodious song of a bird, said: - Brother wolf, what bird is it that sings so well - is the king of birds - replied the wolf -. We bow to él.Era, indeed, the reyezuelo.- In this case - said the bear - I would like to see his royal palace. Enséñamelo.- not as easy as you think - said the wolf -; You must wait for a little while Mrs. Reina.Al come presented the Queen, carrying food in its beak, and also reached the King, to feed their young. The bear wanted to follow unceremoniously; but the wolf held him by the sleeve, saying: - No, wait for the kings parents have returned to marchar.Tomaron note of the hole where the nest was, and retiraron.Pero must bear could not control his impatience; at all costs wanted to see the royal palace, and a little while, returned to the site. The King and Queen were absent, and the bear, glancing at the nest, he saw five or six polluelos.- Is this a royal palace? - he said -. Go a miserable palace! Neither of you are children of kings, but a pícaros.Al hear this young wrens, riding cholera cried out: - It is not true! Our parents are noble people. We pay dearly for this insult, bear and wolf oso.El, restless, they returned to their burrows, while the birds kept shouting and fussing. When his parents returned with more food, the children told them - will not touch a leg fly, although we have to starve, before they let it clear whether or not we legitimate children. The bear was here and then the father insultó.Dijo King: - Rest assured that we will arrange this asunto.Y, taking flight along with Lady Queen, arrived at the entrance of the cave bear and shouted the King: - grumpy Bear, why have you insulted our children? How expensive pay, then we will make this a war without cuartel.Con declared war on the bear, who called for help from all quadrupeds: the ox, donkey, deer, roe deer and all the others who inhabit the Earth's surface. For its part, the wren summoned all those living in the air, not only birds, large and small, but also mosquitoes, hornets, bees and flies; all had to acudir.Cuando sounded when hostilities start, the wren sent spies to the place where he had his headquarters the head of the enemy army. The mosquito, which was the most cunning, toured the forest in which the opposing forces were concentrated, and settled finally on a leaf of the tree at whose foot the slogans were given. Bear called the fox and said: - Zorra, you are the shrewdest of all animals; You will be the general and acaudillarás.- we willingly - said the fox -; But what signal adopt No one said a palabra.- Well - continued the fox -: I have a beautiful tail, long and populated, like a red plume;? while keep it upright, is a sign that the thing is going well, and you must move forward; but if low, cast to run with all your fuerzas.- A hearing this slogan, the mosquito flew his field and told the wren all detalle.Al dawn the day was to rid the battle, saw himself, from far come all the army of quadrupeds to a trot and putting together a furious roar that made the ground tremble. The wren advanced, meanwhile, to the front of his hosts winged, cleaving the air with a terrifying cacophony of squeaks, buzzes and flutters. And the two armies rammed furiously. The wren sent the hornet with orders placed under the tail of the fox and sting with all his might. The first pang, the fox jumped and lifted his leg; resisted, however, keeping the tail erect; the second bite forced to lower it a moment; and the third, unable to stand it, he screamed and put his tail between his legs. In the view animals, they believed that all was lost and took flight, each seeking refuge in their burrows; Thus, birds won the batalla.Volaron then the kings parents to the nest and their young said: - Rejoice, young, eat and drink as you feel like; We have won the war but chicks replied: - Do not eat until the bear come to our nest to apologize and recognize our alcurnia.Voló the wren to the cave bear, and cried - Fudd, you have to present yourself to the nest my children to ask forgiveness and say that they are people of rank; otherwise, you will break the bear, scared costillas.El, hastened to go to present their excuses, and only then the young wrens, who ate, drank and armed revelry until late at night were satisfied.
The tailor in heaven	331	800	Spanish	One day when the weather was very beautiful, God wished stroll through the heavenly gardens and was accompanied by all the apostles and saints, so that in Heaven there was only San Pedro. The Lord had given him not to allow anyone in during his absence, and so Peter did not move from the door, watching. A little cape called, and Peter asked who he was and what quería.- am a poor, honest tailor gently replied a voice that prays for entry. - Yes grumbled Peter, honored as the thief hanging from the gallows! Do not've made you run your fingers, cloth stealing your customers! You will not enter heaven; Our Lord has forbidden me to let anyone while he's fuera.- A little compassion! He begged the tailor. For a scraps which fall off the table! That's not stealing. Not worth talking about this. Look, I am lame, and this walk I have blisters on your feet. I have no courage to turn back. Just let me go; I will take care of all drudgery: take the children, wash diapers, cleaning and drying banks playing, mend their onesies ... San Pedro pitied the lame tailor and opened the door of Paradise, the justito for your scrawny body able to slip through the gap. Then he ordered the man to sit in a corner, behind the door, and was there very still and quiet, for the Lord, to the back, did not see it and be angry. The tailor obeyed. A little cape, San Pedro came a moment; the tailor got up and, seizing the opportunity, went round about every corner of the Cielo.Llegó finally to a place where there were some very precious chairs, and in the center, a throne, all of gold, adorned with gleaming precious stones, much higher than the chairs in front of him a footstool of gold. It was the chair where our Lord feel when you are at home, and from which you can see what is happening in the land.The tailor stared dumbfounded that chair for a while, because he loved more than anything he had seen. In the end, impertinent as it was, could not control himself more: it climbed to the throne and sat down. Then he saw everything that was happening on Earth, and thus was able to observe how an ugly old woman who washed in a stream, secretly laying two handkerchiefs. The tailor, on seeing him, was furious so that gripped the golden footstool and threw sky through against the old thief. But then he realized that he could not recover the footstool, and got out covertly from the throne and returned to his place behind the door, with the air of one who has never broken a return plato.Al Our Lord with His heavenly entourage, he did not notice the tailor sitting in goal; but wanting to take his usual seat, he began to miss the footstool. San Pedro asked him where he had gotten, but the saint he knew how to respond. Then he asked if he had allowed to enter alguien.- not know of anyone who has been here said San Pedro, but a lame tailor who sits behind the puerta.Nuestro Lord commanded to appear at the tailor, and asked if it had taken the footstool and what he had done with him.- Oh, Lord! He answered the tailor joyously. I have upset a lot because on Earth I saw a washerwoman old who stole two handkerchiefs, and threw the footstool to Head. Great rogue! -increpólo Our Lord. If I judged as you do, what would you be long? Would have no chairs, no benches, no throne, even poker from the oven, because everything would have thrown against sinners. From this moment Thou shalt not follow in Heaven, but you'll stay outside, at the door. So, look where you're going! Here one should punish but to me, the Señor.San Pedro had to miss Heaven to the tailor, who, as he had torn shoes and blistered feet, pushing a cane went to limbo, where they live the good soldiers and They spend their best.
The Brave Little Tailor (Seven at one blow)	190	1640	Spanish	Not long ago there was a humble tailor working life with her son and her sewing, sitting on his table by the window earned ago; smiling and in good spirits, had made sewing blaring. This happened in the street a peasant couple shouting -¡Rica mermeladaaaa ... Barataaaa! Rica mermeladaaa, barataaa. This proclamation rang in his ears glory. It poking the fine tailor your head out the window, called out: Hey, my friend! Go up, here you will relieve your merchandise! He climbed the peasant the three flights of stairs with her heavy basket in tow, and tailor made open to him each and every one of their doorknobs. The inspected one by one approaching them nose and finally said, 'This is not jam me look bad; so hand me four ounces, girl, and if you go over the quarter pound, let's not quarrel about that. The woman, who expected a better sale, left sulking and grumbling: -¡Vaya! I cried the little tailor, rubbing his hands. May God bless this jam me and give me health and strength! And, taking bread from the cupboard, he cuts a large slice and spread it to your liking. "It seems wrong not know," she told herself. "But before trying it, I will finish this jacket." He put the bread on the table and resumed sewing; and I was so happy that her stitches out longer and longer. Meanwhile, the sweet scent flowed from the bread up to where the flies were sitting in great numbers and these are feeling attracted by the smell, fell in real legions. Hey, who he invited them to you! said the tailor, and drove the unbidden guests. But the flies, who did not understand their language, far from heeding, returned to the charge in flocks increasingly numerous. Finally the tailor lost patience, he took a piece of cloth from the hole beneath his table, exclaiming, "Wait, I myself will serve !," unmercifully big blow on them, and another and another . To remove the cloth and the count, he saw at least twenty had annihilated. "From what I can !," he thought, astonished at his own audacity. "The whole city will have to learn this" and, on the run, the tailor cut a belt to measure, and then sewed him embroidered in large letters the following sign: SEVEN OF STROKE. "What you say the city !," he added. "The whole world will hear about this!" And pure contentment, the heart trembled as the tail of the lamb. He girded belts and then prepared to leave the world, convinced that his workshop was too small for his bravery. Before leaving, he was rummaging through the house to see if there was something that would serve him for the trip; but only he found an old cheese that is pocketed. Opposite the door saw a bird that had become entangled in a thicket, and also pocketed to accompany cheese. Then he gamely on his way, and as it was agile and light on his feet, he never tired. The road took him up a mountain. When he reached the highest, he met a giant who was sitting there, peacefully watching the scenery. The tailor approached her game and said, 'Good morning, comrade! What, watching the wide world? I go for him precisely a fortune to run. Do you decide to come with me? The giant looked contemptuously and said Divest Thyself of Thy my view, stooge, miserable creature! -Oh yeah? replied the tailor, and, unbuttoning his jacket, she showed her belt - ¡Aquí can read what kind of man I am! The giant read: Seven at one blow, and thinking that men were shot down by the tailor, began to have him some respect. Anyway he decided to test it. He grabbed a stone and squeezed to get a few drops of water. -¡A see if you do, 'he said, since you're so strong! Nothing more than that? He said the sastrecito-. It's child's play! And putting his hand in his pocket pulled out the cheese and squeezed to get all the juice. -What do you say? A little better, do not you think? The giant did not know what to say, and could hardly believe that man do such a thing. then taking another stone, threw it so high that the eye could barely follow it. Go on, you little man, to see if doing something similar. A good shot, 'said the tailor, but the stone fell back to earth. -And now you see a bird taking his pocket, threw him into the air. The bird, delighted with his freedom, quickly took flight and disappeared from sight. What do you think of this shot, comrade? He asked the tailor. -Tirar, you know the giant admitted. Now see if you can handle a load worthy of this name-and leading to the tailor to a huge oak tree that was felled on the ground, he said: Since the days of forzudo you help me get this tree forest. With pleasure said the sastrecito-. You take the trunk to the shoulder and I'll take care of the foliage, which is the heaviest. As the trunk was in office, the tailor seated himself on a branch, so that the giant, who could not turn, had to also carry it, besides all the weight of the tree. The tailor was happier there than behind, whistling that tune that says, "A horse came three tailors," as if the task of trees loading was a cinch. The giant, after dragging a long way the heavy burden, she broke down and cried: Hey, you! Attention, i have to release the tree! The tailor jumped nimbly to the ground, grabbed the tree with both arms as if he were carrying all the time, and said -¡Un big guy like you and you can not even load a tree! They walked and passing by a cherry tree, giant, reaching for the glass, where hung ripe fruits, bent the tree down and put it in the hands of the tailor, inviting him to eat the cherries. But the man was too weak to hold the tree, and as soon as he released the giant, returned the cup to its first position, dragging the tailor into the air. He fell to the ground without getting hurt, and the giant said to him, What is that? Do not you force to hold this puny tallito? 'Not that I lack strength he replied the sastrecito-. Do you think that such minutiae is for a man who killed seven at one blow? Is that jumped over the tree because hunters are shooting down there in the bushes. Do the same, if you can! The giant tried, but remained hanging in the branches; so that this time the little tailor took the victory. Then the giant said: 'Since you're so brave, come with me to our house and spend the night with us. The tailor accepted the invitation and followed him. When they reached the cave, they found several giant sitting by the fire: everyone was holding a lamb roast and I was eating. The tailor looked around and thought, "This is much more spacious than my workshop." The giant showed him a bed and invited him to lie down and sleep. The bed, however, was too great for man; So rather than settle in it, curled up in a corner. At midnight, believing the giant that his guest would be asleep, he got up and, brandishing a huge crowbar, unloaded a tremendous blow on the bed. Then he lay down again in the certainty that had sent forever so impertinent cricket. At dawn, the giants, already forgetting the tailor, were preparing to leave for the woods when suddenly they saw him as cheerful and calm as usual. That it was more than they could bear, and thinking he was going to kill them all, ran, every man for himself. The tailor went his way, always with his nose pointed ahead. After much walking, he came to the garden of a royal palace, and as he was very tired, fell asleep on the grass. While he was sleeping well, he was approached by several courtiers, par examined him everywhere and read the inscription: Seven at one blow. Ah! they cried. What are you doing here so terrible a man of war, now that we're alone? No doubt it will be a powerful knight. And they ran to tell the news to the king, saying that in his opinion would be an extremely valuable man in war and in no way should miss the chance to put his service. A king was pleased the council, and sent one of his nobles to do him an offer as soon awaken. The envoy remained on guard at the sleeping, and when he saw that he stretched and opened her eyes, told him the proposition of the king. I came-just that purpose said the sastrecito-. I am willing to serve the king -so who received honorably and prepared an entire residence for himself. But the soldiers of the king looked at him askance and actually wanted to have a thousand miles away. 'What will stop this? -comentaban each other-. If we fight with him and embarks with us, every blow tear down to seven. No here who can face him. So they took the decision to present to the king and ask him to licenciase of the army. 'We're ready,' they said to fight the side of a man who can kill seven at one blow. The king was very upset when he saw that because one would lose as faithful servants: and he regretted even having seen the tailor and willingly would get rid of him. But he dared not fire him, for fear that finish him and all his, and then installed on the throne. It was thinking for hours and order, he found a solution. He sent word to the tailor who, being so powerful military man as he was, had an offer to make. In a forest of the country lived two giants who were causing great damage with robbery, murder, arson and other atrocities; no one could approach them safely run death. If the tailor should overcome and exterminate these giants, he would receive the hand of his daughter and half the kingdom as a reward. In addition, a hundred cavalrymen what auxiliarían in the company. "Not bad for a man like you!" and the tailor said. "That one would offer a beautiful princess and half a kingdom is something that does not happen every day." So he said, 'Of course I accept. I will finish very soon with the two giants. And I do not need the hundred horsemen. Which kill seven at one stroke does not have to be afraid of two. So the little tailor set out, followed by a hundred horsemen. When he reached the outskirts of the forest, he told his followers: Wait here. By myself, I'll end with the giants. And a leap into the forest, where they began looking right and left. In the After a while he found the two giants. They were sleeping at the foot of a tree and snored so loud that the branches bobbed up and down. He, without thinking twice, especially tailor chose two large stones kept in his pockets and climbed the tree. Halfway slid down a branch to stand just above the sleepers, and thereupon became very good shot (it could not fail) otherwise would be giant perdido.Los to receiving each a blow with stone throwing awakened among them the blame for the beatings. One nudged his companion and said, 'Why do you beat me? You're dreaming replied the other. I have not stuck. They went back to sleep, and then the tailor threw a stone at the second. -What does this mean? He growled the giant. Why did you throw stones? -I I have not thrown anything growled the first. They discussed a while yet; but since both were tired, they left things as they were and closed his eyes again. The tailor the business again. Choosing the largest of its stones, he threw with full force to the chest of the first giant. -This is too much! he shouted angrily. And jumping like crazy, attacked his partner and pushed so hard against the tree, which made him start to drink. The second giant paid in the same coin, and both were enraged while rennet ripped two whole trees and were weapons against each other to until both fell dead. Then he came down from the tree the tailor. "Lucky I did not start the tree where I was," he told himself, "because he would have to jump to another like a squirrel. Luckily we tailors are light." And drawing his sword, he took a couple of gashes each chest. Soon he was presented where the gentlemen were and said, He finished the giants, although I must confess that the task was hard. They began to trees start to fight back. With chunks expect to get a man like me who kills seven at one blow! 'And you're not hurt? they asked the riders. -No think this thing the sastrecito- said. Not even disheveled. The riders could not believe it. They went with him into the woods and there they found the giants wallowing in their own blood and around, the trees uprooted. The tailor was presented to the king to ask the offered reward; but the king became the remolón and schemed another way to get rid of the hero. Before you receive my daughter's hand and half of my kingdom, 'he said, you have to carry out a new feat. For the forest runs a unicorn who does great damage, and you capture it first. -Less I fear a unicorn that two giant said the tailor - Seven at one blow: That's my specialty. And into the forest with an ax and a rope, having begged his followers to aguardasen outside. She did not have to search much. The unicorn suddenly appeared and charged him fiercely determined to impale once with his single horn. -Little by little; the thing is not as easy as you think the tailor said. He planting himself very still in front of a tree, he waited until the animal came closer and then leaped nimbly behind the tree. Like the unicorn had rammed hard, horn stuck in the trunk so deeply that even though he could not get it out, and was taken prisoner. "You dropped the bird !," said the tailor, coming out from behind the tree. He tied the rope around the neck of the beast, cut the horn of an ax and took their prey to the king. But this would not give the prize offered and demanded a third job. Before the wedding would be held, the tailor would have to hunt a boar fierce prowling through the woods causing enormous damage. To do so would be assisted hunters. -¡No he is missing more! sastrecito- said. If it's a cinch! He left the hunters at the entrance to the forest, with great joy from them, for so had received the fierce boar on other occasions, they were not eager to face him again. As soon as I saw the little tailor, wild boar rushed at him with SharpFang of his foaming mouth, and I was about to tear it down, when the hero fled at full speed, rushed into a chapel that stood by those nearby. He jumped out the window of the bottom and another jump, was immediately outside. The boar rushed after him in the chapel; but as the tailor had turned around and closed the door shut, so that the beast was enraged prisoner because he was too clumsy and heavy turn to jump out the window. The tailor was quick to call the hunters, so that the contemplasen with your own eyes. The king now had to fulfill his promise and gave him the hand of his daughter and half the kingdom, adding: ". You're my heir to the throne" was celebrated the wedding with great splendor, and there was that became a whole king brave little tailor.
Mr. Korbes	389	210	Spanish	Once upon a time a hen and a cockerel who decided to take a journey together. The cock built a beautiful car four red wheels, and harnessed four mice. The hen and cockerel mounted on the carriage and set off. A little while they found a cat, who told them: - Where are you going and said the cockerel? ". For those worlds we, the house of Mr. Korbes is that we seek" - Take me with you pleaded the gato.- gladly answered the gallito-. Sit back, lest you fall off in front "Be very careful, do not go to dirty my stroller colorado.Ruedecitas, rodad, little mice, silbad.Por let those worlds;. The house of Mr. Korbes is what we seek." He came up immediately a millstone; then an egg; then a duck; then, a pin and, finally, a sewing needle; all were installed in the car and continued journey. But getting to the house of Mr. Korbes, it was not. The little mice put the car in the barn; the cock and hen flew with a hanger; the cat sat on the fireplace; duck alighted bar in the well; egg wrapped in the towel; the pin stuck on the cushion of the seat; the needle jumped onto the bed pillow, and the millstone laid itself over the puerta.En Mr. Korbes they came and went to the fireplace to light a fire; but the cat's face filled with ash. He ran to the kitchen to wash, and the duck splashed water all over your face. A willing toweling, rolled egg and breaking, he hit him in the eyes. Desiring to rest, he sat in the chair, but he jabbed the pin. He angered, lay down on the bed; but the rest her head on the pillow, clavósele the needle. It already furious, rushed into the street; But on reaching the door, fell upon her Millstone and mató.¡Qué bad person must be that Mr. Korbes!
The godfather	398	332	Spanish	A poor man had so many children, who no longer knew who to appoint godfather when he was born another; They had no more known to be addressed. Head full of worries, he went to bed. While he slept, he dreamed what he should do to you: go out your door and ask the first person who met him to be godfather to his son. As he did awoke; and the first stranger happened, accepted his offer. The stranger gave his godson a glass with water, saying: - This is a miraculous water, which can heal the sick; you just have to look where death is. If you are in the header, you give water to the sick, and he will heal; but if you are on your feet, nothing to do: has sounded its last hora.En Thereafter the man could always say whether a patient could be saved or not; He became famous for his art and won a lot of money. One day they called to the side of the son of the King. A coming into the room, saw death at the bedside, he administered the miraculous water, and the patient left; and so did the second time. But the third, Death was at the foot of the bed, and the child had to morir.Un day he entered the desires man visiting his godfather, to tell their experiences with the prodigious water. But he got home, he found himself with a strange picture indeed. In the first flight of stairs they were fighting the shovel and broom, knocking each other about. He asked them: - Where the godfather live The broom replied: - A stretch more arriba.Al reach the second floor landing saw many dead fingers. He asked them: - Where does the godfather and answered one of the fingers: - A stretch more arriba.En the third landing was a lot of dead heads, which sent him another section above. On the fourth floor he saw some fish frying in a pan on the fire, and said to him - another stretch arriba.Y when he was on the fifth floor, he found himself before a closed room and looking through the keyhole , he discovered the godfather, carrying two long horns. A door opening, the godfather hastily got into bed, covering her head and all. Then said the man: - Lord godfather, what a strange things are in your house. When I got the first flight of stairs, they were quarreling shovel and broom and cascaban reciamente.- How simple you are! said the godfather. That was the boy and the maid who hablaban.- But on the second flight I saw on the floor many fingers muertos.- You're a fool! They were not but scorzonera. - For the third there was a lot of skulls. - Fool! They were repollos.- In the fourth, a fish fry in a pan -. At the end of saying this, the fishes, and they themselves were put on the table. - And when I had gone up to the fifth floor, I looked through the keyhole and I saw you, godfather, with long horns, largos.- Beware! This is not true! The man got scared and ran. Who knows what the godfather would have done to him!
The developer sun	1090	960	Spanish	A tailor roamed the world working on their craft. It was a season without finding work, and went so far in their misery, that there was not a farthing him. He found himself on the way to a Jew and, believing he would have a lot of money, silenced the voice of their conscience and, facing him, he said: - Give me your bag or mato.- you spare me - implored the Jewish -. I do not have money; I've only been eight Rooms.- You have money - replied the tailor - and are about to release! and she hits him so badly that killed him. The last words of the Jew were: - The sun will bring to light! - and murió.El tailor ruffled pockets for the money; but he found only eight rooms, as he had told his victim. It cargóse the body in tow, she left him in some bushes and then continued his long ruta.Tras wanderings came to a city where he found work in his office. The pattern had a beautiful daughter, which the boy fell in love. Casáronse and lived a very felices.Al after a few years time, when they had two children, in-laws died, and young people were homeowners. One morning, being the man sitting at the table next to the window, his wife served him coffee and the pour it in the pan and prepare to drink it, the rays of the sun were to give in the liquid and reflected on the wall making dance her stains on it. Watching the tailor said: - Yes, well want out birth, but you can not with curiosity asked his wife: - What's that, my husband? What do you mean But he said - is one thing you can not saber.-'d tell me if you loved me - she insisted;? and he assured, with large markups, who would not reveal it to anyone; and no longer she left him alone. Then he told her that many years ago, when he still wore a wandering life, being once penniless, murdered a Jew, who, in the throes of agony, exclaimed, "The sun will bring it to light! . " And behold, now the sun was to reveal to the draw their bright spots on the wall; but could not. Then he recommended with great commitment to the woman who did not tell anyone, because he was the head; and she would not well prometió.Pero the tailor had returned to work, she went to see his godmother and confided the secret, encareciéndole discretion and silence; However, at the end of three days he knew the whole city, and the tailor had to appear in court and was sentenced to death. And behold how the sun brought out the crime.
The drum	1829	400	Spanish	One evening a young drummer walked across the field, all alone, and arriving at the edge of a lake, she saw them lying in three pieces tiny linen. "Go some clothes beautiful!" it was said, and pocketed it. At the arriving home, he went into the bed, forgetting, for a moment, of his discovery. But when I was about to sleep, it seemed that someone calling his name. He listened and could perceive a sweet and gentle voice saying to him, "drum, drum, wake up!" As it was dark night, he could not see anyone; but I had the impression that a figure moved in front of his bed. "What do you want?" I ask. "Give me back my dress," replied the voice, "that you took last night by the lake." - "I will give you if you tell me who you are," she replied the drum. "Ah!" cried the voice, "I am the daughter of a powerful king, but fell into the hands of a witch, and am shut in Crystal Mountain Every day, my two sisters and I have to go for a swim at the lake,. but my chemise . can not resume the flight My sisters already left, but I had to stay Devuélveme the chemise, I beg you. ". - "Calm down, poor girl," said the drummer, "I will give it gladly." He took it out of his pocket, held it out in the dark. Cogióla she and I started to leave. "Wait a moment," said the boy, "maybe I can help." - "Only you could do it up to the top of the mountain of glass and tearing of the power of the mountain witch But you can not reach, even assuming you came to the foot, never scale the summit would succeed.." - "For me, love is power," said the drummer, "I inspire pity, and I fear nothing I do not know the road leading to the mountain no.." - "The road goes through the great forest populated by ogres," replied the girl, "it is all I can say." And alejarse.Al daybreak heard the soldier stood in the way. Drum-hook shoulder, adentróse fearlessly in the jungle and seeing to Cape good time to walk through it, it did not appear any giant, he thought, will be a thing to wake these sleepers. Position and put the drum and began redoblarlo so vigorously that the birds took flight with great fanfare. Shortly after a giant, he stood as tall as a pine, who had been sleeping on the grass. "Tadpole!" he shouted, "how can you think cram as much noise and wake to the best of dreams?" - "Toco," replied the drum, "to point the way to the many thousands who follow me." - "What come to look to the jungle?" She asked the giant. "They want to exterminate and clean the forest vermin of your kind." - "Wow!" cried the monster, "I'll kill stomps, as if you were ants." - "You think you'll be with us?" He said the drummer, "when you bend over to pick one, will escape and hide, and as soon as you throw to sleep, will all the bushes and you will rise above worn on the belt an iron hammer and you will leave. the cranium." The giant grew and thought: If you do not try gentecilla with the crafty, maybe go missing. Bears and wolves I pull the gullet; but before the worms of the earth I am helpless. "Hey, little man," continued loudly, "Get thee, and I promise that henceforth leave you in peace to you and yours;. In addition, if you have any desire to meet, let me know and I'll help" - "You have long legs," said the drummer, "and you can outrun me If you promise to take me to the Crystal Mountain, withdrawal will touch signal, and by this time my people will leave you alone.." - "Come, worm," she replied the giant, "Get on my shoulder and take you wherever you want." Levantólo and, from the height, our soldier began to intensify with all his strength. He thought the giant: It must be the sign that the others are removed. A the end of a salióles while on a second giant that, catching the tamborcillo, put it into the eyelet. The soldier grabbed the button, it was as big as a plate, and looked merrily around. Then they ran into with a third party which brought the little man of the eye and placed it on the brim of his hat; And here we have our soldier, walking over the pines. He spotted a blue mountain in the distance and thought, That must be crystal mountain, and indeed, it was. The giant stepped few and came to the foot of the mountain where the dismounted drum. On the ground, he asked the big man to take him to the summit; but the big man shook his head and muttering something under his breath, returned to the bosque.Y there we have a poor drum to the mountain, as high as if three, one above the other, and also smooth as a mirror. How do you cope? He tried climbing, but in vain, slippery every time. Who had wings! sigh; but to no avail desire; he did not grow wings. While I was perplexed about what to do, he saw two men walking distance heatedly disputed. Approaching them, he learned that the reason for the fight was a saddle placed on the floor and everyone wanted her for himself. "How foolish you are!" said to them, "you fight over a chair and not even have horse." - "The saddle is worth it," she replied one of the men, "who climb on it and expresses a desire to move wherever it is, even if it comes to the world in an instant is in the order place. the chair is both, and I now ride up to me, but this is opposed. " - "I'll fix the issue," he said the drummer, moved away some distance and stuck a white rod in the ground. Then he turned to the men and said: "The stick is the goal, the one that first comes to it, that mount before the other." They undertook the two race, and as they had gone a distance, our waiter climbed into the chair and expressing the desire to be transported to the top of the mountain crystal, found himself on it in the blink of an eye. The top was a plateau, in which an old stone house stood; in front of the house he stretched a large pond and behind was a big dark forest. He saw no humans or animals; there reigned absolute silence, interrupted only by the sound of the wind through the trees, and clouds scudding slid at very low altitude, over his head. He approached the door and knocked. The third call was presented to open an old very brown face and red eyes; wearing goggles riding on his long nose, and looked sharply at him, she asked what he wanted. "Entrance, food and bed," replied the drum. "I have," replied the old woman, "if you wilt perform three jobs." - "Why not?" he said, "I'm not afraid any hard work it is." Franqueóle step woman, fed him, and the night came a bed. In the morning, when he was rested, old thimble of the scrawny finger pulled, he gave it and said.. "Now working with this thimble have to empty my entire pond must finish before nightfall, sorting and arranging for groups all the fish it contains. " - "What a strange job!" He said drum, and went to the pond to empty. He worked all morning; But what can be done with a thimble with so much water, even if it were to bale for a thousand years? At noon he thought: It is useless; it does not matter who works as you leave it, and sat on the shore. Then came a girl's house and, leaving his side a basket with food, he said, "What, because I see so sad?" He lifted up his eyes, he saw that the maiden was beautiful. "Oh!" he replied, "if I can not do the first job, how will others came to redeem a princess who must live here,? but I have not found my path will continue.." - "Stay," said the girl. "I'll get you out of trouble you tired, resting her head on my lap, and sleep when you wake up, the work will be finished.." The drum did not repeat, and as soon as he closed his eyes, the girl turned to a magic ring and uttered the following words: "Water rises Fish, outside.." Immediately rose water, like a white mist, and mixed with the clouds, while the fishes sprang on the shore, standing side each other, distributed by species and sizes. A awaking, found the drum, amazed, already done all the work. But she said, "One of the fish is not yours, but alone. When the old come tonight to test for doneness work commissioned you, you will ask: What does this fish here alone? Then throw the fish face, saying: It's for you, old hag "He presented the woman when twilight and the ask the question, drum threw the fish in her face pretended she did not have noticed it and said nothing!. but his eyes him with malicious eyes the next morning he called again: "Yesterday I easily got away with it;. but today will be more difficult. You have to cut me down the whole forest, from logs and arrange them in piles; and it should be finished by nightfall "and gave him an ax, a mace and a wedge;... but the first era of lead, and the other, tinny For the first blows, the tools were hardened and crushed, leaving him unarmed Towards noon girl returned with food and comforted him: "Rest your head on my lap and sleep; . When you wake up, work will be done "Turned to the miraculous ring, and in an instant, desplomose the entire forest with a crash, the wood split, and arranged itself in heaps, it seemed as if unseen giants were finishing the work. when he awoke, the maiden said to him: "see? The wood is split and piled up; It is only loose a branch. When, tonight, I ask the old why you give a blow with the branch and answer: This is for you, old hag "Wine old:" You see, "he said," how easy the job? ?!. But what does there that branch "-" It's for you, old witch, "answered the boy, giving him a blow with her She pretended not to feel it, and, with a mocking laugh, he said: "Tomorrow we will do a lot of all this wood, you burn with fire and be completely consumed." he rose at the first light of dawn to haul the wood? but how could one man carry a forest work not ahead But she did not abandon him in his distress,. brought him at noon meal and then that was taken, he sat with his head in her lap, and fell asleep when he woke up, burned all pyre in towering flames. , whose tongues reached the sky "Listen to me," said the maid, "when the witch comes, will send you a thousand things.; beam, without fear, the command you; only then can you nothing; but if you're afraid, you will be the victim of the fire. Finally, when you've done everything, seize her with both hands and throw it into the fire "The maiden departed, and little, the old woman came." Oops, I am cold, "he said," but that there burns a! fire that warmed me my old bones. How good! There I see a blockhead does not burn; get it out. If you do, you are free and you can leave wherever you want. ! Ala, in without fear "The drum did not think much and jumped amid the flames.. But they did not burn, not even singed the hair picked up the tarugo and pulled him from the pyre But just wood he had touched the ground was transformed, and our waiter was standing before him the beautiful maiden who had helped him during difficult times. and silk dresses and gold she wore, she realized that it was the princess. the old burst in a diabolical laugh and said, "you think it's already yours; but it is not yet "and was about to pounce on the maid to take her;. but he grabbed the witch with both hands, set it up in the air and threw it into the flames, which they quickly closed over her as eager to devour the hechicera.La princess stared at the drum, and seeing that it was a gallant and handsome young man, thinking he had risked his life to redeem her, holding out his hand said: "you have exposed me; Now, I'll do it for you. If you promise fidelity, you'll be my husband. We will not lack wealth; we will have enough with what the witch has gathered here. "She led him to the house, where they found crates and full crates of treasures. They left gold and silver, and took only the precious stones. Not wanting to stay longer in the crystal mountain said drum princess: "Sit in my chair and go down flying like birds." - "I do not like this my old chair," she replied, "only to turn my magic ring're home." - "Well," he nodded, "then wish us at the gate of the city." they were in it in a jiffy, and drummer said, "Before I go to see my parents and tell them the news. Wait for me here in the country; I not take to return "-" Oh, "said the maid," looks very carefully.!; .? When you get home, do not kiss your parents on the right cheek, if you did, you'd forget everything, and I left alone and abandoned in the "-" How can you forget "he replied; and promised to be back very soon. When he arrived at his father's house, no one knew. so much had changed! it turns out that the three days spent on the mountain were actually three long years. Diose known, and his parents threw him to the neck with joy, and was the so excited lad who, forgetting the recommendation of his betrothed, kissed on both cheeks and at the moment he slammed the kiss on the cheek right. borrósele full of memory everything about the princess. emptied his pockets, put on the table handfuls of precious stones, so that the parents did not know what to do with so much wealth. the father built a magnificent castle surrounded by gardens, woods and meadows, as if dest inara to the residence of a prince. When he was finished, the mother said: "I chose a bride for you, within three days we will celebrate the wedding." The son agreed with everything they wanted their padres.La poor princess was a long time waiting at the entrance of the city around her fiance. At nightfall, he said: "Surely He kissed his parents on the right cheek, and has forgotten me." Her heart was full of sorrow and asked to return to the lonely house the forest, away from the court of his father. Every evening she went into town and walked past the house of the young man, he saw her many times, but did not recognize. In the end, he heard people saying: "Tomorrow is celebrated their wedding." I will try to regain her heart, she thought. And the first day of the feast, turning the magic ring, said: "I want a dress shining like the sun." Then he had the dress in her hands; and its brightness was such that tissue appeared pure rays. When all the guests were assembled, she entered the room. Everyone present admired contemplating such a magnificent dress; but the most admired was the bride, whose greatest desire was to get those trappings. He therefore turned to the stranger and asked if he wanted to sell. "Not for money," she replied, "but I'll give it if you allow me to spend the night at the door of the room of the groom." The bride, with the desire to possess the pledge, agreed; but she mixed a sleeping pill in the wine servíase to groom, so he remained mired in deep sleep. When and silence reigned throughout the palace, Princess, clinging to the door of the bedroom, opened, said loudly: "Tambor mine, listen to my palabras.¿Te Forgot your beloved, the Haunted Mountain do? witch will not save my life? no you swore fidelity rendered me? Tambor mine, listen to my words. " But it was all in vain; the drum did not wake up, and the morning came, the princess had to withdraw without having achieved its purpose. In the evening of the second day, again rotating the ring and said: "I want a silver dress like the moon." And when he showed up at the party in her new dress, racing the moon in softness and delicacy, he reawakened the greed of the bride, also achieving conformity that pass the second night at the door of the bedroom. And in the middle of the night silence, he returned to exclaim: "Tambor mine, listen to my palabras.¿Te Forgot loved the Haunted Witch Mountain does not save you, my life Do not you swore fidelity rendered me? ? Tambor mine, listen to my words. " But the drum under the influence of narcotics, is also not awakened, and the girl, the morning came, had to return. sadly, to his home in the woods. But the people of the palace had heard the lamentations of the princess and realized this to the boyfriend, also saying that he would hear was impossible, because the wine was taken to lying down mixed a narcotic. At the third day, the princess turned the prodigious ring and said: "I want a dress glittering like the stars." A appearing at the party, the bride was stunned by the magnificence of the new suit, much more beautiful than before, and said, "It must be mine, and will be." The princess gave it as the previous times, in exchange for permission to spend the night at the door of the apartment of her boyfriend. East. however, wine served him going to bed is not made, but poured it behind the bed. And when the whole house was silence, he could hear the voice of the maid, who told him: "My Drum, listen to my palabras.¿Te Forgot loved the Haunted Witch Mountain do not you I saved my life? No you swore me fidelity rendidaTambor me, listen to my words. " And suddenly he regained his memory. "Oh," he exclaimed, "how you might have acted so unfaithfully fault was the kiss I gave my parents on the right cheek;!. He stunned me" And, rushing to the door and taking the hand of the princess, he took her to his parents' bed. "This is my promise true," said, "and if I do not marry her, a great wrong." Parents, the learning of everything that happened, gave their consent. They were lit again lights the room, drums and trumpets sounded, envióse invitation to friends and relatives, and the wedding was solemnized with the greatest joy. He promised the other stayed with the beautiful dresses, and with them was satisfied.
The old Rinkrank	1855	311	Spanish	Once upon a time a king who had a daughter. He had built a mountain of glass and said: - He that is able to run it without falling, will marry my hija.He here that he presented a suitor and asked King if he could get hand princesa.- Yes -respondióle the King; if you can run up the mountain without falling, the princess will tuya.Dijo then the daughter of the King who would go with him and hold him if he fell. They began the ascent, and the reach halfway up the princess slipped and fell and, opening the mountain, then rushed into her womb without the suitor could see where it had gone, because the mountain had again soon close. Cried the boy Lamentóse and unspeakable, and the King was very sad, and gave orders to break and excavate the mountain hoping to rescue his daughter; but there was no way to find the place where he had caído.Entretanto, Princess, rolling down the abyss, had gone for a very deep and huge cave, where he went to meet a very old character, with long white beard, and he said that would save her life if Avenia maid to serve him and do everything to send him; otherwise he would kill her. She fulfilled all his orders. In the morning came, the individual stairs of the pocket and, resting against the mountain, and climbed through it and went outside, then return to pick up caring for the stairs. She had to cook your food, make your bed and a thousand more jobs; and so every day; and every time he returned the man, brought with it a lot of gold and silver. At the end of many years and follow things and have aged him exceedingly, gave to call her "Mother Mansrot," and sent her to call her him "Old Rinkrank." One day the old man had gone as usual she made the bed and washed the dishes. Then he closed all doors and windows, leaving open only one window slide by entering light. When the old Rinkrank returned, he knocked on the door, saying - Mother Mansrot, open to me - she said No, no, old Rinkrank, I'll open!. He then said: "Here is the poor Rinkrank on its feet seventeen, on his golden foot Mother Mansrot, the dishes.." - I have scoured the dishes she replied. And he continued: "Here is the poor Rinkrank on its feet seventeen, on his golden foot Mother Mansrot, make me bed.." - I made your bed, 'she said. He, again: "Here is the poor Rinkrank on its feet seventeen, on his golden foot Mother Mansrot, open the door.." Giving back to the house, he saw that the little window was open, and thought, "I will miss a peek to see what he is doing, and why he refuses to open the door. " And, trying to get his head through the window, she stopped her beard. Then he began introducing his beard in the window, and, when I was inside, came Mother Mansrot, closed the gate and tied with a ribbon, leaving securely fastened, with beard imprisoned him. What was the old screams, moaning and groaning in pain and begging the woman who let go! But she replied that she would not change but the stairs he left the mountain. Tying a long rope to the window, placed ladder and climbed it properly until opencast; then pulling from above, cover up the skylight. then Marchóse in search of his father and told him his adventures. King was glad and told her that her boyfriend was still alive. And digging out all the mountain, they found the bottom to the Old Rinkrank with all his gold and silver. The king commanded to execute the old and took all his treasures. The princess married her boyfriend, and lived happy and satisfied.
The old Sultan	454	101	Spanish	A peasant had a faithful dog called "Sultan," that old had done in his service and because he had no teeth to hold his presa.Un day, the farmer being with his wife at the door of the house, said: - Tomorrow will kill the old "Sultan"; no longer serves nada.La woman, pitying animal faithful responded: - We have served for so many years, ever so faithfully, that we could now give limosna.- bread What you say, woman! He replied the farmer. You're not in your right mind! No one tusk is left in the mouth, no thief afraid; He has already completed its mission. If you have served us, he has not lacked his good meal.The poor dog, who was lying a short distance sunbathing, heard the conversation and entróle great sadness at the thought that the next day would be the last of his life. It was in the woods a good friend, the wolf, and the late afternoon, went to see him to tell him how lucky esperaba.- Courage, 'I compadre said the wolf, I'll get you out of trouble. I have an idea. Tomorrow, at dawn, your master and his wife will find grass and will have to take their little child, because there will not be nobody home. While they work, they usually leave the child in the shadow of the fence. You will put your hand to watch. I will leave the forest and steal the creature, and you will simulate you leave me persecution. Then, I will release a small, and parents, thinking you've saved, and will not want to cause you any harm, they are grateful people; before, to the contrary, henceforth they will treat you like a king and not lack either the dog nada.Parecióle combination, and out just as it had been planned. Father broke into loud cries to seeing the wolf escaped with his son; but when the old "Sultan" brought him safely to the little boy, caressing thrilled to the animal, he said: - No one will touch a hair on your skin, and not lack sustenance while Vivas. Then he turned to his wife: - Go home right away and you cook to "Sultan" Great soups of bread, you do not have to bite those, and you put on your pillow litter my bed; is the regalo.Y, from that day, "Sultan" a life of príncipe.Al Soon the wolf came to visit him, congratulating him on how well he had left the ardid.- But, she added compadre, he will now be a thing you do when I was present the opportunity to take a sheep from your master blind eye. Today it is very difficult to make LIFE.- That do not count -respondióle the dog; I am faithful to my own, and this can not transigir.El wolf thought it was not serious, and the night came callandito presented himself, intending to steal a sheep; but the farmer, whom the loyal "Sultan" had revealed the purposes of the wild beast was stalking, armed with the flail, and gave him a beating he would not let him healthy bone. The wolf ran off with his tail between his legs; but he yelled at the dog: - Wait, bad friend, me going to pay the next morning the wolf sent the boar looking for the dog, with custom quote him in the forest, to settle their differences!. Poor "Sultan" found no more aid than a cat that had only three legs, and as they headed for the appointment, the poor pussycat had to hop about, straightening his tail every time, of the pain that this exercise caused him. The wolf and wild boar were already at the agreed place, waiting for the dog; But the view from afar, brandishing a sword believed, for such it seemed the upright tail of the cat. As for the latter, advancing by leaps and bounds on its three legs, they thought they ever picked up a stone to throw it later. The two buddies got scared them; the wild boar crept into the brush, and the wolf jumped up a tree. To get the dog and the cat, wondered that not see anyone. The boar, however, had been unable to hide from the all the bushes and ears out. The cat, to directing a look around cautiously, saw something moving and thinking it was a mouse, he jumped up and bit full force. The boar ran shrieking wildly and shouting: - The culprit is on the tree Cat and dog looked up and discovered the wolf, who, ashamed of having shown himself so timid, made peace with "Sultan."
the tinderbox	1998	562	Spanish	On the road leaving a soldier marking time. A, two, one, two! He had his knapsack to the shoulder and a sword at his side, then came the war, and was now his people. But behold he met on the road with an old hag. Ugh !, what !, bugbear with that lower lip that hung to his chest. "Good evening, soldier!" Told him. "Beautiful sable take, and what backpack so great! You're a soldier through and through. I will teach you how to have all the money you want." "Thank you, old witch!" replied the soldier. "See that tree so large?" He continued the old woman, pointing to one that grew within walking distance. "The inside is completely hollow Well, you have to climb to the top and see a hole;. You gliding effortlessly through it until you get very bottom of the trunk you'll tie a rope around the waist to become up when you call.." " What I will do in the tree? " He asked the soldier. "Withdrawing money!" She cried the witch. "Look, when you're at the foot of the trunk you find a large clear corridor since it illuminate more than lamps hundred'll see three gates.. You can open them, as they have the key in the lock to the enter the first room you find . the center a big box with a dog sitting on top of it the animal has as big as coffee cups eyes, but do not worry I'll give you my blue apron;. I stretch out on the floor, grab quickly to the dog, the deposit on apron and you embolsas all the money they want, they are coppers If you prefer silver, you must go into the other room;. it is a dog with eyes as big as millstones;. but this should not worry I put on . apron and grab money from the cash Now, if you want more gold, you can also get it, much as you like, for that you must enter the third room Mas dog in it has eyes as big as. Round tower. to this Call or a dog really! But nothing to scare you. I put it on my apron, and will not do you any harm, and you'll be out of the box all the money you please. "" Not bad! "Said the soldier." But what am I to give you, old witch? Well, I guess you'll want something for you. "" No, "replied the woman," not a penny. For me thou shalt bring forth an old tinderbox that my grandmother forgot there, when he was in the tree the last time. "" Well, tie me and the rope around his waist, "agreed the soldier." There you go, "he replied the witch , "and also take my apron blue." climbed up the soldier to the top of the tree, he slid down the hole and, as I told the witch, he soon found himself in the corridor spacious in burning the lámparas.Y opened the first door. Ugh was there dog eyes as big as teacups, staring at him. "Good boy!" said the soldier, catching the animal and placing it on the apron witch. Llenóse then the pockets of coins copper closed the box again put the dog up and went to the next room. in fact, there was the dog eyes like millstones. "you had better not looking at me like," he said. "you're going to hurt view. "And the dog sat on the apron. a much seeing the silver box, threw all copper coins carried and pockets and the backpack of the white metal was filled. He then went on to the third chamber. That had bad turn; the dog had, in fact, eyes as big as the Round Tower, and moved as if they were millstones. "Good night!" said the soldier, touching his cap, dog like that because I had not seen in his life. Once it was observed well, he thought, "Well, is already seen," he grabbed the dog, put it on the floor and opened the box. Lord, and what piles of gold! Would like to buy the whole city of Copenhagen, with all piggies marzipan cake shops and all the tin soldiers, whips and rocking wooden horses of the world. Over there yes there was gold, word! He threw all the silver coins he had on him, replaced them with other gold and pockets, knapsack, cap and boots so that he could hardly move filled. It was not just rich, now! He put a dog on the box, closed the door and through the gap in the trunk, shouted: "Beam me up now, old witch!" "You got the tinderbox"? the woman asked. "Yikes!" She cried the soldier, "because I'd forgotten!" And he went to get the bag, with tinder and flint inside. The old woman took from the tree, and found our man on the road again, with pockets, boots, knapsack and cap full of gold. "What do you want the tinderbox?" He asked the soldier. "That do not mind!" He replied the witch. "You already have your money, now give me the bag." "Yea, yes, eh"? She cried the boy. "You tell me right away what you want the tinderbox, or unsheathed his sword and cut your head off you!" "No!" He insisted the mujer.Y the soldier severed head and set down the body witch. I put all the money in her apron, colgóselo back like a bundle, put the tinderbox and also a magnificent population went straight to the ciudad.Era, and our man entered the best of their inns and asked for the best room and favorite dishes, because it was rich with both dinero.Al servant who was ordered to clean his boots it occurred that were very old for such a rich gentleman; but he had not yet bought new ones. In the next day he bought a pair of boots as God commands and elegant dresses. And there you have turned to the soldier in a great lord. They told him all the splendors containing the city, and spoke of the King and how precious was the princess, her daughter. "Where can you see?" asked the soldier. "There is no means of seeing it," they replied. "He lives in a large copper castle, surrounded by many walls and towers. No one except the king, can come and go, as there is the prophecy that the princess will marry a common soldier, and the monarch does not want to go through it . "" I would see her, "he thought the soldier; but there was no way to get a man autorización.El had a great life: going to the theater, walking drive through the park and gave much money to the poor, which said much in his favor. He remembered very well how hard it is to have a fat bitch. Now he was rich, wore beautiful costumes and made many friends, who regarded him as an excellent person, a true gentleman, which liked the soldier. But like every day was spending money and never entered a penny, to the end we were only two farthings. Had to leave the luxurious rooms had become accustomed to and staying in the attic, in a small room under the roof sleazy, he cleaned boots and sew them with a large needle. And his friends stopped visiting; It had to climb many stairs! One day, after dark, he found he could not be bought or a candle, and then remembered a piece of tinder that was in the bag taken Witch tree. He reached the bag and pulled the piece of tinder; and behold, at the percutirla with flint and sparks fly, suddenly opened the door and the dog eyes appeared like coffee cups were found in the tree, saying, "What sends my lord" "What it means this?" He inquired the soldier. "What a funny tinderbox, if I get him what he wants Bring me some money," he ordered the dog; he retired, and was back in a jiffy with a big bag of money in the boca.Entonces the wonderful soldier under his tinderbox learned. If he struck once, he was appearing dog box copper coins; if twice, presented the silver, and if three, came that of gold. Our soldier returned to his luxurious rooms of the first floor, dressed himself again with rich garments, and his friends again put by nubes.Un day came a thought: "It's very strange that there no way to see the princess! . it must be very beautiful, but what does it profit, whether to spend his life in the palace of copper surrounded by walls and towers? No way would see it? Where is the tinderbox? " and the light the tinder, dog with big eyes like cups of coffee showed up. "I know we're late at night," said the soldier, "but I would much rather see the princess, if only one time. "the dog retreated quickly, and before he had soldier time to think, came back with the maid, she came sitting on her back, asleep, and it was so beautiful that the league saw that She was a princess. The soldier could not resist and kissed her; something was done and then a soldier derecho.Marchóse the dog with the maid; but when the morning came the King and Queen, her daughter told them she had a dream strange, a dog and a soldier. She was riding in a dog, and the soldier had kissed her. "Well go history!" exclaimed the Reina.Y arranged for the following night an old bridesmaid will remain on duty at the bedside of the princess, to ascertain whether or not it was a sueño.Al soldier entered some crazy desire to return to see the daughter of the King, and at night called the dog, who came hastily to his room with the girl in tow; but the old lady ran as much as he, and noting that his mistress disappeared into a house, he thought: "Now I know where he is," and a piece of chalk drew a great cross on the door. then he returned to palace and lay down; but the dog, to the realization of the cross marked on the door, drew other equal in every other city. It was a great idea, because the lady could not distinguish the door, since all had a cruz.Al dawn, the King, the Queen, the maid of honor and all the officers came to find out where the princess had been. "It's here!" exclaimed the King seeing the first door with a cross on it. "No, it's there, honey!" said the Queen, seeing a second door with the same picture. "But if there is everywhere!" observed others who would look for wherever they saw crosses on the doors. Then they realized it was useless to continue buscando.Pero the Queen was a very sly lady, whose science was not limited in knowing carriage ride. Taking its large gold scissors, he cuts a silk fabric and compiled a cute bag. The then filled with buckwheat groats and tied it to the back of the princess, opening a hole in it, so that during the road was sémola.Por out the night came again the dog rode the princess on his back and led her to the window of the soldier, climbing up the wall until habitación.A the next morning the King and Queen discovered where talks were carried her daughter, and sending apprehend the soldier, he was locked in cárcel.Sí sir, to jail went. How dark and ugly was the cell! And if all stop at that! "Tomorrow will be hanged," he said. The outlook was not very happy, to say; moreover, he had left the tinder-box at home. In the morning he could see, by the narrow gate of the prison, like all people of the city came hurrying to attend the execution; he heard the drums and saw the parade of troops. Everyone ran; In the crowd was an apprentice shoemaker in apron and slippers, galloped so fast that one of the slippers he shot out and went for the wall that was the gate through which looked at the soldier. "Hey, shoemaker , Do not run so much!" he shouted, "do nothing without me. But if you want to go to my house and bring me my tinderbox, I'll give you four shillings. But you have to go light!" The Apprentice, happy at the prospect of earning a few bob, ran to the inn and soon be back with the bag, which he handed to the soldier. And now comes the good Hidden in the Woods had erected a gallows, and formed around the troops and the crowd thronged: thousands of people. The King and Queen occupied a magnificent throne, facing the court and counsel in pleno.El soldier was already at the top of the stairs, but when they wanted to adjust your rope to the neck, begged, before fulfilled the punishment, he allow, poor sinner, meet an innocent desire to smoke a pipe, the latter would enjoy in this world.The King could not refuse such a modest request, and the soldier, taking the tinder and flint, hit them once, twice, three times . Immediately three dogs were presented. The eye as coffee cups, which had as millstones, and those of the size of the Round Tower "Help prevent hang me," the soldier said. And the dogs fell upon the judges and especially the Council, grabbing one by the legs and the other by the nose and throwing them into the air, so high, that falling all were shattered. "To me no, My no!" She cried the King; but the greatest of dogs attacked him and the Queen, and threw them where the others were. In the view, the soldiers were frightened, and all the people shouted, "Good soldier, you shall be our king and marry the beautiful princess!" And then they sat down to the soldier in the royal carriage, the three dogs led the way, dancing and shouting "hurray !," while the boys whistled through their fingers, and the troops presented arms. The princess left the palace of copper and it was Reina. And well you knew him! The wedding lasted eight days, and dogs sitting by the table, attended her with her big eyes wide open.
the stripling	1446	922	Spanish	Once There Was a stripling, famous in many leagues around by their thoughtful responses and discrete. His fame reached the ears of the King, which, not giving credence to what had of the boy, she sent for him to their presence. He said to him - if you can correctly answer three questions that you'll make, you'll live with me in the palace as if you were my own hijo.- What are the questions? - said muchacho.- First - said the king - tell me how many drops of water are in the océano.A what the lad replied: - Lord King, ordered to stop all the rivers of the earth, so that no in the sea or a drop of water more until I have told the, and then I will tell you that contains the océano.- here is the second question - continued the King -: How many stars are in the sky - Give me a sheet large paper - said the cowherd. And he drew on it with a pen as many dots and so tight that hardly distinguishable from each other; It was impossible to count them, and clouding the view of whom stared. Then he said -: in heaven many stars as dots on the paper. Count them, and you will know! But no one was able to do. And the King continued: - Will the third question: How many seconds have eternity - In Pomerania - answered the boy - there is a mountain of diamonds: has a league high, one wide and one background. Hundred years settles in her a bird and it sharpens its beak. For when the whole mountain is worn, the first second of the eternidad.Entonces have elapsed Rey said: - You have answered the three questions like a true sage. Henceforth you will live in my palace and I take it as my own son.
Fox and his comadre	701	4	Spanish	The wolf gave birth to a cub and invited the fox to be godfather. - It is our close relative said, has good understanding and skill, can teach many things my son and help him thrive in the world.The fox was considered very honest and said in turn: - My lady respectable comadre, I give thank you for the honor makes me. I will try to reciprocate so that it is always glad mí.En the party gave a good binge, he got cheerful and ending, he spoke thus: - Dear Mrs. comadre: it is our duty to care for the child. You must procure good food you gain a lot of strength. I know a sheep pen that could make a tasty bocado.Gustóle the wolf song and left in the company of the fox toward the farmhouse. At the draw near, the fox showed him the house, saying: - You can enter without being seen by anyone, while I flip on the other side; may be able to become a gallinita.Pero rather than go to the farm, in tumbóse input forest and stretching the legs, he began to dormir.La wolf entered the pen with all stealth; but he had a dog that barked; attended farmers and, surprising lady with the midwife handed, gave such flaying that was not allowed to healthy bone. At the end he managed to escape and went to the meeting of the fox, which, adopting a plaintive attitude, he exclaimed: - Oh, my dear lady comadre! And how bad I've had! The peasants caught me, and have spanked me a great time. If you do not want to stretch the leg here, you will have to take me to cuestas.La wolf just could with his soul; but the fox I gave him so carefully, he laid on his back and took her home to his compadre, who was healthy and good. At the farewell, said to Fox: - Goodbye, dear lady comadre, and that makes you enjoy your meal roast! - and, dropping the big laugh, he ran.
The singing zurrón	3784	327A	Spanish	Once upon a mother who had no more than a child, I wanted very much, because the girl was very good; so she had given him a choker coral.Un day told him to go for cantarito water source that was out of place. It was the girl, and when he reached the fountain, took off her necklace of coral so that you will not fall into the basin in time to fill the cántaro.Junto the fountain sat a very ugly, old panhandler wearing a knapsack and he looked at the girl with eyes ... she got scared; and just he filled the pitcher, when he ran and left forgotten the gargantilla.Al enter his home, missed, and returned hastily to the source to find it; When he arrived, he was still there the old man, who took the child and licked in the bag. Then, he went to ask alms house, saying he brought wonderful, and it was a satchel singing. And you see; people wanted to hear, and the old man said in a voice of thunder Zurrón sings; if you do not give this poor girl lanza.La, scared to death, had no choice but to get to sing, which made tears of this way: by water went to the fountain outside the place, and I lost my necklace, choker coral. Oh the mother of my soul, what will be angry! then to the fountain turned me, if I could find my lost necklace, choker coral. Oh the mother of my soul, what a rush it is! I found my necklace, choker coral, I found my necklace, and I lost my freedom. Oh the mother of my soul, what you will be afflicted! The girl sang so well that the people loved to hear them, so that everywhere gave a lot of money because the old chant the zurrón.Viendo and from house to house, came to the girl's mother, and as this heard the song, she met her daughter's voice, and said to the poor: Man, the weather is very bad: the wind rises and fattens water; Stay you here tonight collected, and give the poor dinner.The wine in it, and the girl's mother gave him so very much to eat and drink, which ballooned, so after dinner, fell asleep more difunto.Entonces pulled a satchel mother her child, who was my soul heladita and faint; gave him kisses, wine biscuits, and went to bed and tucked her in bed, and in the bag got a dog and a gato.A the next morning gave thanks old, and was so careless. In the first house he came he said, as he had said the day before, to the zurrón: Zurrón, sing and if you do not give this spear point said the dog: - Pícaro, old, wow, uau.Y cat! - perverse old meow, miau.Enojado the poor, believing the girl sang well, he opened the bag to punish; Then they went raging dog and cat, and the cat was rushed to the face and pulled his eyes and the dog bit off his nose, and ... although witness I have not been, so I have referred you .
Choice of bride	1476	1452	Spanish	Once upon a shepherd boy who wanted to marry. He knew three sisters, one as beautiful as the other, so it was difficult election and was undecided about which of the three would prefer. He sought advice from his mother, and she told him: - invites the three and cheese serve them; cortan.Hízolo and see how well the young man and saw that the first cheese was eaten with the crust; the second separated the crust, but it was so sloppy that she pulled a good piece of good cheese; the third, however, it mondaba with great care, without removing too much nor too little. The pastor explained everything to his wife MOTHER'll be the third - said to ésta.El boy followed his advice, and lived happy and content with his wife.
Elisa, skinny	1603	1430	Spanish	Elisa skinny thought very differently than loafer and Trini fat Enrique, who had no way to get out of bed. Went the extra mile to work from morning to night, and forced to work for her husband, Lorenzo spindly, so that the poor what happened worse than a donkey under the load of three sacks. But all was useless; nor they had anything or getting the least prosper. One night, he is lying down and so exhausted he could barely wiggle, the thoughts would not let her sleep. She woke her husband a nudge in the ribs, and said: - Listen, Lorenzo. You know what I thought? Well, if I were a shield and someone I gave away another, I would borrow a third party and you'd give me one; and so with the four, he buys a cow joven.No seemed wrong idea man: - Of course - observed - do not know where I'm going to get the coat you want me to give you. Anyway, if you had the money and you were enough to buy a cow, holy obrarías implementing your idea. I love to think - he added - that the cow could have a ternerita; at the least he could, from time to time, take a small glass of leche.- milk would not be for you - replied the woman - because the calf would suckle for fattened and we could sell bien.- true - she nodded her husband -; plus a little bit of milk, might well catch me; no harm would in ello.- And what do you know about cows? - replied the woman. Whether or not it bad, do not want, and as much as emperres do not will taste a drop of milk. Big Guy, you're never sick! You think I'll let you swallow so much sacrifice has cost me - Women - replied Lorenzo -. Shut up or I arreo one bofetada.- What! - she said -; You dare to threaten me, glutton, rogue, slacker! -, and he tried to grab hairs; but the lanky husband stood up and, with one hand holding arms Elisa scrubby, with the other he pressed his head against the pillow and held it until she got tired of pests take and fell asleep. I do not know it is whether, waking up to the next day, went looking for him camorra or went in search of the shields needed.
Elsa List	321	1450	Spanish	Once upon a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Else. When he was older, the father said: "It must be married." - "Yes," her mother said, "so that someone wants!" At the end he came from far away a young man named John, who asked her hand, putting on condition that the girl was judiciously. "Oh," she said the father, "our Elsa is no fool!" And the mother said, "Oh, is she can see the wind running and hear the flies cough." - "So, well," I said John, "because if it is not very wise, not love." While all desktop, the mother said: "Elsa, down to the basement and bring beer." Clever Else took the jug from the wall and went to the basement, making sound vividly the cover along the way to distract yourself. He reached down, looked for a stool, put it in front of the barrel and sat down to not having to bend down, so would not do damage to the back and cogiese some evil stranger. Then put the jug in place and turned on the faucet and to avoid having idle eyes as he left the beer, he went to the top of the wall and, after take them from one end to another repeatedly discovered, just above his head, a pickaxe that bricklayers had left there by mistake. Elsa the list began to mourn, saying to himself: "If I marry John and have a son, when he grows up, send it to the cellar to draw beer, it pickaxe might fall on his head and kill him." And sitting there crying stayed that shouts loudly about the possible accident. Meanwhile, upstairs waited for the drink, but did not appear Elsa list. Finally the mother told the maid: "Go to the basement to see what happens to our Elsa." The maid went and found Elsa sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. "Elsa, why are you crying like that?" She asked the maid. "Oh!" Elsa said. "How I will not mourn! If I marry John and we have a son and comes to grow and come here to draw beer, perhaps, that pickaxe falls on his head and kills him." And the servant said, "Go Elsa list we have!" and, sitting beside him, also he began to mourn for the accident. He spent a while, as the maid not to come upstairs and had thirst, the father said to the servant, "Go down to the basement, Elsa and see where the maid will have been." He went down and found the servant Elsa crying and the maid. He asked: "Why do you weep?" - "Ouch!" Elsa I said, "No, should I mourn! If I marry Hans, and we have a son, and reaches more, and send it here to draw beer cellar, perhaps dropping the pickax over his head and kill him." And the servant said, "Wow Elsa list we have!" and, sitting beside her, he began to turn to mourn her eyes out. Top awaited the return of the servant; but seeing that he was coming either, he said the husband to his wife: "Down with you to the basement to see what he is doing Elsa." He dropped his wife and found the three tears that could no more and asked the cause, and the explain Elsa that his future son, if she have it, maybe die of the blow that would give the pickax, if was right to like up when, already higher, enviasen for beer. Mother once told her: "Oh, what Elsa's list have!" and, sitting down, she began to make chorus with others. Upstairs, the man waited a while, but as his wife did not return and thirst never ceased, he said: "I will go down myself to the basement, to see what he is doing Elsa." A coming into the basement and see everyone sitting crying, and hearing the reason of that grief, of which was to blame the son of Elsa, which, assuming she bring him to the world, could die victim of the pickaxe if a day fell the tool at the right time to meet him under filling a jug of beer, exclaimed: "Wow Elsa list we have!" and he sat down to mourn with others. The groom went up only long time until, seeing that no one ever returned, he thought, "I will be waiting downstairs, I'll have to go see what happens." In the downstairs, he saw the five sitting there, screaming and moaning more and better. "But what unfortunately happened here?" I ask. "Oh, dear John," Elsa said. "Imagine we're married and have a son and the child grows, and that perhaps we send him to seek beer and fall below the pickaxe on his head and kill him! Is not to mourn?" - "Wow!" Juan said, "more lesteza no need in my house. Elsa, I will marry you, because you're so clever." And, taking her hand, she led her up and soon after boda.Cuando held and carried a married season, the husband said, "Woman, I'm off to work, you have to make money for us You go to the field to harvest. wheat to make bread. " - "Yes, my dear John, I will." When John was gone, Elsa good porridge was cooked and brought to the field. A getting to him, he said to himself, "What do I reap first, or eat first Bah I eat?!." It arrebañó the plate of porridge and when he was fed up, wondered again: "What do I reap or nap Bah !, sleep first?". And he lays in the middle of wheat and fell asleep. John and made good time that I was back, and seeing that Elsa did not return, he said: "What a clever woman I have, and so laborious, that does not even think about going home to eat!" But as night came and she continued without appearing, Juan headed to the field to see what was mown. And behold there was unharvested anything but lay there and sleeping in the middle of wheat. So John went back to his house and returned immediately, with a net to hunt birds, from which hung small bells, and hung around the body. He returned home, shut the door and, sitting in his chair, he went to work. Finally, it was dark, Clever Else woke up and sitting up, noticed a rattling around, as the bells rang at each step. He was frightened and bewildered, wondering whether it was the Elsa list, and ended by asking: "Am I or am I not?" But I did not know what to say, and remained a good time on that question until finally he thought: "I will go home to ask if I am or not, they will know for sure." And ran to the door of her house; but he found it closed. Then he knocked on the window, shouting: 'John is Elsa at home "-" Yes, "replied John," yes it is "She, frightened, exclaimed:". My God, then I am not I "and he was to call another door, but hearing the noise that people of bells, all refused to open, so they did not find refuge in any part of the people fled and no one has heard from her..
Henry loafer	1565	1430	Spanish	Enrique was very lazy, and although his work was limited to take every day to graze their goats, every night, returning from injury, said with a sigh: - it sure is heavy and tedious having to carry the goat, one year if and another too, until majorly fall, to graze the meadow. If at the least one could lie down and sleep! But no; you need to be with your eyes open and watch the animal will not leak, do not damage the shoots, or jump hedges or get into the orchards. How you can have one tranquility and enjoy life! He sat down and concentrating on his thoughts, he was pondering how to take that burden off your shoulders. He removed a long time without finding solution until suddenly it seemed as though scales fell from my eyes: - I know what I'll do! - he cried -; I will marry the Trini fat. She also has a goat; you can get her out to graze with mine, and I will not have to go atormentándome.Levantóse therefore and setting in motion their tired legs, he crossed the street as front living parents of Trini fat, to ask the hand of his laborious and virtuous daughter. Parents did not think much. "Birds of a feather, flock together," they thought, and acquiesced. And Trini convirtióse fat in women of Henry and took two goats to graze. He lived happily with no other concern than his own laziness. Only occasionally accompanied to the field to his wife - I do it just for me around more enjoyable rest. Otherwise, does one lose taste in reposo.Pero it turned out that Trini was no less lazy fat your marido.- Enrique mine - said one day - why agriarnos life unnecessarily and wasting best times of our youth? Would not it be better to sell our neighbor the two goats, each morning wake us with their bleating, in exchange for a hive? The we would put behind the house, in a sunny place, and no longer should we worry more about her. The bees do not have to store them or take them to the meadow; themselves tend to fly out there, they know the way back and store their honey, no hassle for dueño.- Spoken like a woman wise and knows what is said - said Enrique -. We'll do so right away. In addition, honey is more flavorful and nutritious than goat's milk, and saved over time.The neighbor willingly changed the two goats for a hive. Bees flew tirelessly from early morning until late at night, filling the hive rich honey; and so on come the fall, Enrique could fill her good will jarra.Guardaron the jar on a shelf nailed to the top of the wall of her bedroom, and, fearing that someone might steal or mice will go up to her Trini stout hazel a stick and put it beside the bed sought to have it at the fingertips without having to get up and, from the bed to scare away arrear or lazy guests inoportunos.El Enrique kept the sheets before noon: - early bird - used to say - dissipates its hacienda.Una morning, being still in bed, resting from his long sleep, he told his wife: - a women like sweet, and you're gobbled you honey. It would be better, before you eat the whole, we buy her a goose and patito.- But not before a child to care for them have - said Trini -. You think I'll carry you all, the work of raising them, consuming my strength for nothing? - And you imagine that the child will keep the geese? Today, children no longer obey, make his holy will, because they think smarter than their parents. Remember, if not, to that young man who sent for the cow lost, and he devoted himself to running after a mirlos.- Oh! - replied Trini - what is mine, what will happen if he does wrong what command him. I'll take a stick and skin curtiré bastonazos.Agarró the hazel stick at his side to ward off mice and, brandishing it in his excitement, he shouted: - You see, Henry? So I'll spank! And was unlucky to hit a homer to pitcher rack. He gave it against the wall, fell to the floor in tatters, and all honey poured and esparció.- There you our goose and duck - Enrique said -; and no need to save. Anyway, it was lucky that the pitcher did not fall on his head; We can consider ourselves very afortunados.Y as I saw that one of the pieces had been a little honey, he reached out to catch him, saying: - Look, woman, and then savor this little rest after the scare. No matter what we get up a little later 'than usual. The day is very long - Yes - Trini said - always on time. You know? Once the snail invited to a wedding; He was on his way, and instead of coming to the wedding came to the christening. In front of the house he stumbled, fell from the top of the fence and said - well say that haste is always bad!
Frederick and Catherine	561	1387	Spanish	There was once a man named Federico, and a woman named Catherine, who had just married and began their married life. One day the husband said. "Catherine, I go to the field, when I return, I have on the table a little barbecue to satisfy hunger, and a cool drink to quench thirst" - "Begone quiet, I'll take care of everything." A approaching lunchtime, the woman picked up a sausage fireplace, cast it in a pan, covered with butter and put on fire. The sausage began to brown and make chup, chup Catalina !, while holding the handle of the pan, let your thoughts fly. Suddenly it occurred: While just brown the sausage, I'll go down to the cellar to prepare the drink. Leaving, then, he secured the pan, grabbed a pitcher, went down to the cellar and opened the tap beer; and while it flowed into the jug, she looked at him. Suddenly he thought: Wow! The dog is not tied; if you think of stealing sausage from the pan, I'll be worn. And in a jiffy, she stood up. But the mongrel had the sausage in his mouth and ran away with her, dragging her across the floor. Catalinita, not idle, they gave chase and was running long time after him through the countryside; but the dog, lighter than Catalinita, hold their prey was soon out of reach. "We lost, is lost!" said Kate, renouncing the sausage; and as had been suffocated and tired with the race, he turned slowly to cool. Meanwhile still pouring beer barrel, because the woman had forgotten to close the tap, and when the jar was full, the liquid started running the winery until the barrel was empty. Catalinita saw the disaster from the top of the stairs: "Hell!" he exclaimed, "what do I do now so that Federico will not notice?" After some thought, she recalled that the last fair had been in the barn a bag of good wheat flour; the best would lower it and throw it on beer. "Whoever saves time, day comes that rejoices," she told herself; He went to the barn, carried the sack and dumped in the cellar, with such bad luck that it was precisely to give the jug full of beer, which capsized, losing even the beverage to Federico. "That's!" She cried Catalinita; "Where one goes, you go the other," and poured flour on the floor of the warehouse. When he was finished, he felt himself very satisfied with her work and said: "What a neat and clean is now" At noon came Federico. "Well, little woman, what have you prepared me?" - "Oh, Fred!" she replied, "I wanted to fry a sausage, but as walked down beer, the dog stole from the pan, and when I got behind him, beer was poured, and wanting dry beer with flour, I poured the jug. But do not worry, that the wine is very dry Federico replied. "Catalinita, you should not do that! You let that you steal the sausage, the beer is lost, and still you mess our meal! "-" You're right, Fred, but I did not know! You should avisármelo "thought the man a woman like that, there will be more foresighted had saved a sum pretty ducats changed the gold and told Catalinita.." Look, that are yellow badges; I will bring them into a pot and bury it in the barn, under the manger of the cows. Take heed well to touch them, because, otherwise, you're going to go wrong, "she replied,".. No, Fred, you can be sure not touch it "But behold, when Frederick was gone, presented a peddlers selling clay pots and bowls, and asked the girl if she needed some of his goods "Oh, good people!" she said Catherine, "I have no money and can buy anything.; but if you quisieseis charge in yellow badges, yes I would buy something. "-" Chapitas yellow, why not? Let's see "-" Come down to the barn and look under the manger of the cows.; you will find them there; I can not touch them. "The rascals went to the barn and removing earth, found pure gold. They loaded him and took to their heels, leaving at home their burden of clunkers. Catalinita thought he should use that pottery new for something ;. but as in the kitchen there was no need, broke the bottom of each of the pieces and put them all as ornaments at the ends of the stakes of the fence surrounding the house arriving Federico, surprised by this new ornamentation he said : "Catherine, what have you done" - "I've bought, Fred, with yellow badges that saved under the crib cows. I did not go to look for them; They had to go down the same peddlers. "-" My God, "said Federico," good've done it, woman! If they were not chapitas, but pieces of pure gold; Our entire fortune! How did such nonsense? "-" I did not know, Fred. Why did not you warn me "Catalinita remained thoughtful for a moment and then said," Hey, Fred, recover the gold? we leave behind thieves "-" Well, "replied Frederick," we will try.; Bring bread and cheese to have something to eat on the way. "-" Yes, Fred, I'll take "set out, and as Frederick was lighter legs, Catalinita was behind Better, he thought, so when we come back I'll have less.. to walk. they came to a mountain where, on both sides of the road, ran a deep ruts. "you have to see," said Catherine, "how they have torn, broken and sunk this poor earth! Never will recover from this! "Filled with compassion, took butter and began to spread the ruts, left and right, so that the wheels do not afflict so much. And, leaning to implement their charitable intent, cayóle one of the cheeses and started rolling down hill Catalinita said: "I'm not back down this path;. . Will release another to go get it "and, taking another cheese, released him after the first But neither returned, he took a third, thinking. Maybe they want company, not like up alone them not to return. none of the three, she said, "What does he mean? Perhaps, the third is lost; I will let down the room, that look. "But the room was no better than the third behaved, and Catalinita, irritated, threw the fifth and the sixth, who were the last. He remained a must stop while the attentive ear, waiting for volviesen, but the cape, getting impatient, said: "to go find the serviríais death. So much time at all! Do you think that will continue aguardándoos? I leave and I already attain, because You run more than me. "And, continuing his way, then found himself with Federico, who had stopped to wait, because he was hungry." Give me because of what you bring, woman. "She handed him bread alone "Where are butter and cheese.." - "Oh, Fred!" said Kate, "with butter smeared lanes, and cheeses should not take back. I missed one, let go to the other in search of "Federico said,"..? You should not have, Catalinita "-" Yes, Fred, but why did not you warn "They ate together dry bread, and then Frederick said, "Catherine, ¿made sure before leaving the house?" - "No, Fred; . As I do not tell "-" Well, go home and close it well before going ahead; and also brings something else to eat; You wait here "Catalinita resumed the way back, thinking... Fred wants to eat something else, apparently does not like cheese and butter will bring some dried apricots in a handkerchief, and a jug of vinegar to drink the it arriving home closed lock the upper door and dismounted the bottom and carried her on his back, believing that, taking the door, would the insured home calmly, he walked back the way thinking. So Fred can When more rest time came where he was waiting, he said, "Take, Fred, here's the door. so you can save the best house. "-" Good God, "he exclaimed," and what women have given me smarter! Remove the door down so everyone can come in, and bolted shut the above. Now it's too late to go back; But since you have brought the door, you bear it. "-" I will carry the door, Frederick, but the dried apricots and vinegar jug ​​me heavy. You know what? Hang them on the door, which she wears! "They came to the forest and started looking for the thieves, but did not find them. At the end, as it was dark, and went up a tree, ready to spend the night. Scarcely they had settled in the cup, they came some of those rascals who are dedicated to take by force what they do not want to go willingly, and find things before they are lost. they sat at the foot of the tree that served as a refuge Federico and Catalinita, and, lighting a fire, they prepared to share the spoils. Federico fell to the ground on the opposite side, picked up stones and climbed back to see stoned to death thieves. But the stones did not give in white , and thieves observed: "it will soon be day, the wind brings down the cones." Catalinita still holding the door in the back and, as he weighed more than they should, thinking it was the fault of the dried apricots, she said: " Fred, I have to drop orejones. "-" No, Catherine, not now, "he said. "They might discover." - "Ah, Freddy, I have no choice, weigh too much." - "Well, drop them in the name of the devil!" Dried apricots rolled down between the branches, and the rascals exclaimed: "Birds do their business!" A cape of another time, as the door continued to weigh, Catalinita said, "Oh, Fred !, I have to pour the vinegar." - "No, Catherine, do not do it, could give us away." - "Oh, Fred is accurate, I can not take the weight." - "Well, throw it on behalf of the devil!" And poured vinegar, spraying thieves, which they said. "Now she is dripping dew" Finally, Catalinita thought: Could it be the door which weighs so much? and he said, "Fred, I have to let go of the door." - "No, Catherine, not now, could discover!" - "Oh, Fred !, I have no choice, I weigh too much." - "No, Catherine, hold it steady!" - "Oh, Fred, the loose!" - "Well, drop it on behalf of the devil!" And there the cast, with an infernal noise, and thieves exclaimed: "The devil down the tree!" and they took those of Villadiego, leaving everything. The next morning, the two of descending the tree, they found all their gold and took him to casa.Cuando be returned and aposentados, Federico said. "Catalinita, now you must be very diligent and work hard" - ". Yes, Fred, yes I will'll cut the grass field." When he reached the field, he said: What shall I do first: cut, eat or sleep? Let's start eating. And Catalinita ate, and then sleep entróle, so, cutting, half asleep, all dressed broke: apron, skirt and shirt, and when he woke at the end of a long time, looking half-naked, preguntóse: am I or am I not? Oh, it's not me! Meanwhile, it was dark; Catalinita he went to the people and calling her husband's window, shouted: "Fred!" - "What happens?" - "Is Catalinita at home?" - "Yes, yes," he replied Frederick, "must be lying, sleeping." And she said, "Then it's sure I'm home," and started correr.En depopulated found himself with thieves who were preparing to steal. Approaching them, he said, "I'll help you." The rascals thought he knew the chances of the site and declared compliant. Catalinita walked past the houses shouting: "Hey, do you have something people steal We Want?" - "Good we have done!" thieves said, while thinking how they could get rid of Catalinita. At the end he said: "At the exit of the village, the priest has a field of beets, go pick a lot." Catalinita went to the field to pick beets; but it was with such verve that did not rise from the ground. He happened to pass a man who, stopping at her, thought the devil was stirring the field. She ran then to the house of the priest, and said, "Lord heals in your field is the devil pulling beets." - "OMG!" cried the priest, "I have a lame leg, I can not throw him out!" Man answered: "I will help," and held it up to the field at the right time Catalinita straightened. "It's the devil!" He exclaimed the priest, and the two ran; and holy man was so afraid that, forgetting his lame leg, left behind the man who had held.
Fernando Leal and Fernando Desleal	1193	531	Spanish	Once upon a time a man and woman married and very wealthy but childless. They lost their fortune, and then were born a little child. But unable to find sponsor for his baptism, the man who would go to another town to try to get one she said. On the way he met a beggar who asked him where he was going, and he replied that he was going to that place in search of a godfather, because he was so poor that no one was paid to serlo.- Look - the man said -. Poor you are and I do too. I Avengo to be the best man; but it is so little that I have, that I can not give away anything to your son. Go tell the midwife who carried the child to the iglesia.Cuando all arrived at the temple, and awaited the beggar in him, and put the child the name "Fernando Leal." At the exit, said panhandler: - Go away now to home; nothing I can give you, you must not give me anything to mí.Sin however, gave a key to the midwife custom of giving it to the father once were at home. The parent should keep it until his son fulfilled fourteen. Then the boy had to go to a wasteland where he would find a palace whose door opened with that key; and what it contained, it would be his. When the small arrived at seven, he went out one day to play with other kids, and it turned out that everyone had received more gifts which their respective godfathers; only he had run out nada.Regresó crying to his house and asked his father: - So, I do not have anything brought me my godfather - Yes - said the father - gave you a key?. When you see a palace in the wasteland, you go to him and abres.Fue the child, but found no trace of the palace. But returning to the end of seven years, that is, to the turning fourteen, he saw a palace which stood in the middle of that desert. He opened the door and found only inside a white horse. The boy, thrilled with the animal, rode him once and told his father: - Now that I have horses, I want to leave viaje.Y left. And behold, in the way he saw on the ground a pen. His first idea was to catch her, but then thinks: "Better leave it where it is everywhere I find feathers when needed.." And he passed by. But suddenly, he heard a voice behind him - Fernando Leal, pick me up The waiter returned, but saw no one!. He stepped back and took the pen. At the end of a stretch he passed along a river, on whose banks saw a fish gasping out of the water.- Wait, my friend - he said -. I'll throw you to the water - and, holding it by the tail it back to the river. The fish then put his head: - Since you brought me out of the mire, let me give you a flute. When you shall find in difficult situation, you just have to make it sound. I will come to ayudarte.Siguió our waiter riding, and the after a while, cruzóse with an individual, who asked him where he was dirigía.- to the first town - Fernando answered. - And your name - Fernando Leal.- Here! - he noted the other -. Almost we have the same name; my name is Fernando Desleal.Siguieron together and alighted at the inn of the first city. Bad thing was that Fernando Desleal knew everything and thought the other was going to do; and he knew from his evil intents artes.Sucedió lived in the inn a girl, honest and cute face. Doted Fernando Leal, who was a young man of good presence, and asked where I'm going iba.- aimlessly! - Fernando said to him, to which he replied that she would do better staying there, as there was in the country a king who asked a servant or coachman, and would take his service. He objected that could not be presented as well, to offer to ello.- From this custom I - replied the girl. He went to the palace and told the King that he knew a boy very apropos for his servant. King ordered to present himself and offered him the post of valet. The boy said he preferred to be coachman, for where were his horse, there must have it; and King named postillón.Al know Fernando Desleal said the maid: - Yea he would help, and me, no, huh - Well - said the girl - I also will concern yourself - thinking: "I should be taken by friend, because it should not be trusted. " And, returning to see the king, he proposed to servant; and the monarch aceptó.Cada morning, dress Fernando disloyal to his master, is he lamented: - Ah, if he were here my beloved The servant had ojeriza Fernando Leal, and once when the King returned to exclaim, he said: - you have at the coachman - enviadle in search. And if you bring it, you send cabeza.Llamó cut off the King Fernando Leal and said that in such and such a part lived the woman he loved; I would look for him, and if he did not return with her, he would be punished by Fernando Leal muerte.Dirigióse to the stable to his white horse, weeping and lamenting: - Ah, wretched me! - when suddenly, someone shouted behind him: - Fernando Leal, why are you crying He turned the boy, but saw no one, continued his complaints: - My dear horse, I must leave you, for I must ! die And again heard: - Fernando Leal, why are you crying then realized that it was the horse that hablaba.- are you, my horse? You can talk? I go to such and such a place, looking for the girlfriend of the King. Do you know, perhaps, how to do the horse answered: - Go to the King, and tell him that if you provide what you need, you will bring his girlfriend. And you need for this is a ship full of meat and another filled with bread. As there are giant sea, you would destroy if not llevases them meat; and large birds of the sky, you would remove your eyes if you do not dieses pan.Ordenó the King that all slaughterers of the country oblation cattle, and all cociesen bread bakers, to fill the two ships. When they were charged, said Fernando Leal horse: - Now ride me and lead me to the boat. Then, when the Giants are presented, they say, "Be still, still, my gigantitos, of you I acordéy a bite I will lay." And when you get the birds, repeating: "still, still, my birds, of you I acordéy one I will miss bocadito "And do not do any harm.; and when you get to the palace, the giants will help. When you go up to it, take two or three. There is the sleeping princess; but you should not wake her, but the Giants will transport the ship, along with the linen.All happened as predicted white horse: Fernando Leal gave the giants and the birds what for them had brought, and giants, helpful , he was ferried to the ship princess, without moving from the bed. When the princess was with the King, he said he could not live without his books, which had remained in the palace. It was recalled Fernando Leal, always at the instigation of the Faithless, to the presence of the King, who gave him orders to return to the palace in search of books, warning that failure to get them, lose his head. He got the boy back to the barn crying and told his beloved white horse: - I have to take the trip again. What should I do Horse advised him cargase boats as before, and everything happened as it was then: the giants and the birds were tamed, to be the gorged meat and bread. To get to the palace, and said the horse to come in to look for books; They were on the table in the bedroom of the princess. Soon he returned Fernando Leal with books; but being offshore and dropped to the water pen. Then said the horse: - Now I can not do anything more for ti.El waiter then remembered the flute and began to play it; and behold, a few moments later the fish stuck on the surface with the pen in his mouth and handed it over. And Fernando took the books to the palace, and soon the Queen was held boda.Pero felt a great repugnance to the King, who had no nose, and one day they were assembled all the nobles of the Court, said he understood the art of sleight of hand. He knew, for example, behead a person and volvérsela to place, embellishing. He offered to make the experience, but none wanted to be first. In the end he had to undergo the test Fernando Leal, always victim of the perfidy of the other Fernando. Queen cut off his head, and thereafter, was placed again, leaving the boy completely healed. It only remained as a red trickle in volume to the cuello.Dijo then the King to his wife - Hijita! Where did you learn that? - Oh! - he exclaimed the Queen -. I understand a lot of this art. Want to try it you ?, he said, thinking of putting her head again, with a beautiful Nose. Yes - said the King. And she cut off his head turn, but then did not find the mode locks in place, so that the king died and enterraron.Algún later, the Queen, who was secretly in love with Fernando Leal, married him .The young man was riding a white horse all hours of the late King, and once he had gone out with him, and said the animal to take him to another wasteland that would indicate and give him three times over. And behold, the third white horse, getting up on his hind legs, was suddenly transformed into a prince.
Sweet porridge	974	565	Spanish	Once upon a time a girl, as poor as pious, who lived with his mother, and behold, it came to that fact in their misery, they had nothing to eat. One day the girl went to the woods, found himself with an old woman who, knowing their plight, gave her a pout, to which he had only to say, "Pucherito, fired !," to be put to a baking sweet porridge and very tasty; and when he said: "Pucherito, stop !," stop cooking. The girl took the pot to his mother, and so were remediated their poverty and hunger, as they always had porridge to fill. One day the daughter had gone, the mother said, "Pucherito, fired !," and he began to cook, and the woman had had enough. Then he declined to cease firing, but here they forgot the magic formula. Thus, baking baked until gruel reached the edge and fell off; and continued bakes baking, filling the entire kitchen and the house, then the house to the side and the street, as if to satisfy the hunger of the world. The trouble was agonizing, but no one could find a remedy. At the end, when there was more than a house without flooding, she turned her daughter and said, "Pucherito, stop !," and the pot stopped cooking. But anyone who wanted to enter the city, had to make their way by dint of swallowing porridge.
people list	984	1384	Spanish	One day a peasant took his rod corner of Hornbeam and told his wife: - Lina, I leave travel and will not be back before three days. If, meanwhile, comes the farmer and want to buy our three cows, you sell is the two hundred ducats. ? Not One Less, you know - Márchate in the name of God - answered his wife -; I will like dices.- Mira - advirtióle man - that girl from're hard of heart and always will be. But caters well to what I say. Do not make mistakes, or I'll put back dwelling and not with paint but with this stick in my hand, and it will cost you a year back to your natural color, I garantizo.Y thereby man put in camino.A the next morning the attending was presented, and the woman did not need to waste many words. When the merchant had examined cattle and knew the price, he said: - I am willing to pay; these animals are worth it. Llevo.Y me, dropping the chain, pulled from the barn. But when he walked with them to the farm gate, the woman, taking her sleeve, he said - before you have to give me two hundred ducats; otherwise the llevaréis.- not you are right - said the farmer -. I forgot to take the bag. But do not worry, that I will give you a good guarantee of payment. I'll take two cows and the third will let pledge; not bad fianza.Así believed the woman, and let the dealer to go away with both cattle, thinking: ". How glad will be Juan when you know what I've been ready" Three days later he returned farmer, as previously announced, and his first question was whether they were sold the vacas.- Yes, my husband - said the woman - and two hundred ducats, as I said. Barely worth, but the man ran out regatear.- Where is the money - do not have it yet, because the dealer had forgotten her purse; but will soon bring; He has left me a good fianza.- What guarantee - One of the three cows; it will not take until you have paid the others. You do not say I have not been listed; Note: I am left with the smallest, which is the least come.El man became enraged and, raising his stick, he set out to deal it the promised beating. But suddenly, lowering him said: - You're the most foolish creature God ever cast upon the earth; but I pity you. I will go out to the road and wait three days to see if I find someone who is even dumber than you. Yes I find it, you will save the sticks; but if not, be prepared to receive the wages that I promised you, then I think saldar.Salió leave nothing to the road and began to wait on events, sitting on a stone. In this he saw approaching a wagon, driven by a woman, who was standing in the middle instead of going sitting on the pile of straw put to the side, or go on foot driving oxen. Man thought: "Surely this woman is one of the people I'm looking for." He arose, and began to run back and forth in front of the cart, as if he were not in their cabales.- What's wrong, buddy? - she Asked the woman -. Where do you come from, I do not know you - have fallen from heaven - said the man - and I can not go back there. Could Not take - No - replied the woman - I do not know the way. But if you come from heaven you can surely tell me what about what happens my husband, who died three years ago. Visto.- will have certainly true that I have seen; but not everyone has a good time there. Your husband keeps sheep and cattle blessed give much fatigue, as climb mountains and go astray in the woods, and he did not stop running after them to bring them together. In addition, it is very broken; clothes was falling apart. There's no Tailors; San Pedro does not let any; and you must know by cuentos.- Who would have thought! - cried the woman -. You know what? I'll go get your Sunday suit, which is still hanging in the closet, and he will take you there with great honor. I going to do for llevárselo.- Not even think about it! - replied the farmer -; in heaven no one wears a suit; it take from one to the pass puerta.- Listen to me! - she said -. Yesterday I sold wheat and a pretty sum; I will send it. If you meteis money in his pocket, nobody notará.- If there is no other choice - said the farmer - I am willing to make you this note.- For aguardadme here - she said -; back home in the bag and not take back. I'm standing in the cart, rather than sit on the straw, so that the horse does not have to carry as much peso.Y launched the animals, while the peasant thought, "This woman is silly capirote, if you really brings me money, mine may be lucky, because they will have saved the sticks. " A Cape soon returned peasant running with money, and put herself in the bag man. At the farewell, gave him thank you a thousand times for his complacencia.Cuando the woman came back to her house, her son had just returned from the field. Contole the strange things he had heard, and added: - I am glad to have found this opportunity to send something to my poor husband. Who would ever have thought that in heaven might lack something deeply son was admirado.- Mother - he said - that that one down from the sky does not happen every day. I'm looking for the man; I want to know how are working for allí.Y saddled the horse and set off at a good trot. The farmer found under a tree when he was counting the money bolsa.- Have not you seen a man who came from the sky? - asked him the mozo.- Yes - answered the farmer - but has since returned, taking a shortcut that goes through that mountain. At the gallop, still able alcanzarlo.- Ouch! - he exclaimed the boy -. I'm exhausted from working all day and coming here has done with my strength. You who know a man, do you want to ride my horse, go after him and persuade him to come back here "Aha - thought the farmer - here's another that has loose bolts !."? And, addressing the waiter, he said: - Well, no more missing Montó in the animal and began light jogging!. The boy waiting for him until night fell, but the farmer did not return. "Certainly - he thought the young man - the man of heaven would lead in a hurry and would not return, and the farmer will be given the horse to give it to my father." And returned home and told his mother what had happened: he had sent the horse to his father to not have to run on foot from side to ANOTHER: You did well - answered the mother -. You still have good legs and can walk to pie.Cuando the farmer was in his house, he puts the horse in the stable with the third cow. He rose where was his wife, and said - Lina, you were lucky, because I have given two that are even more silly than you. By this time you will save the beating; but I do keep for the next ocasión.Y, lighting his pipe and leaning back in his chair, he continued -: It has been a good deal; two lean years I have gained a good horse and a good bag of money. If stupidity were always so productive, we should have it in high estima.Tal was the thought of the farmer. But I'm sure you prefer the ready.
Haaken Grizzlebeard	3344	900	Spanish	There was once a princess who was so proud, but so proud that no candidate was good enough for her. She was making fun of all of them, and returned them one after another. But despite this, new entrants kept coming to the palace, because such was the beauty of the mala.Un impish day a prince came to court her, her name was Haaken Grizzlebeard. The first night he was there, the princess ordered the joker king to cut the ears of one of the horses of the prince, and open channel other jaw to the ears. The next day when the prince went for a walk, the princess was standing on the porch and miró.-¡Bien! She said, 'I never saw anything like this in my life; the wind blowing here is so sharp that has cut off the ears of one of his horses, while the other stayed with his mouth as open their jaws opened up their orejas.-Con that she let her laughter, ran into he slammed the door and went home marchó.Él; but when he left he thought that the charge someday. After a while, he got a full beard moss, threw a big fur coat over her clothes, and dressed like a beggar. He went to where a goldsmith and bought a spinning wheel that spun gold, and sat under the window of the princess and started moving her distaff and hiló.Así when the princess got up in the morning, she came to the window and opened it, and asked the beggar if he sold his spinning wheel oro.-no, it's not for sale, said Haaken Grizzlebeard-; but if I can sleep tonight against the door of her bedroom, she the princess daré.La thought it was a good bargain; there could be no danger allowing sleep outside their puerta.Así she got the wheel and that night Haaken Grizzlebeard stretched out her bedroom. But when night came he began to helar.-¡Huttetuttetuttetu! This place is very cold; let me in, - he lloró.-I think you're crazy, - told the princesa.-¡Oh, Huttetuttetuttetu! The cold is so bitter, please let me go, - said Haaken Grizzlebeard of nuevo.-¡Este quiet! Be silent your tongue! said the princess. If my father knows that outside was a man in the house, I can be in serious problemas.-¡Oh, Huttetuttetuttetu! I almost froze me. Just let me go and I'll stay on the ground, - said Haaken Grizzlebeard.Nada she could do about it. She had to let him in, and when he was inside, he stood on the floor and fell dormido.Algo later, Haaken got up and went back to where he was the spinning wheel that spun gold and sat under the window Princess and he began to work hard. When she heard her work, she opened the window and started talking to him, and to ask what he hacía.-Oh, it's just the support of that spinning wheel that his royal highness bought. I thought you already had the wheel might like to have the support también.-What you want for it - ask the princesa.-Not for sale more than the wheel, but could have it if I can sleep on the floor her room the next noche.Ella agreed, but only if he would still remain to be sure, and not to flinch and cold calling, or anything else. Haaken Grizzlebeard promised quite fair, but when night took him and shake began to shake, and to ask if he could not come closer and stay on the floor beside the bed princesa.Ella could not do anything about that; she would have to allow it, or the king would hear the noise he was making. So Haaken Grizzlebeard stood beside the bed and fell princess dormido.No spend a lot of time before Haaken Grizzlebeard will rise again, this time thread a spool of yarn gold and he sat down and began to work hard under the princess window. Then history repeated itself again. When the princess heard what's going on, she came to the window and asked what he was doing and if he would sell the spool of yarn golden-No money has value; but I'll give it to you for nothing, if you allow me to sleep tonight in his bedroom, with my head on the bedstead-.She agreed, but only if he gave his word to keep quiet and not do any noise. He said he would do his best; but when night brought back, he began to shiver and shake until their brincaban.-¡Huttetuttetuttetu teeth! It's cold so bitter! Let me get into bed to warm up a little, - said Haaken Grizzlebeard.-¡Entrar in bed - told the princess!; why should you be mad .-- Huttetuttetuttetu - said Haaken-?!; let me get into bed. Huttetuttetuttetu - Silence! Silence! For God's sake, be quiet - said the princess. If my father knows there's a man in here I'll be in serious trouble. I'm sure he would kill me on the site .-- Huttetuttetuttetu! Let me get into bed, - said Haaken Grizzlebeard followed shuddering until the whole room shaking. Was good, nothing she could do about it. She had to let him in bed. He slept soundly and smoothly, but soon after the princess gave birth to a child. The king was so angry and upset that he was going to throw them both, the mother and baby, the calle.Después that happened, Haaken Grizzlebeard step back with strong once again, as if by chance and took a seat in the kitchen, like any other mendigo.Cuando princess came out and saw him, she cried, - Ah, God have mercy on me, you look bad luck that brought me. My father is in a rage. Let me go home with you .-- You are crazy if you have the idea to follow me, - said Haaken, - because I have not a log hut to live; and I do not know how the food, if I just if I can find food for me -.- simply do not care how you get it me, or if you get it at all, - she said; just let me be with you, if I stay around here sure my father will certainly kill me -.Así she got permission to go with the beggar, she followed him and they walked for a long long time and, although she was not a good treadmill. When she left the land of his father and entered into another realm, she asked who era.-¡Oh! This kingdom is Haaken Grizzlebeard, if you want to know, - he dijo.-¡De fact - said the princess. 'I could have married him if I had wanted, and then would not have to walk as the wife of a beggar-.They saw great castles, forests and parks, and when she asked who they were, the response of the beggar always it was the same, Oh! They are Haaken Grizzlebeard-. The princess was very sad that she had not chosen the man who had such lands. At the end of it all, they came to a palace where he said he was known, and where he thought he could get work for her, so they could get something to eat. He built a cabin on the edge of the woods to live within them. Every day he went to the palace of the king, saying he would cut wood and carry water for the cook and when he brought back a few pieces of food; but they were not suficientes.Un day when he came home from the palace, he said, - Tomorrow I'll stay home and take care of the baby, but you must go to the palace, because the prince told me that you could go and work in ! the kitchen .-- cOOKING - told the princess; I can not cook, because I never did such a thing in my life .-- Well, you should go, - said Haaken, - because the prince said. If you can not cook, you can learn; You only have to look at how others work and cook in the oven; and when you leave, you should steal some bread for me .-- I can not steal, - told the princesa.-You can learn that too, - said Haaken-; you know that we are very short of food. But I care discovers the prince, because he has eyes for everywhere.-When she was on the way, Haaken ran a shortcut and arrived at the palace before her, and took off his rags and put on their robes magníficas.La princess took place at the bakery, and did as he was commanded Haaken, she stole bread until his pockets were full. That afternoon, when she was about to go home, the prince said, - We do not know much about this vagabond old woman. I think you should better check it if she is taking something.-He pushed his hand in all his pockets, and when he found the bread, he was very angry, and raised a large movimiento.Ella began to wail and mourn, and he said, - the beggar made me do it, and I could not refuse .-- Well, - told the prince finally - I must have been hard on you; but because of the beggar I forgive this time.-When she was on her way home, he took off his robes, donned his costume and his fake beard, and came to the hut before her. When she came home, he was busy tending to the bebé.-You made me go against my own conscience. Today was the first time I ever stole, and will be the last-; and that she told him how he had fared and what the prince had dicho.Después few days Haaken Grizzlebeard came home in the evening and said, - Tomorrow I'll stay at home caring for the baby, because they will kill a pig in the palace, and you should help them make sausages .-- I do sausages - told the princess!; I can not do that. I have eaten hot dogs quite often, but I've never done in my life.-But nothing she could do about it; the prince had said, and she had to go. As for not knowing how, she just had to do what the others did, and at the same time Haaken asked to steal some sausages for it.-No, I can not steal, - she said; you know how I was last time -.- Well, you can learn to steal. Who knows? You can have good luck this time - Grizzlebeard.Cuando Haaken said she was on her way, Haaken ran a shortcut, came to the palace before she took off his disguise and fake beard, and was standing in the kitchen with her royal robes as she entered. So the princess standing when the pig was killed. She made sausages with others and she did as Haaken had said before, he filled his pockets full of sausages. That afternoon, when she was about to go home, the prince said, - this beggar's wife stole last time; we must see if she is not taking nada.Así he began thrusting his hands into his pockets and when he found the sausages, was again very angry, and threatened to send her to the sheriff and throw it in the cárcel.-¡Oh God bless your royal highness; let me go! The beggar made me do it, - she said, and cried amargamente.-Well, - said Haaken, - you have sinned for him; but it is the fault of the beggar I perdono.-when she had been, he changed his clothes again, he ran for the shortcut, and when she reached the cabin, there he stood before her. She told him the whole story, and swore was the last time he would get her to do such cosa.Poco after a man came to the palace and said, 'Our prince will marry, but the bride is sick, so the tailor does not you can measure it for your wedding dress. Prince wants you to go to the palace and is measured instead of the bride; because he says you are of the same height and shape-.A what the beggar said, 'After you have modeled, just will not quit. You can stand and when the tailor cuts the dress, you can pick up larger pieces, and brings home a vest for me.-No, I can not steal, - she said; well you know how it was last time .-- You can learn then, - said Haaken, - and you may be lucky this time.-She thought about it, but still she went and did as he was told. She stood while the tailor was cutting the dress, and she swept the larger pieces and put them in their pockets; and when she was about to leave, the prince said, 'We must see if this beggar has not taken anything this time-.So he began researching his pockets, and when he found the pieces became very angry and started stamping and quarreling furiously as she cried and said, - Please forgive me; the beggar made me do it, and I could not disobey .-- Well, you are instigated by him, - Haaken- said; but cause the beggar I perdono.-So it was now and had gone before, and when she returned to the cabin, the beggar was there before her. Oh, heaven help me, - she said; you will be responsible for my death. The prince was so angry that he threatened us both with the sheriff and cárcel.-One afternoon, after some time Haaken cottage came home and said, - the prince in the palace and wants to replace the bride, because the bride still sick in bed. He did not postpone the wedding, and he says that you are like her, no one can say that; So as soon as you arrive in the morning you should be ready to go to the palace .-- I think you're crazy, you and the prince, - she said. Do you think that I seem to be in good health to stand in the place of the bride? Look at me! Anybody poor girl is better than me - Well, the prince said that you are who have to go - said Haaken Grizzlebeard.Nada she could do about it. She had to go; and when she came to the palace, they dressed her so finely that no princess ever was so bonita.La wedding procession went to church where she represented the bride, and when they returned, there was dancing and joy in the palace. But as she was dancing with the prince, she saw a flash of light through the window, and looked at the cabin the edge of the forest all llamas.-¡Oh! The beggar, the baby, the cabin, - she screamed and desmaya.-here are almost the beggar and the baby, and so allow the cabin burn, - he said Haaken Grizzlebeard.Ella looked again and then joy and the celebration really began. Since that time I have not heard anything more from them.
Hansel and Gretel	140	327A	Spanish	Next to a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and two children; the boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. Just they had to eat, and at a time of famine that hit the country, there came a time when man could not even gain the daily bread. The woodcutter was in bed one night, ruminating and thrashing without worries left stick his eye; finally he said, sighing, his wife: - What will become of us? How to feed the little poor, since nothing left? - It occurs to me one thing she replied. Tomorrow, at dawn, we take the children to the thickest part of the forest. Them a fire, we'll give you a piece of bread and then leave you alone to go to our work. They will never find the way back, we'll get rid of them. - My God, woman! He replied the man. I do not do that. How I will take upon myself to abandon my children in the woods! They would soon be torn apart by wild beasts. - Do not be a fool! she exclaimed. Wilt thou then, we die of hunger four? Ya can wear sawing the boards of the coffins! -. And he did not stop until the man importune accedió-. But I really pity -decía.Los two little brothers, who always kept hunger revealed, heard what her stepmother advised his father. Gretel, bitter tears, told Hänsel: - Now we're lost! - Do not cry, Gretel -the comforted the boy, and do not worry, I'll manage to get out of the way. And when the parents were asleep, he got up, stood the little jacket and went out the back door. Moon shining brightly and white pebbles that were on the floor in front of the house glittered like pure silver. Hänsel he was picking up that did not fit him most in his pockets. Back in his room, he told Gretel: - Fear not, little sister, and sleep quietly: God will not abandon us-and lay down nuevo.A the first light of day, even before the sun had risen, the woman went to children call: - Come on, lazy, get up! We have to go to the forest for Lena. And giving each a piece of bread, they warned: There you have it for lunch, but do not eat it before, because I will not give more. Gretel put the bread under her apron, because Hansel had his pockets full of stones, and began the four forest path. A Cape walk for a while, Hansel stopped occasionally to turn and look toward the house. He said the father: - Hänsel, do not stay laggard looking back and legs Attention alive! - it Is that look white kitten, which from the roof is saying goodbye me the boy replied. And the woman replied: - Tonto, not the cat, but the morning sun, reflected in the fireplace. But what he was doing Hänsel was not looking at the cat, but go throwing white pebbles, he drew from his pocket along the camino.Cuando were in the middle of the forest, the father said: - collect wood, small, I light a fire so do not be cold. Hansel and Gretel gathered quite a lot of kindling. They built a fire, and when an open flame burned, she said: - Put yourself now to the side of the fire, boys, and rest while we go away through the woods to cut firewood. When we're done, we'll come to recogeros.Los two little brothers sat by the fire, and at noon, each his piece of bread he ate. And as they heard the sound of an ax, they believed that his father was near. But in fact, was not the ax, but a branch that he had tied to a dead tree and that the wind was hitting the trunk. At the end of a long time to be sitting there, tiredness closed their eyes and fell fast asleep. They woke up, when it was dark night. Gretel began to mourn, saying: - How do we get out of the woods? But Hansel comforted her: - Wait a little shine the moon, we'll find the way. And when the moon was high in the sky, the boy, holding the hand of his sister, guiose by the pebbles which shone like silver, and showed the route. They walked all night and came to the house at the crack of dawn. They knocked on the door and opened the stepmother, who, seeing them, exclaimed: - Devil kids! What is that to stay many hours in the woods? We thought you wanted to not go back! The father, however, was glad he had returned because he guilty conscience for having abandonado.Algún time later there was another period of misery in the country, and one night the children heard how the stepmother, being in bed, said her husband: - again it's all over; only half a loaf of bread we have left, and that was that. We have to get rid of the children. We will take you deeper into the forest so they can not find their way; otherwise there is no salvation for us. A father hurt a lot abandoning the children, and thought: "You had better starting with your kids the last bite." But the woman would not listen to their reasons, and reproachful and invective. Who gave the first time, it must also give the second; and thus the man had no courage to negarse.Pero children were still awake and heard the conversation. When the parents had gone asleep, Hansel got up to go out and get shingle, as before; but could not, because the woman had locked the door. He said, however, his sister, to comfort her: - Do not cry, Gretel, and sleep quietly, may the Lord ayudará.A us the next morning the woman to get them out of bed came and gave his piece of bread, even smaller than before. Way of the forest Hansel crumbled the bread in his pocket and, stopping here and there, dropped crumbs on the floor. - Hansel, why do you stop and look back? -preguntóle Father. Come on, do not dawdle! - I'm looking at my pigeon sitting on the roof says goodbye. - Bobo! 'said the woman, is not your little pigeon, but the morning sun, shining on the chimney. But Hansel was strewed bread crumbs all camino.La stepmother led the children still deeper into the forest, a place I had never been. They lit a bonfire, and the woman told them: - Stay here, small, and if you get tired, let down a little nap. We go for firewood; at dusk, when we're done, we will collect. At noon, Gretel left bread with Hansel, who had strewed his along the road. Then they fell asleep, no one came to look for the poor things; awoke when it was already dark night. Hänsel comforted Gretel saying - Wait a little sister to the moon rises; then we will see the bread crumbs I have scattered, and show us the way back. When the moon rose, they prepared to return; but they found not a single crumb; They had eaten them a thousand birds flying through the forest. Hansel said to Gretel: - I'll give the road-but they did not find. They walked all night and all the next day, from dawn to dusk, unable to get out of the forest; also suffered hunger, because they had not eaten more than a few wild fruits collected from the ground. And how they felt so tired legs and refused to support them, they fell to the foot of a tree and stayed dormidos.Y the third morning since leaving home. They resumed the march, but increasingly strayed deeper into the forest. If someone did not come quickly to their aid, they were doomed to die of starvation. But behold around noon saw a beautiful bird, white as snow, perched on the branch of a tree; and she sang so sweetly that they stopped to listen. When he was finished, he spread his wings and flew away, and they followed, until a little house, whose roof was settled; and the closer they saw that the house was made of bread and cover cake, and the windows were pure sugar. - Look how good! Hansel said, here we can get the belly bad year. I will eat a bit of the roof; you, Gretel, you can try the window, you'll see how sweet it is. the boy climbed onto the roof and broke a piece to try how it tasted, while his sister nibbled on the glass. Then they heard a soft voice from within: "Could it be the ratitala gnawing my house?" But the children responded: "It's the wind is blowing vientoque violent." And they continued to eat without being disconcerted. Hansel, who found that the roof tasted, broken off a good piece, and Gretel took out a large round glass and sat on the floor, eating upon it. the door was opened, then abruptly, and left a very old woman, leaning on a crutch. Children were so frightened, they released what they had in their hands; but the old woman, shaking her head, he said: - Hello, little ones, who brought you? Come and stay with me, I do not do any harm. And, taking them by the hand, he brought them into the house, where he had served an appetizing meal: milk with sugared buns, apples and nuts. Then he took two little white beds, and Hansel and Gretel lay down in them, believing in the old cielo.La appeared to be very good and friendly, but actually was an evil witch stalking children to hunt, and he had built the little house of bread with the sole purpose of attracting them. When one fell into her power, she killed him, what she cooked and ate; this was for her a great feast. Witches have red eyes and are very nearsighted; but instead, his nose is very fine, like animals, so far vented from the presence of people. When he felt Hansel and Gretel approached, said to himself, with an evil laugh: "Mine are, they can not escape me !." He arose early in the morning before the children were awakened, and seeing them rest so peacefully, with mejillitas those so rosy colored, muttered: "They will be a good bite !." And she grasped Hansel with her withered hand, brought him to a small barn and locked behind a fence. He shouted and protested the boy with all his strength, but to no avail. Then she went to bed and woke Gretel little, shaking her rudely and shouting: - Get up, lazy, go get water, and cook something good for your brother; I have it in the barn and I want fattening. When properly primed, I'll eat it. Grethel began to mourn bitterly, but in vain; It had to fulfill the mandates of the bruja.Desde then Hansel was served delicious meals while Grethel got nothing but crab shells. Every morning down the old to the stable and said: - Hansel, stretch out your finger, I want to know if you are overweight. But Hänsel, instead of finger out a little bone, and the old, which had very poor eyesight, I thought that was really the child's finger, and it was surprising that not getting fatter. When, at the end of four weeks, I saw that Hänsel still so skinny, lost patience and could wait no longer: - Anda, Gretel said to the girl, to fetch water, light! Be your brother fat or thin, tomorrow I'll eat. What a grief for the poor little sister, when she came to water, and how the tears streamed down her cheeks! "!. My God, help us -rogaba- I wish we had eaten the beasts of the forest, at least have died together !." - Stop whining! She cried old woman; servirte.Por have nothing of the morning, Gretel had to go cauldron filled with water and a fire. - First coceremos said the witch bread. I have already heated the oven and kneaded the dough -. And She pushed the poor girl to the oven, from which flames were already shining. Sign in to see if it is hot enough to put the bread -Command old. His intention was to close the door of the oven when the girl were inside, roast and eat it too. But Gretel guessed he thought and said - I do not know how to do it; How do I do to get in? - Have you ever seen dumbest creature! He replied the witch. The opening is big enough; I myself could go through it-and, to prove it, he stepped forward and put his head into the mouth of the oven. Then Gretel, a push, rushed inside and closed the iron gate, ran the bolt. Over there was to hear the squeals that gave the witch! What more terrifying screams! But the girl ran, and the evil witch was burned to death miserablemente.Corrió Gretel was the stable where Hansel, opened the door, exclaiming: Hansel, we are saved; He is already dead witch! He jumped the child out, like a bird which opens the cage. What joy they both were and how they threw the neck one of the other, and what hugs and kisses! And as they had nothing to fear, they toured the witch's house, and found in every corner boxes filled with pearls and precious stones. - they are better than pebbles! said Hansel, filling his pockets them. And Gretel said: - I also want to bring something home-and, in turn, apron filled with precious stones. - Vámonos now said the child; we must leave this bewitched forest -. About two hours of walking they reached a large river. - We can not pass it observed Hansel, I see no bridge or gateway. - Nor is there any added barquita Gretel; but there's nothing a white duck, and if I ask will help us pass the river -.Y shouted: "Duckling, Hansel and Gretel good patitomío have reached the río.No is no bridge to spend; About your white back us you want to take ?. " He approached the duck, and the boy climbed into it, inviting her sister to do the same. - No 'said Gretel, would be too heavy for the little duck; worth more than bring us one after another. So did the good duck, and when they were on the opposite bank and had walked another stretch, the forest was being them increasingly familiar, until at the end they discovered how far the house of his father. Then they ran, went like a whirlwind and clung to her father's neck. The poor man had not had one hour's rest from the day they leave their children in the forest; As for the stepmother, she had died. Grethel opened her apron, and all pearls and precious stones jumped on the floor, and Hansel took handfuls their pockets. Gone are the penalties, and thereafter lived three happy. And colorin colorado this story is over.
Story of one who made a trip to find out what was fear	31	326	Spanish	A father had two sons, the eldest of whom was smart and knowledgeable, and knew exactly what to expect at all, but the younger was stupid and did not understand or learn anything, and when they saw the multitude said: "Labor has his father with him. " When there was something to do, always he had to send it to the greatest, but if his father sent him something still night, and sent him to the dark near the cemetery, or at dark on the road or anywhere else somber, he always replied: " Oh !, no, father, I will not go there: I have fear because he was very afraid! ". If night related a story around the fire, especially if it was specters and ghosts, said all who heard him: "What I fear!" But the child, who was in a listening corner could not understand what they meant: "They always say FEAR, fear !, I do not know what is fear. That must be an art of which I understand nothing" plus a "Hey you, the one in the corner: already are a man and you have strength enough to learn something to make a living Well see how much work your brother, but you do nothing but waste time. day his father said. " - "Oh father!" he replied, "I learn something willingly, and especially would like to learn what is fear, because otherwise I do not want to know anything." His older brother laughed on hearing him, and said to himself: God, what a fool he's my brother! You never come to earn a living. His father sighed and said, "You know what's scary. But not why you gain life" Shortly after was the sacristan visit, and told him the father what happened, telling him how his younger son was given as bad habit for everything and who could not even learn anything. "Shall they believe that when I asked him if he wanted to learn something to earn his living, he said he just wanted to know what is fear?" - "If not more than that," replied the sexton, "I'll show you: enviádmele to my house, and you will soon know." The father was glad, for he thought one another: now it will be a little less proud. Sexton was brought home to give ring the bells. Two days later he woke up at midnight, he sent up, climb the belfry and ring the bells. Now you know what is fear, he said to himself. He left behind him, and when the young man was on top of the bell tower, and was to take the bell rope, stood in the middle of the stairs, facing the door, wrapped in a white sheet. "Who's there?" He asked the young man. But the ghost did not answer or move. "Answer, or I'll go back the way you came, you have nothing to do here at this time of night." But the sexton remained motionless, so that the boy might think he was a ghost. The second young man asked: "Who are you speaking, if you're an honest man, or I do if not roll down the stairs?". The sexton thought he would do what he said and was not breathing as if it were stone. Then he asked the young man for the third time, and as was already inconvenienced, jumped up and began to roll down the stairs spectrum so that rolled down ten steps and went to a corner. Then he rang the bells, and went home, went to bed without saying a word and fell asleep. The sexton's wife waited a while longer her husband; but he did not return. then she became uneasy, called the young man and asked him: "Do not know where my husband has been uploaded to the tower behind you?." - "No," he replied the young man, "but there was one on the stairs outside the door, and of course wanted to say a word or leave, I thought he would tease me and I have thrown down the stairs Id. there and you will see if he then would feel. " The woman was running; and she found her husband who was in a corner and complained because he had a leg rota.Se immediately took him to his house and ran to the father of the young. "Your son," he said, "has caused me a great misfortune has thrown my husband down the stairs and broke her leg;. That is the payment that has given us the scoundrel" His father was frightened, ran and called the young man. "What bad thought has given you to do this mischief?" - "Father," he replied, ".. Listen, because I am innocent was night and was there as a soul from the other world did not know who he was, and I entreated him three times to talk or leave." - "Ouch!" his father replied, "I just ocasionas trouble. Get out of my presence, I do not want to see you more" - "Well, father gladly, but wait until it is day, and I'll know what's scary, so I learn a trade which will support me." - "Learn what you want," his father said, "everything is indifferent to me there are five hard so you do not miss the moment to eat, leave and not tell anyone where you are or who your father to. do not be ashamed of you. " - "Well, father, do what you want, do not be care for me." As was day the young man stayed with his five dollars in his pocket, and started down the road, constantly saying: "Who teaches me what it is fear? who teaches me what is fear? " Then he found a man who heard the words he said the young man to himself, and when they had gone a little to a site that a gallows, he said looked "Look, there is poor seven to those who for his many sins have cast land and do not want to receive in heaven, so you see they are learning to fly, put under them, wait for it at night and know what is fear. " - "If not more than that," said the young man, "I'll do it easily, but be sure to teach me what is scary and I will give my five dollars, back to me early in the morning." So was the young man where he was hanged, put under and waited outside at night and cold as had lit a fire; but at midnight air it was so cold that did not help anything the fire; and like the air to move the bodies and bumping into each other, he thought that having cold that was on the side of the fire, much more should have those who were farther away, so we tried together to warm up, and as he was very compassionate, he picked up the stairs and picked up one after another until he dropped to seven. Then more wood put on fire, blew and placed around for it to warm. But as the fire moved and made no effect on their bodies, he said to them, "Take heed what you do, because if I do not return to hang you." But the dead heard him were silent and still without any movement. Bothered, then he said: "Since you do not want to listen to me, after I have proposed to help you, you do not want you calentéis more." And again he hangs one after another. Then he burst into the side of the fire and fell asleep, and the next morning the man came, I wanted to give him the five dollars; for he said, "Now you know what is fear?" - "No," he replied, "Why do I have to know Those who are up there with your mouth shut, and they are so stupid, they do not want even warm." Then he saw the man who was not money for him and he left saying: "This has not gone very well." The young man went on his way, and began again to say, "Who will teach me what is scary is? who will teach me what is fear? " Hearing of a wheelwright who was behind him, he asked: "Who are you?" - "I do not know," he replied the young man. "Where are you from?" Cartman asking continued. "I do not know." - "Who is your father?" - "I can not say it." - "What're thinking?" - "Ah!" the young man replied, "I wanted to find out who teach what is fear, but nobody wants to show me." - "Do not talk nonsense," replied the carter, "Come with me, come with me and see if I can get it." The young man continued walking with road and at night came to an inn, where determined to stay. But as soon as he reached the door, he began to say aloud: "Who teaches me what is fear who teaches me what is fear?" The innkeeper at the hear laughed saying, "If you want to know, here you are presented with a good chance." - "Shut up," he said the innkeeper, "many daredevils have already lost their lives, and it would be a pity that such beautiful eyes should never see the light again." But the young man replied, "Even though something worse happened, I would know, because that is the reason for my trip." No let anyone rest at the inn until he was told that not far from there was a ruined castle where he could find out what was scared by hovering on it three nights. The king had offered his daughter to wife, who was the most beautiful maiden who had seen the sun, which wanted to test. In the castle there were great treasures hidden that were guarded by evil spirits, which were then discovered, and were enough to make you rich to poor. The next morning the young king appeared, saying that if he would allow three nights at the ruined castle. The king looked as pleased him, he said: "You can carry three things, you shall not have life, to stay in the castle." The young man replied, "Well, give me bring wood to make fire, a lathe and a cut with his blade." The king gave him everything he asked for. As night was the young man entered the castle, lit in a room a beautiful fire, he puts the pit side with the knife, and sat on the lathe. "Ah, if I could but fear!" He said, "but I will learn it here either." Towards midnight began to stoke the fire and when it was blowing cried suddenly in the corner: "Meow Meow !, We've got cold!" - "Crazy," he said, "why do you cry if you are cold, come, sit by the fire and warm yourselves?." And hardly she had said this, he saw two beautiful black cats that were put to him and looked at him with eyes of fire; to the little while, as they had warmed, they said: "Comrade, do you want us to play cards?" - "Why not?" He replied, "but just show the legs first." - "Then they extended their hands." - "Ah!" He said, "what long nails you have to stand still !, you must first cut." Then he grabbed her feet, put on the chopping block and said well by the legs. "I have already seen the nails," said, "now I do not feel like playing." He killed them and threw them into the water. But some have been thrown, he would sit by the fire, when they came from all corners and crevices a multitude of cats and black dogs with chains of fire; There were so many in number that they could not tell; They shouted horribly, around the fire, pulled him and wanted to scratch. Looked around with greater peace of mind, and so he took his knife uncomfortable, exclaiming, "Begone, rogue." And toward them. Part escaped and the other killed her and threw it to the pond. As he concluded his task put to blow the fire and warm up again. And as soon as he sat, he began to keep open no longer eyes and wanted to sleep. He looked around, and saw in a corner a beautiful bed. "It comes in handy," he said. And he fell on it. But when going to shut his eyes, he began to walk the bed itself and give turns around the room. "So much the better," he said, "the better." And the bed continued running through the floors and stairs as if thrown her six horses. But suddenly he dropped, keeping him under a weight and feeling as if a mountain encima.Pero up the blankets and pillows and got up saying, "I do not want to walk." He sat next to the fire and slept until the next day. The king came to the next morning, and when he saw lying on the ground believed that the ghosts had made an end with him and he was dead. Then he said, "Too bad man So handsome!" The young man to hear him, stood up and replied: "There are no pity me why." The king admired, asked him how he had fared. "Okay," he replied, "has already spent one night, the other two will get over likewise." When he came home he looked astonished the innkeeper: "I was afraid," he said, "not to see you alive, you know already what is fear?" - "No," he replied, "everything is useless, if there is someone who wants to show me." The second night was back to the castle, sat down by the fire, and began his old song: "Who taught me what is fear?" At midnight began to hear noises and blows, first weak, then stronger, and finally fell down the chimney with a lot of noise half a man, staying ahead of him. "Hello," he said, "there is still the other half, this is very little." Then the noise started again, seemed thundering, and the castle fell apart and dropped the other half. "Wait," he said, "light a little fire." As soon as he had finished and looked around, saw who had joined the two sides, and a very horrible man sat at his post. "We have not bet," said the young man, "the bank's mine." The man wanted to make him sit up, but the young man with all his strength up and put back in place. Then men fell one after the other, they brought nine bones and two skulls and began to play bowling. The young, rejoicing, said, "Can I be in the game?" - "Yes, if you have money." - "And quite," I replied, "but your balls are not quite round." Then he took a skull, put it on the lathe and rounded. "So they are better," he said, "now we're going." He played with them and lost some money; but as it struck twelve all disappeared from his eyes. He sat and slept with the utmost tranquility. The next morning the king was informed. "How have you been?" he asked. "I played and lost a couple of pesetas," he replied. "Have not you afraid?" - "On the contrary, I had so much fun I wish I knew what fear." On the third night sat back on his bench and said inconvenienced, "When will I know what is fear?" As soon as he started getting him were later presented with six very tall men brought a coffin. "Oh!" He said, "this is surely my cousin, who died a couple of days." He motioned with his hand and said, "Come, little cousin, come." He put the coffin on the ground, approached him and lifted the lid; there was a corpse inside. Tempted him face, but it was cold as ice. "Wait," he said, "I'll heat up a bit." He went to the fire, warmed his hand and put it on his face, but he remained cold dead. Then he picked him up, took him to the fire and put her shoulder and rubbed his arms that the blood might moving again. As he was getting nowhere, it came up suddenly: "If I get him in bed, it gets warm." He was dead on the bed, covered her and stepped aside. In the short time he was dead hot and began to move. Then the young man said, "Look, brother, I've already warmed up." But the dead man got up saying, "Now I want to strangle you." - "Hi!" replied, "Are these the thanks you give me? Soon you return to your box!" He took it, he got into it and closed; Then came the six men and led him away. "Do not scare me, he said, here I do not learn to make a living." Then came a man who was taller than the others and looked terrible, but it was old and had a long white beard. "Ah, evil, you'll soon know what is fear, because you will die!" - "Not so soon," he replied the young man. "I want to kill you," said the wizard. "Gradually, that is not so easily, I am as strong as you and much more yet." - "We'll see," said the old man, "come, we will try." Then led him to a very dark corridor with a forge, he took an ax and struck an anvil, who got a blow on earth. "That I do much better," said the young man. And he went to another anvil; The old man put his hand to him, and his beard touched the anvil. Then the young man took the ax, split the anvil of a blow, and struck the old man's beard. "You're mine," he said, "now you'll die." Then he took a crowbar and began to beat her to the old man until he began complaining and offered, if I let him give him great riches. The young man dropped the ax and let him go. The old man led him back to the castle and showed him three chests full of gold, which was in a cave. "Part of it is the poor, the other of the king, the third yours." Then it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, leaving the young man in the dark. "I'll manage me," he said. He began groping, found the way to the room and slept there by the fire. The next morning he returned the king and said, "Now you know what is fear." - "No," he replied, "I do not know, here's been my dead cousin and a bearded man who has taught me a lot of money, but has not been able to teach what is fear." Then he told the king: "You have disenchanted the castle and marry my daughter." - "That's all right," he replied, "but yet not know what's scary." Then took all the gold there and celebrated weddings, but the young king, loved his wife and was very happy, he kept saying: "who will teach me what fear is who will teach me?" This displeased to his wife and told his daughters: "I'll try to teach what is fear." He went to the stream running through the garden and sent bring a whole bucket full of fish. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife got up clothes and put the bucket full of water over him, so that the fish jumping, dropped a few drops of water. Then he woke up saying, "Oh who scares me who scares me, dear wife and I now know what is scary!?."
Drawbacks running world	1359	1696	Spanish	A poor woman had a son who wanted to travel and run world. Said to her mother: - How would you like to leave? I have no money, what you'll get the boy replied: - I'll manage. Everywhere I'll saying, not much, not enough time mucho.Marchóse and was always repeating: "Not much, not much, not much," until he met fishermen and told them: - God help you! Not much, not much, not mucho.- What do you say, animal: not a lot and taking off the net, actually had few fish. One of the fishermen railed against him, armed with a stick, saying - I'm going to measure yourself ribs! - and undertook to home runs with him.- What I have to say, then? - said the mozo.- Let pesquéis many who pesquéis many !, that's what you decir.Siguió the boy walking and repeating again and again: "That pesquéis many who pesquéis many." A short time came to a gallows, where there was a poor thief who were about to be hanged. And the boy said: - Good morning. That pesquéis many who pesquéis many - What do you say, imbecile? Still there must be more bad people in the world? Is not it enough and received some more.- sticks What should I say then - You say? ". God help this poor soul," he hurried away boy, always repeating: "God have mercy on this poor soul !. " And soon after he found next to a pit where a knacker was skinning a horse. The young man says: - Good morning. God have mercy on this poor soul - What do I say, stupid? - said the skinner, largándole with your tool one bump in the neck that made him lose the world of vista.- What should I say then? - he asked infeliz.- You say, "A pit with carrion!." And the boy went on, endlessly repeating: "To the pit with carrion !." Behold crossed with a car full of passengers and said: - Good morning. Let's den with carrion! And it so happened that the carriage overturned in a ditch. The driver grabbed the whip and, by taking it to lashes, left the boy so badly, he had no choice but to return, almost dragged to his mother's house. And since then they took forever wanting to travel.
Juan hopefully	789	1415	Spanish	John had served seven years his master, and said: - My love, I finished my time, and I would go back home with my mother. Soldada.Respondióle pay me my master: - I have served faithfully and honestly; the prize will be up to the service - and gave him a piece of gold as big as the head of John. He took out his handkerchief this pocket, he wrapped it in gold and lifted it to his shoulder, he made his way home. As he walked, he saw a man mounted on horseback, advancing cheerfully to a trot ligero.- Ouch! - Juan exclaimed aloud - what a beautiful thing it is to ride! Goes one sitting in a chair, he does not stumble against the stones or breaks boots and cuenta.Oyólo forward without realizing the rider and the horse stopping, he said: - Hey, John, why are you walking - What choice have I! - he answered the boy -. I bring this clod home; true that it is gold, but do not let me go right head, and weighs in hombro.- You know what? - said to the gentleman -. Let's change; I give the horse, and you give me your terrón.- a thousand loves! - she exclaimed Juan -. But you have to carry him, declare it advierto.Apeóse the rider, took the gold and helping Juan to ride, set him the reins in his hand and said: - If you want to run, you do not have but flicking tongue and call out "hop, hop!." John was beside himself with joy at the seen perched on his horse, trotting as freely and comfortably. At the after a while it occurred that could speed up again, and began flicking tongue and yell "hop, hop !." The horse began to trot, and before John could realize, had been fired from the saddle and was lying in the ditch which separated the fields of road. The horse would have escaped, have not arrested a farmer who happened to pass by driving a cow. Juan joined as he could, shook and very sulky, told the farmer: - That of riding has very practical jokes, especially with a nag like this, you jettisoned potentially break your neck. For all of the world I will ride it. Your cow yes that is good animal; one can walk quietly behind her, and also gives you milk, butter and cheese every day. What not give for having a cow as well - Well - said the farmer - if you like so much, I'm willing to cambiártela by caballo.Juan gladly accepted the deal, and the peasant, raising his mount away all prisa.Entretanto, Juan, guiding his cow, extolled the good business that had just made: "If I have a piece of bread, and much will you get to miss me, I can always accompany butter and cheese, and when you are thirsty, I will order the cow and drink milk. What more can you wish for, my heart ?. " Made high in the first hostelry he found, and happily ate his remaining provisions, spraying them with half a glass of beer, which paid with the few quarters in his pocket. Then he continued his route, leading cow to the village of his mother. noon approached; hacíase he is sweltering heat, and Juan was found in a wasteland that could not happen in less than an hour. So intense was the embarrassment that thirst was sticking his tongue to the palate. "This is hopeless - thought Juan -; I will order the cow, and milk will refresh me." Atola to the dry trunk of a tree, and as I had no bucket, put his leather cap to collect milk; but even though he strove he could not make out even a drop. And as he did so clumsily, animal, impatient at the end pególe kicked in the head such that threw him rolling on the floor and left it a bit pointless. Fortunately he happened to pass by there a butcher, carrying a young pig in a carretón.- bromitas Go! - he exclaimed, helping Juan to levantarse.Explicóle this your mishap, and the other, holding out his boot, said: - Drink a drink to refresh yourself. This cow milk probably will not because it is old; at best, will serve to pull a cart or go to the matadero.- That's a good one! - said Juan, pulling their hair -. Who would have thought? For one who was at home, it would not hurt to kill an animal as well, with the amount of meat you have. But I will not tell me much beef; insipidus meeting. A good pig like yours is something else. This really tastes good, and also sausages - Hey, John - said the butcher -; I am willing to do you a favor, and change the pig by vaca.- God will reward your kindness - John answered and, handing the cow, the other unloaded from the truck the pig, and put in hand the rope that ataba.Siguió Juan walk, delighted by how well they were fulfilling their wishes; barely out crooked one thing, in a trice he was unbowed. Later he joined a boy carrying a goose under his arm to be beautiful blanca.Después good morning, John began to tell the other how lucky they had and how fortunate I had been successive changes. The boy realized, in turn, that had the goose for a meal of bautizo.- Sopésala - he continued, holding it by the wings -; look how beautiful she is; the were fattened for eight weeks. To whoever eats this roast will gush fat on both sides of the Mouth. Yes - Juan said, hefting the animal with one hand - has its weight; but my pig is not anís.Entretanto grain, the boy, who never ceased to look everywhere, looking worried, she said: - Listen, I fear that your pig things are not as God intended. In the last village through which I passed they had just stolen a pig from the stable of the mayor; and I would not be surprised if it was that you carry. They have dispatched people looking for him, and bad business if you do atrapasen with him; for if you could please give some time to come out sombra.El good old Juan was afraid: - God! - he cried, and turning to the boy, he said -: Get me out of this predicament; you know more than I do about all this. Stay with pork, and give me, however, much oca.- is the risk that I run - answered the boy, but I can not allow a disgrace to mind my culpa.Y, grabbing the rope, he hurried away quickly with the pork, along a narrow road, while Juan, free of anguish, continued his people with the goose under his arm. "While I think it - I was saying - go out winning change First, the rich roast;. Then, with the amount of fat that will come, we will have butter for three months, and finally, with this beautiful white feather me will fill a pillow, where I will sleep like a prince Do not put just glad my mother "going through the last village topóse with a sharpener who was with his lathe and, grinding wheel, singing:".!. I sharpen scissors with great lightness, where the wind blows, there will not laziness "He remained standing staring Juan.; to the Cape, approached him and said: - We should go fine things, for you are very happy while you give the rueda.- Yes - answered Sharpener -, this office has a gold background. A good knife sharpener, whenever he puts his hand in his pocket the bag with money. But where you bought that beautiful goose - not bought, but I changed it to a pig. - And the pig - Say a cow by cow him.- What? - I gave it in exchange for a horse. - And the horse - Oh !, I bought the horse for a piece of gold as big as my Head. And gold - Well, my salary was seven years.- Well, I tell you that you have known to gain from each change - said the grinder -. And you just need to find a way that every day, Waking up, hear sound money in his pocket, and your fortune will completa.- And how does that? - For making you asked Juan.- Sharpener, like me; for which, in fact, it will not need more than having a grindstone; the other comes by itself. I have one that, indeed, is somewhat damaged, but, hey, I avendría to cedértelo in exchange for the goose. What do you say to that? - and I ask? - John answered -. Would you do me the happiest man on earth. Taking money every time you reach into your pocket, what am I to worry anymore? - and, holding the goose, he stayed with the grindstone. Sharpener, taking the floor of a heavy pebble, he said: - In addition, I give you this good stone; You can hit on it to straighten crooked nails and old. Take it and save cuidadosamente.Cargó Juan with stone, and resumed his journey with hearts overflowing with joy, "good is that I was born under a lucky star - said - because I see all my wishes filled, as if he had the gift! of divination. " Meanwhile, began to feel fatigued, then came walking since dawn; In addition, it nagged hunger because at the time of optimism, when the cow business, had liquidated all its provisions. Finally, he could no longer move forward but with enormous effort, stopping at every moment; not counting the stones were heavy thing. She could not alienate himself thinking how nice it would have been for him not to have to llevarlas.Avanzando like a snail, arrastróse to a source with the idea of ​​resting beside her and a nice drink of fresh water. To avoid damaging the stones sitting, carefully put on the edge; Then, crouching to drink, he made a false move And, plum !, the two stones fell to the bottom. John, seeing that sank into the water, jumped for joy, and kneeling, he thanked God, with tears in his eyes, for having granted that last grace, and had delivered such a simple way, without remorse for him, the two very heavy stones that both estorbaban.- in the world you do not hear there is a man more fortunate than me! - he exclaimed enthusiastically. And with light, heart free of all charges, resumed the route, not stopping until you get home to his mother.
Juan de Hierro	1292	502	Spanish	Once upon a time a king who had a great forest near his palace, full of hunting of all species. One day he sent a huntsman to kill a deer custom; but the man did not return. "Maybe you've thought of something," thought the King, and the next day, sent two other hunters in search; but neither they returned. A third day he summoned all the huntsmen of the Court, and said - Roam throughout the forest and not slacken until he found the three I desaparecidos.Pero not returned any of the group, nor knew nothing of dogs ellos.A pack with carrying thereafter, and no one dared to venture into that forest, which was silent and lonely, only now and then could be seen flying over it an eagle or a hawk. So many years passed, until one day he presented himself to the King an outsider hunter and asking provisions and victuals, ofrecióse to penetrate into the dangerous forest. The king, however, refused to do, saying - It's a sinister place. I'm afraid I'll have better luck than others, and not depart him.But the hunter insisted: - Leave him try on my own risk, sir; I do not know the miedo.Y the hunter into the forest, followed by his dog. A little while, the animal vented one piece and set to pursue; but scarcely had advanced a few steps, he found himself before a deep puddle, forcing him to stop. Naked arm out of the water and, seizing the dog, sumergióse him again. In the view, the hunter stepped back looking three men cubes provided, with which drained the pond water. When the fund was bare, he appeared a wild-looking guy with the tan body like rusty iron, and hair that covered her face and fell to her knees. Atáronlo with ropes and led him to the palace, where his appearance produced huge surprise. King sent locking him in an iron cage and prohibited under penalty of death, no one opened the door, entrusting the custody of the key to the Queen in person. From that moment, everyone could travel through the forest without peligro.Tenía the King a son of eight years, playing one day in the courtyard of the palace, to shooting his golden ball, he went to his fall into the cage. He ran there the little boy and said: - Give me the ball - first you have to open the door - answered the prisionero.- No - replied the boy - I will not do this thing;! King has forbidden it - and ran away. A returned the next day to claim his ball, and the man insisted: - Open the door! -; no more small quiso.Al third day, having left the King hunting again load the rapacious and said - if he wanted to, could not open the door; I have the llave.Replicóle then savagely beneath the pillow of your mother; encontrarás.El child there, eager to retrieve his toy, silenced all objections and went to get the key. The door was opened, heavily, and little fingers caught in it. He went wild, and then turn the tables on the little prince, he hastened to flee. But the boy he was afraid, and, breaking to mourn, called: - Wild, do not leave! If you escape, I pegarán.Retrocedió the fugitive and charging to the small shoulders, ran to hide in the back bosque.Al see the King and empty the cage, asked the Queen what had happened. But she knew nothing. He went to look for the key, and found none. He called the boy, but no one answered him. Then the king sent people around looking for his son; but they all returned without news of him. It was not hard to guess what happened, and the Court was seized with great distress. Meanwhile, the wild had returned to his dark forest. He went down to the little boy from her shoulder and said - not ever see your father or your mother; but I will keep with me, because I have restored freedom and I pity you. If you do as I say, you'll have very good. I own more gold and riches than anyone in the mundo.Preparó for a bed of moss boy and the creature he was soon asleep. At the next day, the man led him to the edge of a spring and said - You see? This source of gold is pure and clear as crystal; sit on the bank and be careful not to drop anything on it, it would be impure. Every day at dusk, come to check if you've fulfilled my orden.Sentóse the child to the edge of the spring and could see that occasionally appeared in its waters a fish or a snake gold, as he watched not fall anything they. He is finding himself sitting and suddenly felt such intense finger pain, mechanically dipped in water. Although he retired soon, he was golden; and although he could not erase the oro.Al evening, presented himself iron man and, looking at the child, he asked: - What happened to the source - Nothing has happened to him - answered the little , hiding his hand on the back so you could not see the finger. But the man said - you put your finger in the water. By this time I forgive you; but beware of anything put back in ella.A the next morning, the boy resumed his guard at the edge of the spring. Finger hurt him again, and he rubbed it on his head; but he had the misfortune that fell one hair to the water, and although hurried to get him out, I was completely browned. A man arriving iron ocurrido.- knew what you dropped a hair in water - he said -. I forgive you again. But if it happens again, the source will be sullied, and will not be able to live with me, on the third day, the boy was near the fountain without moving your finger, but it hurt a lot. As time he had long wanted to look in the mirror of the source, and tipping his head to look good face, his hair long, that reached to his shoulders, was soaked in water, and although immediately he withdrew them, went gold and bright as the sun. You can imagine the horror of the poor child. He took his handkerchief and hit him in the head so that the iron man not viese.Pero when he came, I knew everything and said: - Take off the scarf! - and they appeared golden loops. He tried to apologize small, but nothing sirvió.- You have not passed the test, and you can not stay here. Márchate running world. So you know how hard it is poverty. But as you have a good heart, and I wish you well, I will grant you a favor. When you are in a hurry, run to the woods and shouts, "Iron John !." I will come to your aid. My power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in abundancia.El prince left the woods and was launched by beaten track and not beaten until the end came to a big city. She reached into her work but could not find it, for nothing had taught him to earn a living. Finally, he presented himself at the palace of the King and asked if they wanted as a servant. People from the Court did not know what to make of him; But as I turned sympathetic, he was allowed to stay. In the end, the cook took his service, saying it could go for firewood and water and collect the cenizas.Un day were absent waiters, the cook ordered him to serve food to the royal table; but the boy, not wanting her hair gold saw, he allowed himself to put the cap. A King he had never such a thing happened and said: - When you present to serve the real table must descubrirte.- O Lord! - justificóse the child - I do not dare, because I tiña.El king summoned the cook and scolded him for taking his service to that child, ordering him to dismiss him on the spot. Cook, however, pitying the small, changed by the porter the jardinero.Desde then, the boy had to spend hours in the garden, planting and watering, digging and hoeing, exposed to wind and weather. One summer day he was working alone, the heat was so torrid that the cap to give her the air was removed. In the reflected rays of the sun in her hair, glitter and sparkle of this it was to project into the room princess. It jumped out of bed to find out where it came from the reflection. Seeing the boy yelled: - Boy, bring me a bouquet of flowers he hastened to put back the cap and, taking some wildflowers, he made a bunch of them!. When he climbed the ladder to take him to the princess, he found himself with jardinero.- Is the Princess How can you think carrying a bouquet of flowers so vulgar? - riñóle man. Back to the garden, fast, and select the most rare and bellas.- No - she replied the little -. Wild smell and taste better más.Al you enter the room, and said the daughter of the King: - Take your hat off. can not appear before me with the head cubierta.Pero he returned to be justified as before: - I can not, I have tiña.La maid took the cap with a brusque gesture, and gave him golden hair over her shoulders, and it was so nice to see it was glory. Wanted to escape the child; but she stopped him, taking him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. The boy, who made no case of money, was to deliver the coins to the gardener: - The gift to your children to play with them - I dijo.A the next morning again send the princess to bring him a bouquet of flowers of the field, and when it was presented to him, he would also take his hat; but the boy remained subject with both hands. She gave him a handful of ducats, gave the child to the gardener for his children, as the day before. The same scene repitióse the third day. Princess could not remove the cap, and would not saved the little boy dinero.Al time, the country went to war. The king summoned his troops, doubting whether he could resist the enemy, who was very powerful and had a great army. gardener boy then said: - I'm older and I want to go to war. Give me a caballo.Los other with a laugh, they replied: - When we left, I want. I leave one in the establo.Y indeed, when the troops had left, down the block and he took her to the animal, which was lame in one leg and hobbled progressed. Sat on it, after all, going to the dark forest and on reaching the shore, shouted three times: "Iron John !," so strongly that his voice echoed through the árboles.Enseguida was presented wild and asked - what do you want - I want a good steed, for I am going to have guerra.- Lo, and even more savage than pides.El stepped back into the forest, and the little time left a groom him driving a beautiful horse snorting through the nostrils and seemed untamed. Behind them came a host of troops with iron armor and swords that sparkled in the sun. The boy gave the groom and his lame nag, riding the steed, stood at the front of the troops. In the approach to the battlefield, much of the army of the king had already fallen, and the rest was about to take flight. He then attacked the boy with his warriors, and carrying on the enemy like a hurricane, knocked as opposed to its passage. The opposing troops tried to flee, but the young man gave chase and annihilated. Then, instead of going to the King, he led his army to the forest, byways, and called back to Juan de hierro.- What do you want? - Asked the salvaje.- Keep your steed and your army, and give me back my horse cojo.Hízose as requested, and the boy started back to the palace in his rocín.Cuando mounted the King reached the Court, his daughter came out to meet him and she congratulated him on his victoria.- not have been the winner - answered the King - but an unknown gentleman who came to my rescue at the front of their tropas.Quiso the princess know who was such a gentleman, but his father did not know .- All I can tell you - he added - is launched in pursuit of the enemy, and I've not seen ver.Ella went to the gardener to ask him about his assistant, and the man, laughing, said: - just arriving in his lame nag, and everyone received with derision, exclaiming: "Here comes our hero !." And he asked: "Where were sleeping during the fight ?," he has replied: "I have done a good job, without me, I would have gone wrong." And all the carcajada.Dijo have released the King to his daughter: - I want to organize a big party that lasts three days and you shall drive out a golden apple. Perhaps this desconocido.Cuando announced the party, the boy went to the forest and called Juan de hierro.- What do you want? - éste.- be the one asked him take the golden apple of princesa.- can take it for yours - Iron John answered -. I will give you a red armor and will ride one alazán.Al brioso reach that date appeared the boy to gallop, and standing among the other knights, was not recognized by anyone. He advanced the princess and threw a golden apple. But nobody caught him, but no sooner had in his possession, fled at full speed. In the second day Iron John was given a white armor and a horse of the same color. Again he seized the apple, and again walked away with it without losing momento.Irritóse the King and said: - This is not allowed; introduce yourself and tell his nombre.Y gave orders that, if he returned to appear the gentleman of the apple, he was pursuing if he tried to escape, and give him death if he refused to obedecer.El third day Iron John she gave him a armor and a black horse, and he returned to stay with the apple. A fleeing with her, persiguiéronle King's men, coming one so close that wounded him in the leg with the tip of the sword. However, the gentleman managed to escape; but they were so formidable that hit the jumps his horse cayéndosele helmet, his pursuers could see that he had golden hair. A return to the palace Rey.Al explained it to the next day, the princess asked the gardener for his ayudante.- is in the garden working. It's a very strange young man. It was at the party and did not return until yesterday. He also taught my children three golden apples that had ganado.El King did call his presence, and the boy was presented, but also undiscovered. But the princess approached him, he took off his hat, which the hair fell into her golden curls over the shoulders, so beautiful boy that everyone present pasmaron.- Was it you the gentleman who was appearing the three days at the party, each with different armor, and won three golden apples? - she Asked the KING: Yes - answered the boy - and there are apples - and taking them out of his pocket, handed it to the king -. And if you still want more evidence, you can see the wound that caused me your men to the chase. And I'm also the gentleman who gave you victory over your enemigos.- If you can actually perform such feats not been born to garden boy. Tell me, who is your father - my father is a mighty king, and in terms of gold, I have it in abundance, all that quiero.- Well see - said the king - I'm in debt to you. Can I repay you somehow - Yes - answered the boy - if you can: Give me your wife to hija.Echóse princess laughed and said: - He does not beat around compliments! I had noticed in her golden hair that was not an assistant gardener - and, approaching him, gave him a beso.A wedding present were her parents, overjoyed because they had lost all hope of seeing his son Dear. And when they were already seated at the splendid table, suddenly the music stopped, the doors opened and in came a stately king, followed by a large retinue. He went to the prince, embraced him and said: - I am Iron John. I had been bewitched, transforming me into this wild man; but thou hast redeemed me. Yours are all the treasures that I possess.
John the ready	301	1696	Spanish	John's mother asked: - Where are you going, John answers Juan: - A house MARGARET Fare thee well, John. - Well me go. Goodbye, Mother. - Goodbye, Juan.Juan comes home MARGARET Good morning, MARGARET Good morning, John. What do you bring good? - Bring nothing; you me darás.Margarita gives John a needle. John says: - Goodbye, Goodbye MARGARET, Juan.Juan takes the needle, puts on a hay wagon and returns home after Goodnight carro.-, MOTHER: Good evening, John. Where have you been? - With Margarita estuve.- What you took - I took nothing; she gave me. - What gave you Margarita? - A needle me dio.- And where have the needle, Juan? - In the hay wagon metí.- you made silly, John; owed stuck the needle in manga. - No matter, mother; I'll do better again. - Where are you going, John - A house Margarita, mother. - Do well, Juan.- Well I will. Goodbye, Mother. - Goodbye, Juan.Juan Margarita comes home. - Good morning, MARGARET Good morning, John. What do you bring good? - Bring nothing; you me darás.Margarita gives John a knife. - Goodbye, Goodbye MARGARET, Juan.Juan takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve and returns to his casa.- Goodnight MOTHER: Good evening, John. Where were - With Margarita estuve.- What you took - I took nothing?; she me dio.- What gave you Margarita - A knife dio.- Where I have the knife, John - You did stuck it in manga.- silly, John. You should put it in his pocket. - No matter, mother; again I will mejor.- Where are you going, John - A house Margarita, mother. - Do well, Juan.- Well I will. Goodbye, goodbye MOTHER, Juan.Juan Margarita comes home. - Good morning, MARGARET Good morning, John. What do you bring good? - Bring nothing; you me darás.Margarita gives John a little goat. - Goodbye, Goodbye MARGARET, Juan.Juan takes the goat, ties its legs and puts it in his pocket. A coming home, is ahogada.- Goodnight MOTHER: Good evening, John. Where have you been? - With Margarita estuve.- What you took - I took nothing; she gave me. - What gave you Margarita? - A goat me dio.- And where have the goat, Juan? - In your pocket you made metí.- silly, John. You should tie the goat of cuerda.- No matter, mother; I'll do better again. - Where are you going, John - A house Margarita, mother. - Do well, Juan.- Well I will. Goodbye, Mother. - Goodbye, Juan.Juan Margarita comes home. - Good morning, MARGARET Good morning, John. What do you bring good? - Bring nothing; you darás.Margarita me, gives John a piece of bacon. - Goodbye, Goodbye MARGARET, Juan.Juan takes the bacon, ties it to a rope and dragging behind him. Dogs come and eat bacon. A strip the house still reach the rope, but nothing hangs from her.- Goodnight MOTHER: Good evening, John. Where have you been? - With Margarita estuve.- What you took - I took nothing; she gave me. - What gave you Margarita? - A piece of bacon gave me, - Where have Bacon, John - I tied a rope, brought it dredges, dogs will comieron.- ill done, John. You should bring the bacon on Head. No matter, mother; again I will mejor.- Where are you going, John - A house Margarita, MOTHER thee well, Juan.- Well I will. Goodbye, goodbye MOTHER, Juan.Juan comes home MARGARET Good morning, MARGARET Good morning, John. What bring good - Bring nothing; you me darás.Margarita gives John a Bye, Bye MARGARET ternera.-, Juan.Juan takes the calf, puts it on the head, and the animal kicks his the Face. Good night, MOTHER good evening, John. Where were - Margaret estuve.- What you took - I took nothing, she gave me dio.- What you Margarita - A beef I have dio.- Where beef, Juan - On the head I put it; Face. hurt me the ill done, John. You ought to bring her tied up and put in the care pesebre.- No, mother; again I will mejor.- Where are you going, John - A house Margarita, MOTHER thee well, Juan.- Well I will. Goodbye, goodbye MOTHER, Juan.Juan comes home MARGARET Good morning, MARGARET Good morning, John. What bring good - bring anything; you me darás.Margarita says John: - I'm contigo.Juan catches Margarita, tie it to a rope, leads to the manger and tied him. Then he goes to his MOTHER Goodnight MOTHER: Good evening, John. Where were - With Margarita estuve.- What you took - Carrying, nada.- What gave you Margarita - Nothing gave me?; ? He came conmigo.- And where you left Margarita - I led her to a rope; I tied her to the rack, and scattered grass- ill done, John; you had to put tender eyes. - No matter, mother; again I will mejor.Juan going to the barn, he draws eyes to all calves and sheep and put them in the face of Margarita. Margarita gets angry, he escapes loose, and John is no girlfriend.
Hans-my-Hedgehog (John Hedgehog)	1023	441	Spanish	Once there was a rich farmer who had no children with his wife. Often when he was with the other peasants to the city they mocked him and asked why he had no children. Once he became very angry and when he got home he said: "I want to have a child Although a hedgehog!" His wife then had a son who was a hedgehog half up and half down a child, and when she saw her son was shocked and said, "You see We've thrown up a curse!" Then the husband said: "It is no use lamenting, we have to baptize the child, but we can not give any godfather." The woman said, "we can not baptize rather than the name of Hans-my-Hedgehog." When he was baptized the priest said: "Him with his quills he can not put on a bed as they should." So I prepared a little straw behind the stove and went to bed there Hans-my-Hedgehog. He could not feed on the mother's chest, because had stuck with his quills. Thus, he spent eight years lying behind the stove, and his father was tired of him and wishing him to die; but not dying, and still lying there. It happened then that was in the city market and the farmer wanted to go. Then he asked his wife what he should bring him. "A little meat and a couple of rolls that are needed at home," she said. Then he asked the maid and she wanted a pair of shoes and stockings rhombus. Finally also he said: "What do you want, Hans-my-Hedgehog?" - "Little Father," he said, "bring me bagpipes walk." When the peasant returned home he gave his wife what had brought him meat and buns; then gave the maid the slippers and socks rhombus, and finally he went behind the stove and gave Hans-my-Hedgehog the bagpipes me. And when Hans-my-Hedgehog had it said: "Padrecito, go, go to the blacksmith and instructs that my rooster shod, then I'll leave riding on it and never return." The father then was very happy because I was going to get rid of him and made shod with the cock, and when he was done, Hans-my-Hedgehog mounted it and left, levándose also pigs and donkeys, because he wanted to keep in the forest. Once there, however, the rooster had to fly with him to a tall tree and stayed there, taking care of the donkeys and pigs, and there was many years until the herd was great, and his father he knew nothing of it. And while on the tree and played his bagpipes music was very beautiful. Once he passed by a king who was lost and heard the music; then he was struck with wonder and sent a servant to look where it came from music. This looked everywhere, but all he saw was up in the tree, a small animal that looked like a cock with a hedgehog on top and it was playing music. Then the king said to the servant who asked him why he was there and if you do not know what the way back to his kingdom. Hans-my-Hedgehog was then dropped from the tree and told him that he would show the way if the king would promise in writing that would give him first what is found in the royal court when he got home. The king thought, "That can do it quietly, as Hans-my-Hedgehog does not understand and can write whatever you want." The King took pen and ink and wrote something, and once done this Hans-my-Hedgehog showed him the way and arrived safely home. But his daughter, he saw her coming from afar, was so overjoyed that she ran to him and kissed him. He remembered Hans-my-Hedgehog and told her what had happened and had him to promise in writing to a strange animal that was riding on a cock and played beautiful music that would give the first thing you will find to the get home, but as Hans-my-hedgehog could not read what he had written was that really would not give it. The princess was very happy and said it was fine, it would never have gone with-my-Hedgehog él.Juan meanwhile, he continued his asses and pigs, and was always glad I climbed the tree and playing his bagpipes. And then it happened that went through there with their servants and other bishops king who was lost and could not go home because the forest was very large. Then also heard in the distance the beautiful music and asked his runner what that would be, they were to look where it came from. The bishop came under the tree and saw everything above the rooster with Hans-my-Hedgehog above. The bishop asked him what he was doing up there. "I am keeping my asses and my pigs. What are you offering?" The bishop said he had lost and could not return to his kingdom if he did not teach them the way. Then Hans-my-Hedgehog with his cock down the tree and told the old king that he would show the way if he gave the first thing you find at home in front of the royal palace. The king said yes and confirmed in writing to Hans-my-Hedgehog that he would. Once done Hans-my-Hedgehog went to the front mounted in the cock and showed him the way, and the king returned happily to his kingdom. When he arrived at the court there was a great joy. The king had an only daughter who was very beautiful and met him, he hugged him and kissed his neck and back were much his old father was glad. He also asked where he had been around the world so long and he then told her that he had already lost point had been never to return, but when going through a great forest means being hedgehog, half man who was riding a rooster climbed a tall tree and played beautiful music had helped him and taught him the way, and that in return he had promised him to give the first thing you find in the royal court, and that the former had she been and I was very sorry. She, however, promised then that, for the sake of his old father, she would go with him if he went by, however, my Hedgehog allí.Juan took care of his pigs, and the pigs had more pigs and they had other and so on, until at the end they were already so many that filled the whole forest. Then Hans-my-Hedgehog made his father told him that emptied and cleaned stables all the people, who would go with a herd of pigs so great that anyone who knew to slaughter should get to do it. When his father heard he was saddened, thinking that Hans-my-Hedgehog had died long ago. But Hans-my-Hedgehog mounted his cock drove pigs to people and made them kill. Phew, what a butcher! Be could hear up to two hours walk away! Then Hans-my-Hedgehog said. "Padrecito, make shod back to my cock in the smithy and then I leave here and will not return in my life" Then the father had the cock shod with and was very pleased that Hans-my-Hedgehog did not want volver.Juan-my-Hedgehog was riding the first kingdom; There the king had given orders that came mounted on a cock and a bagpipe, shoot all against him and give him beat and stab wounds to not come to the palace. When Hans-my-Hedgehog came, they pounced on him with bayonets, but he spurred his rooster, he flew over the door of the palace and landed on the window of the king and told him to give him what was promised or otherwise life would rob him and his daughter. The king then told his daughter with good words he had to go with him if he wanted to save his life and his own. She was dressed in white, and her father gave her a carriage with six horses and a magnificent servants, money and goods. She got in the car and Hans-my-Hedgehog sat with his cock at her side; then they said goodbye and left there, and the king thought he would never see them. But not what he thought happened, because when they were already part of the way of the city Hans-my-Hedgehog I undressed her and jabbed with his hedgehog's skin until it was completely filled with blood. "This is the reward of your falseness. Go away, you do not want," he said, and drove out to his house, and he was outraged to all its vida.Juan-my-Hedgehog, meanwhile, continued riding in his cock with his bagpipes to the second kingdom, whose king also had taught him the way. This, however, had arranged that if he someone like Hans-my-Hedgehog will present arms and let him step frank, launched alive and bring him to the royal palace. When the princess saw him was scared, because I really had a very strange look, but thought he had no choice, because he had promised his father. The king welcomed Hans-my-Hedgehog and he had to accompany him to the royal table, and she sat beside him, and ate and drank. When night fell and were going to sleep she got very scared his quills, but he told her not to be afraid, do not suffer any damage, and the old king told to bet four men at the door alcove and a large fire to be lit, and when he entered the room and went to bed in bed would shed their skin hedgehog and leave her at the foot of the bed; then men would have to go quickly and throw it in the fire and stay there until the fire had consumed. When the clock struck eleven, he went into the bedroom and took off his hedgehog skin and left at the foot of the bed; Then came the men and took quickly and began to fire, and when the fire consumed her he was saved, lying there in bed like an ordinary person, even black as coal, as if he had been burned. The king sent for his doctor and wiped with good ointment and smeared with balsam, then turned white and was turned into a handsome young lord. When the princess saw him was very happy and very pleased got up and ate and drank, and the wedding was held, and the old king gave his kingdom to Hans-my-erizo.Cuando had passed a few years went away with his wife to the house of his father and told him it was his son; The father, however, replied that he had none, he had only had one once, but he was born with quills like a hedgehog and had gone out into the world. He then released and the old father rejoiced and went with him to his kingdom.
Knoist and three children	1311	1965	Spanish	Between Werrel and Soest lived a man named Knoist. He had three sons, one of whom was blind; the second, maimed, and the third was walking stark naked. They came once to the field and saw a hare. The blind man shot himself; the Manco picked it up, and bare slipped it into his pocket. Then came a gigantic river where there were three boats, one ran; another was sinking, and the third had no bottom; they went to that had no bottom and sailed to a gigantic forest, where a huge tree stood. On the tree there was a huge chapel and the chapel, a sacristan Hornbeam and a priest of boxwood, which distribute the holy water which meditael estacazos.Dichoso way to escape such holy water.
Spider and the Turtle	8978	60	Spanish	One day Anansi the spider picked some very fat and tasty vegetables from his garden. The carefully she baked and smell great. I could not wait to sit and eat. Then someone knocked on his door. It was Turtle, who had been traveling all day and was very tired and hungry. "Hello, Anansi," Turtle said. "I've been walking for so long, and I smelled the most delicious vegetables I've ever smelled. So Would you be kind enough to share her with me food?" Anansi could not refuse, because it was the custom in his country to share the meal with visitors at the time to eat. But this did not make him very happy, because it's a bit ambitious and wanted the delicious vegetables all to himself. So Anansi thought for a bit and put together a plan. ". Please come in, Tortuga would be honored to have you as a guest tonight Sit, here's a chair and help yourself.." Tortuga came and sat down, but when I was about to saborar a vegetable, Anansi yelled, "Turtle, Do not you know it's rude to sit at the table with dirty hands? "Turtle looked at his hands and saw they were dirty. He had been crawling all day and had not had a chance to wash them. Then he got up and went to the river to clean his feet. He walked, slowly like all turtles, all the way to the house and when he returned Anansi had started eating. "I did not want these tasty vegetables to cool, so I had to begin," said Anansi. "But please do join me now, Turtle." Tortoise sat back and took a vegetable, but again Anansi yelled. "Turtle, do not you I've heard it before? It's not polite to sit at the table with dirty hands!" She looked down and saw that his clean hands had become a mess, and he had to crawl on them to return to home. Then he walked to the river to wash again. And when he came back this time I was careful to walk on the grass to keep his hands clean. But when he arrived at the table, Anansi had already finished all the tasty vegetables and there was not a bite. Turtle looked at Anansi for a moment and then said, "Thank you for sharing your meal with me If you ever find yourself near my house, please let me return the favor.". And then slowly he walked out the door and kept going. The days went by and Anansi thought more and more on the food that the turtle had offered. His interest in a free dinner grew, and finally could not take it anymore. It was launched one day to find Turtle's house. He found Turtle sunning on the bank of a river just at lunchtime. Turtle looked up and saw him and said, "Hello Anansi, have you come to share dinner with me?" "Oh, yes, yes!" Anansi said that with each passing minute it became hungrier. Turtle went underwater to his house to prepare the table for dinner. Luege climbed the bank and said, "Your place is waiting and the food is ready Please follow me, Anansi.". And then she plunged and started eating slowly. Anansi jumped into the water, but could not get to the bottom of the river. He tried to swim makes the background, but it was so slight that his body rose to the surface each time. He tried to dive and tried backstroke. He tried a running jump, but nothing helped him get to the bottom of the river. Meanwhile, the turtle slowly chewing his food. Anansi was not about to give up a free meal, and went to the shore wondering what he would do. Finally, I had an idea. He started grabbing stones and rocks and stuffed them into the pockets of his jacket. So when he got into the water he sank to the bottom and was able to take his place at the table. The table was a feast consisting of delicious meals. Anansi could not believe how many tasty food was before him and could not wait to start. But as the first bite came, Turtle stopped eating and spoke: "In my country, we do not use our jackets on the table." Anansi noticed that Turtle had removed his jacket before sitting. Anansi started to remove his jacket, and as soon broke off his shoulders, was thrown back to the surface. He stuck his head into the water and saw Turtle, down there, slowly enjoying that wonderful banquet.
The Pif Paf beautiful Catalinita and Poltri	1243	2019	Spanish	- Good morning, Father Patosabio: - Many thanks, Pif Paf Poltri.- Could get your daughter's hand - How not? Provided it seems good to mother Vaca Lechera, a brother Smug, Sister Comequeso and beautiful Catalinita, no problem. "And where the mother Vaca Lechera is?" "Milking cows back in the boyera." - Good morning, mother Cow Lechera.- Thank Pif Paf Poltri.- Could get your daughter's hand - How not? Provided it seems good to the father Patosabio, a brother Smug, Sister Comequeso and beautiful Catalinita, there will be inconvenience "And Brother Presumido where he is?" "Chopping wood behind the ejido" -.. Good morning, Presumido.- brother Thank you, Pif Paf Poltri.- Could get your sister's hand - How not? So they look good to the father Patosabio, mother Vaca Lechera, Sister Comequeso and beautiful Catalinita, there will be inconvenience "And where Sister Comequeso is?" "Cutting grass for rabbits." - Good morning. sister Comequeso.- Many thanks, Pif Paf Poltri.- Could get your sister's hand - How not? So they look good to the father Patosabio, mother Vaca Lechera, a brother Presumido and beautiful Catalinita, there will be inconvenience "And where is the beautiful Catalinita?" "In his room, counting their pennies" -.. Buenos days, beautiful Catalinita.- Thank you, Pif Paf Poltri.- would you like to be my girlfriend - I should think so. If you please Patosabio my father, my mother Vaca Lechera, my brother and my sister Presumido Comequeso, no inconveniente.- Bella Catalinita, how much have dowry - Fourteen real in good coin, a quarter and a half of debts, half a pound of plums, a handful of chips four casseroles, just like it sounds, is not a good dowry - Pif Paf Poltri, what is your occupation? Are you tailor - Much mejor.- ¿Zapatero - Much mejor.- ¿Labrador - Much mejor.- ¿Carpenter - Much mejor.- ¿Herrero - Much mejor.- ¿Molinero - Much mejor.- ¿ you may escobero - that's what I am. Is not it good trade?
Sleeping Beauty	474	410	Spanish	Many years ago there lived a king and queen, who each day said, "Ah, if we had a child's!" But the son did not come. However, once the queen was bathing, a frog jumped out of the water to land, and said: "Your desire shall be carried out and before a year, have a daughter." What he said frog came true, and the queen had such a beautiful girl that the king could not contain himself for joy, and ordered a party. He invited not only his relatives, friends and acquaintances, but also a group of fairies, so they were kind and generous to the girl. They were thirteen of them in his kingdom, but only had twelve golden plates to serve dinner, so he had to do without one. The party was held with splendor, and when it ended, the fairies were regaling the girl with the best and most portentous gifts they could: one bestowed virtue, another beauty, the third riches, and and all others, with everything anyone could want in the world. When eleven of them had given their gifts, suddenly he entered the thirteenth. She wanted revenge for not having been invited, and without warning, without looking at anyone, shouted voice loudly: "The daughter of the king, when he turns fifteen years, prick herself with a spindle, and fall dead immediately!" And needless to say, he turned and left the salón.Todos were stunned, but the twelfth, who had not yet announced his gift, went to the front, and although he could not avoid the evil sentence, if he could reduce it, and said: "She will not die, but go into a deep sleep for a hundred years!" king tried by all means to avoid that misery for the young. He gave orders that every spindle machine spinner or the kingdom was destroyed. Meanwhile, gifts of the other twelve fairies, are fully met in this young. So she was beautiful, modest, good-natured and wise, and everybody who knew her, wanting the profundamente.Sucedió reached on the same day he met her fifteen years, the king and queen were not at home, and the maid was alone in the palace. So she was traveling every place he could, he looked at the rooms and bedrooms as she wanted, and the end came to an old tower. She climbed the stairs narrow staircase to reach a small door. An old key was in the lock, and when turned, the door suddenly opened. In the room was an old woman sitting in front of a spindle, busy spinning her flax. "Good morning, ma'am," said the daughter of the king, "What are you doing with that?" - "I am spinning," said the old woman, nodding her head "What is that thing that turns playing so cute?". joven.Y said she took the spindle and wanted to spin too. But nothing had touched the spindle when the magic decree was fulfilled, and she pricked her finger with El.En as felt the prick, fell on a bed that was there, and went into a deep sleep. And that dream was extended to the entire territory of the palace. The king and queen who were just coming home, and had entered the great hall, they fell asleep, and the whole court with them. Horses also slept in the stable, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons in the eaves of the roof, the flies on the walls, even the fire of the home well flamed, was without heat, the meat was roasting stopped roasting, and the cook who at that time was to pull her hair to the young assistant for having forgotten something, let him and fell asleep. The wind stopped, and in the trees near the castle, not a leaf movía.Pero around the castle began to grow a network of thorns, which every year and made bigger, while surrounded him and covered completely, of so he saw nothing, not even a flag that was on the roof. But the story of Sleeping Beauty "Rosamond," so had called her, was spread throughout the region, so that from time to time kings' sons came and tried to cross the wall of thorns wanting to reach the castle. But it was impossible, for the thorns came together as tightly as if they had hands, and the young men were caught by them, without being able to release, obtained a muerte.Y wretched past hundred years, another prince also came to the place, and heard a old man talking on the curtain of thorns, and it was said that behind the thorns a princess beautiful, called Beautiful Rosa, who has been asleep for a hundred years, and also the king, the queen and the whole court were asleep by hiding same. And he had heard from his grandfather, that many kings' sons had come and tried to cross the wall of thorns, but remained stuck in them and had a death without mercy. Then the young prince said: - "I have no fear, go and see the lovely Rosamond." - The old man tried to dissuade him well as he could, but the young man did not heed their advertencias.Pero at that time the hundred years had already been fulfilled, and the day when Rosamond should be awakened had arrived. When the prince came to where the wall of thorns was, there was nothing but beautiful flowers, which parted from each other by mutual agreement, and let pass the prince without hurting him, then they gathered again behind him like forming a cerca.En the stable of the castle he saw the horses and lawns to hunting dogs lying asleep with pints in the eaves of the roof were the pigeons with their heads under their wings. And when he entered the palace, the flies were asleep on the wall, the cook in the kitchen still had extended his hand to scold the assistant, and the maid was sitting with her black hen that was ready to followed desplumar.Él progress, and the great hall saw the whole court lying asleep, and the throne were the king and reina.Entonces advanced further, and everything was so quiet that a breath could be heard, and finally came to the tower and opened the door of the little room where Rosa was asleep. There lay, so beautiful that he could not look away, then stopped and kissed her. But as soon kissed, Preciosa Rosa opened her eyes and awoke, and looked very dulcemente.Entonces both went down together, and the king and queen woke up and the whole court, and looked at each other with amazement. And the horses in the stable stood up and shook. The hunting dogs jumped and wagged their tails, the pigeons in the eaves of the roof drew their heads from under their wings, looked around and flew to the open sky. Flies flitted back wall. Fire home raised its flames and cooked meat, and cook pulled her hair out the assistant so that even screamed, and the maid plucked the chicken leaving it ready for cocido.Días after the wedding was held in the Prince and Preciosa Rosa with all splendor, and they lived happily until the end of their lives.
The Cristal ball	1864	302	Spanish	He lived once an enchantress, who had three sons who loved each other as brothers; but the old woman did not trust them, fearing that would take away their power. Why he transformed into the largest eagle, which nested on top of a rocky mountain and only occasionally saw him describing wide circles in the immensity of the sky. A second whale made him, condemning him to live within the sea, and only occasionally sticking to the surface, projecting high a powerful jet of water. Both of them bore his human form for two hours each day. The third son, fearing also be turned into vermin, bear or wolf, for example, he fled secretamente.Habíase I learned that in the castle of the Sol de Oro lived an enchanted princess waiting time of their release; but the company who tried exposed his life and youth and twenty had fallen sadly. Just another could try their luck, and no one else after him. And since he was a young man of stout heart, he decided to go in search of the castle of the Sun of Oro.Llevaba long time coming, without being able to find the castle when he found himself lost in a vast forest. Suddenly he discovered the distance two giants that beckoned with his hand, and when he had come, they said - We are quarreling about who of us has to stay with this hat, and since we are equally strong, none can beat the other. Like you, the little men are smarter than we are, we thought you decidas.- How can you dispute about an old hat? She cried the young man.- is that you ignore their virtues. Hat is a miracle, because anyone who puts in an instant will be transported to anywhere hat desee.- Come, 'said the waiter. I go a short distance with him, and when call you, you run; I'll give it to me the first alcance.Y by donning his hat, walked away. But his mind full princess, forgot followed by the giants. Sighing from the bottom of the chest, exclaimed: - Ah, if I could find in the castle of the Golden Sun! -and no sooner had these words left his lips, he found himself on top of a high mountain, at the door of the alcázar.Entró and through all the rooms, finding the princess at last. But what a shock was seeing her !. His face ashen, wrinkled; eyes, murky, and hair rojo.- Vos are the princess whose beauty the whole world praises - Ouch! she said, this is not you contemplate my own figure. Human eyes can only see me in this horrible appearance; but that you know how I really am, look in this mirror, who errs and reflects my verdadera.Y image put in his hand a mirror, in which the young man saw the figure of the most beautiful maiden in the world; and his eyes were flowing bitter tears rolling down his mejillas.Díjole then: - How can you be redeemed? I do not back before any peligro.- who take over the crystal ball and present it to the sorcerer, shall break their power and restore me my original figure. Oh! she added, many have paid with life the attempt, and thou art so young, it hurts to see that expose you to such great danger me.- Nothing will stop him replied me, but tell me what to hacer.- Vas to know everything said the princess: If you descend the mountain on top of which are, find a foot, by a fountain, a bison wild, with which you will have to fight. If you can kill him, he will rise from a bird of fire, carrying in the body burning an egg, and the egg yolk has the crystal ball. But the bird does not release the egg unless being forced to do so, and if it falls to the ground, light, burn everything that is around him, he dissolved along with the crystal ball, and then all fatigues your have been in vain. He lowered the boy to the source, and then heard the snorting and bellowing of the bison fierce. After a long struggle he managed to pierce with his sword, and fell lifeless monster. At the same moment his body desprendióse fire and the bird flew away; but the eagle, that is, the brother of the young man, who came flying through the clouds, pounced in pursuit, pushing the sea and harassing her peck, until the other, unable to resist, let the egg. But this was not to fall into the sea, but in a fisherman's cottage located on the shore, where he immediately began to smoke and fire flames. Then they mounted higher tidal waves, flooding the hut, extinguished the fire. They had been provoked by the other brother, the whale, and once the fire was extinguished, the youth sought for the egg, and was lucky enough to find it. He had not melted yet, but, by the action of cold water, the shell was broken and so he could take out, undamaged, the ball cristal.Al presented her to the witch and show, said this: - My power has been destroyed, and from this moment, are you the king of the castle of the Sol de Oro. you can also disenchant your brothers, returning her figure humana.Corrió the young to the meeting of the princess and coming into his room, the saw in all the splendor of its beauty and, overjoyed, the two exchanged rings.
The buffalo leather boot	1882	952	Spanish	A soldier who fears nothing, neither hurries for nothing. One of this kind had received his license and, not knowing any trade and was unable to make a living, going around the world uncertainly, living on the alms of kind people. He is hanging from his shoulders an old coat, and wore riding boots, buffalo skin; It was all he had left. One day I was walking haphazardly, came to a forest. Ignoring what was that place, and behold, it was sitting on a fallen tree, a man well dressed wearing a green jacket. Hand pitched for the soldier, sitting on the grass beside her, stretched his legs for comodidad.- I see you're wearing boots very bright said to the hunter; but if you had to wander the world like me, do not last long. Look at mine; They are of buffalo skin, and I have already gone far with them throughout thick and thin. A After a while the soldier got up - I can not continue here, 'he said; hunger drives me. Where does this road, friend Botaslimpias - I do not know, 'said the hunter, I've lost in the bosque.- Then we're alike. Each feather flock together; We find together the way.The hunter smiled slightly, and together they left, walk without stopping until he closed the night. - We will not leave the forest said the soldier; But I see a light shining in the distance; there will be some comer.Llegaron a stone house and her call, he went to open a vieja.- seek shelter for tonight said the soldier and something to take to the stomach, then, at the least, I have as a backpack vacuum vieja.- Here you can not stay said the woman. This is a den of thieves, and the best you can do is get away before they come home, if you are, you are perdidos.- things will not come so far replied the soldier. I took two days without eating and it gives me kill me here to starve in the woods. I quedo.El hunter was reluctant to stay; but the soldier grabbed his arm: - Come on, man, do not preocupes.Compadecióse old and said - Ocultaos behind the oven. If you leave something, I'll give you when they're sleeping. Instaláronse in a corner and entered a little while twelve murderers, putting together big fuss. They sat at the table that was already set, dinner and asked loudly. He served the old a huge chunk of roasted meat, and thieves the great feasted. At the get the smell of the food to the nose of the soldier, he said to the hunter: - I can not stand; I'll sit at the table to eat with them.- cost us life replied the hunter, holding of the brazo.Pero the soldier began to cough loudly. At the hearing the bandits, dropping knives and forks, they rose abruptly from the table and found the two strangers hidden behind the horno.- Aha, gentlemen! they cried. Yea you here ?, eh? What did you come for? Spies are ye anything? Wait a while and learn to fly from the end of a branch seca.- best manners! He replied the soldier. I have hunger; give me something to eat, then do with me what queráis.Admiráronse bandits, and the captain said: 'I see you're not afraid. It's okay. I'll feed you, but then talk about it morirás.- Then said the soldier; and, he is sitting at the table, vigorously attacked asado.- Botaslimpias Brother, come eat said to the hunter. You are hungry like me and not find a home so tasty roast éste.Pero the hunter would not take anything. The bandits looked in amazement at the soldier, thinking, "This does not walk with compliments." When he had finished, he said: - The food is very good; but now it takes a good trago.El head of the gang, followed mood, he called old: - Bring a bottle of wine, and the mejor.Descorchóla the soldier, blowing the cap, and turning to the hunter, he said: - Now, attention, brother, you will see wonders. I will provide throughout the company; and brandished the bottle over the heads of the brigands, said: -¡A your health, but with the mouth open and arm up! -and took a long drink. He had barely uttered those words, all stood motionless, as if petrified, open mouth and lifting the arm derecho.Dijo then the hunter: - I see you know a lot of tricks, but now let's go to casa.- not run much, my friend. We have defeated the enemy, and must first take the spoils. Look at them there, sitting stupefied and speechless; they can not move until I permit. Come on, eat and bebe.La old had to bring another bottle of vintage wine, and the soldier got up from the table until he had had enough for three days. At the end, when it dawned dawn and said: - Lift up now the field; and, to spare road, the old will indicate the shortest ciudad.Llegados leading to it, the soldier went to his old comrades and said: - There in the forest I found a bird's nest gallows; Come, that cazaremos.Púsose his head and told the hunter: - Come with me and see how they shake when we seize them by the pies.Dispuso his men round about the robbers, and then, lifting the bottle, took a sip and, he brandished it above them, exclaimed: - a wake everyone immediately regained mobility! but they were thrown down and bound the hands and feet with ropes. Then the soldier ordered them to be in a car, as if they were sacks, and said: - Take them to the hunter cárcel.El, besides calling one of the troops, he said a few words in secreto.- cried Brother Botaslimpias the soldier, we have defeated the enemy and happily go with a full stomach; now we will quietly, closing the retaguardia.Cuando already approached the town, the soldier saw a crowd came to meet him throwing loud cheers and waving green branches; then he advanced all the royal guard, formada.- What does this mean? he asked, admired, to the cazador.- -respondióle this- Do not you know that King had long been absent from his country? Today it back, and everyone goes to recibirlo.- But where is the king? He asked the soldier. This is not veo.- said the huntsman. I am the King and I announced my arrival-. And, opening his jacket, the other could see below the vestiduras.Espantóse real soldier and falling to his knees, the apprentice must give forgiveness for having treated as an equal, without knowing him, calling him a nickname. But the King shook his hand, saying: - You're a brave soldier and I've saved my life. You need not spend more, take care of you. And the day you feel like a roast, as tasty as the cave of bandits, just go to the palace kitchen. But if you feel like giving a toast before you will have to ask my permission.
Baba Yaga witch	3008	510A	Spanish	He lived in other times a trader with his wife; one day it died, leaving a daughter. A short time widower married another woman, who, jealous of her stepdaughter, abusive and sought how to get rid of ella.Aprovechando the chance that the father had to make a trip, the stepmother told the girl: go see my sister and ask her to give you a needle and some thread so that things like a sister camisa.La stepmother was a witch, and the girl was ready, he decided to go first to seek advice from other aunt, sister of his FATHER: good morning, tiíta.-very good, dear niece. ? What has come My stepmother told me to go to ask his sister a needle and thread to sew a camisa.-I remember well the aunt 'I then said that a white poplar want to scratch your face: you tie his branches with a ribbon. The doors of a closed gate and gnash noisily not let you pass; you spread with the hinges with oil. You want to tear dogs; tírales some bread. A fierce cat will scratch you and get you in charge of eyes; Give him a piece of jamón.La girl he said goodbye, took some bread, oil and ham and a tape began walking in search of the Witch and finally llegó.Entró in the cabin, where sat the witch Baba -Yaga on his bony legs, busily tejer. good morning, tía.-¿A do you come, niece? my mother sent me to come to you for a needle and thread to sew one camisa.-right. While I look, sit down and get to tejer.Mientras niece was knitting, the witch left the room, she called her maid and said, 'Turn hurry, heat the bathroom and wash my niece well, for me it will comer.La poor girl was left half dead with fear, and when the witch was gone, the servant said: No burn a lot of wood, dear; is better take water fire and bring the water to the bathroom with a colador.Y saying this, gave him a pañuelo.Baba-Yaga, impatient, walked to the window where the girl worked and it asked: 'Are you weaving, niece? Yes, auntie, I'm trabajando.La witch left the cabin, and the girl, taking advantage of the time, gave the cat a piece of ham and asked how he could escape from there. Cat said: -On the table is a towel and a comb: Take them and runs away as fast as you can, because the witch Baba-Yaga will run after you to catch you; occasionally throw yourself to the ground and he snuggles up to your ear; when you hear that is near, strip the floor towel, which will become a very wide river. If the witch pulls the water and swim passes, you will have earned lead. When you hear on the ground which is not far from you, throw the comb, which will be transformed into a thick forest, through which the witch can not pasar.La girl took the towel and the comb and began to run. Dogs wanted to dismember it, but threw them a piece of bread; the gates of a gate creaked and slammed, but she anointed with oil the hinges and the doors opened wide. Beyond a wanted white poplar scratch his face; then tied with a ribbon and branches could pasar.El cat sat on the loom and weaving wanted; but did nothing to entangle the threads. Witch, approaching the window, asked: 'Are you weaving, niece? Are you weaving, dear? Yes, aunt, I'm weaving said hoarsely the gato.Baba-Yaga entered the hut, and seeing that the girl was gone and the cat had cheated, began to strike him, saying Ah old gourmand! Why have I let slip my niece? Your duty was to take his eyes and scratch his face! I've been a long time your service, 'he said the cat and still have not given me even a little bone, and she gave me a piece of jamón.Baba-Yaga was angry with dogs, with the gate, with poplar and with the maid and began to beat todos.Los dogs they said, 'we've served many years without you have given us even a hard crust of burnt bread, and she has given us bread canceled fresco.La said: 'I've served long before despite my birdies I've greased with tallow, and she has smeared me with oil.The poplar hinges said,' I've done much time without've given me even a thread, and she has graced me with a cinta.La maid said, 'I've served a long time without even have given me a rag, and she gave me a handkerchief. Baba Yaga quickly sit in the mortar; arreándole with deck and sweeping with a broom in his footsteps, he went in pursuit of the girl. This pulled his ear to the ground to listen and heard approaching the witch. Then he threw the floor towel, and the instant a river so formed ancho.Baba-Yaga reached the shore, and seeing the obstacle that stood in his way, gnashed his teeth with rage, returned to his cabin, he gathered all his oxen and he took them to the river: animals drank all the water and the witch continued persecution of muchacha.Ésta pulled over your ear to the ground and heard that Baba Yaga was very close: pulled to the ground comb and it became a very dense forest and frondoso.La witch began to gnaw the tree trunks to break through; ? But despite all his efforts he failed, and had to turn his cabaña.Entretanto furious, the merchant returned home and asked his woman.- Where's my dear little daughter He went to see his aunt - He answered the madrastra.Al little while, to the surprise of the stepmother, returned the niña.-Where have you been? mine asked FATHER-¡Oh father! My mother sent me to her sister to ask a needle with thread to sew a shirt, and it turns out Aunt is the very witch Baba-Yaga, who wanted comerme.-How you could escape it, my child? Then the girl told him all sucedido.Cuando the merchant learned the wickedness of his wife, threw her home and stayed with his hija.Los two lived in peace many happy years.
Prudent peasant	893	875	Spanish	Once upon a time a poor peasant who had only one house, where he lived with his only daughter. Said to this: - We should ask the Lord King a piece of land baldía.Al know their miserable situation King, gave them a piece of meadow, father and daughter labored with the idea of ​​planting in some grain. When already had almost everything plow, found in the earth a mortar of puro.- gold Oye - the father said to the girl - because the Lord King has been so kind to the give us this field, our duty is to give this almirez. but the daughter objected, saying: - Father, we have the almirez, but not the hand, and also want to give you this; therefore better callar.Pero the man would not listen to his advice and taking the almirez, took him to the Lord King, saying that he had found in his native land and handed it as a sign of respect. King took the mortar and asked the farmer if he had found nothing more.- No - replied the good man; and then he replied the King who was to bring him the hand of the mortar. He replied that the farmer had not found, but nothing helped; It was as if the wind carry his words. He was locked up in prison, which would be to deliver the pestle. Whenever the guards brought him bread and water, which were the sustenance of prisoners, heard shouting to the farmer: - Ouch! Why do I not listened to my daughter! Why I not heard my daughter! So they went to the king and told him what the man said without stopping, and refused to eat and drink. Then the king commanded that would lead to the detainee to his presence, and asked him why continually shouted: "Oh, if I had listened to my daughter." - What she said - I advised not you bring the almirez? because if I did I also hand.- exigiríais since you have such a clever daughter, I conocerla.Y girl had to appear before the King, who told him that as it was so smart, he would pose a conundrum and if deciphered, he would marry her. Avínose the girl, saying that it would be correct. King was expressed in the following way: - Report to me or clothed or naked, or horse or car, or on the road or outside the road. If you can do it, I will marry her and contigo.Retiróse completely naked, which was not dressed; then he took a large fishing net and getting into it, wrapped well, so it was no longer naked. He then rented a donkey, tied to the tail network and forced to drag the animal, which advanced her or on horseback or by car. In addition, the donkey had to walk inside rut, so she did not touch the ground but with the big toe of the foot, and was not even on the road or off it. To get to the palace, he confessed to the King who had hit the riddle, and that the condition was fulfilled. He gave freedom to his father and, taking her as his wife. her in unto mistress of all assets real.Transcurrieron several years, and one day the Lord King went to review. Several peasants with their carts parked in front of the palace, where they sold their loads of firewood; some of the wagons were pulled by oxen; others horse. One of the peasants came with three mares, and one of them had a colt, who escaped and went to get between two oxen pulling a cart. The peasants then began to quarrel, fight and fuss, because the owner of the horse claimed that they had the colt and therefore wanted to stay with him, while the other said that the colt was the son of his mare, and in therefore it belonged. The uproar reached the ears of the King, which ruled that the colt will stay where it had been found, which happened to be owned by the owner of the oxen, against all reason. Marchóse the other weeping and lamenting the loss of his horse; but, aware that Lady Queen was compassionate and came from the people, he presented himself to her and begged her to help him regain his potrito.- I'll help you if you promise not discover me. Tomorrow morning, when the King comes to reviewing, put you in the middle of the road by which he must pass, provided with a fishing net; and do as if you will be catching, shaking and pouring as if it were full of fish. Then what was said to respond to the King when he will behold preguntase.Y to the other day our peasant went to "fish" in that dry place. A passing the King and see him, he sent one of his followers to find out what was making him crazy there. Which replied - I'm pescando.Preguntóle the messenger how could fish in a place where there was no water, and replied the farmer: - In the same way two oxen may have a pony, I can catch a dried.The place raised it was to transmit the response to the King. This did come to the farmer and told him that answer was not his; Whose was it? And careful what you answer! But the man swore and insisted strongly that it was his. then Tendiéronle on a bundle of straw and beat him and tormented him until he decided to confess that the answer was the Queen. A King arriving at the palace, told his wife: - Since you have been false, do not want more for women. Me has ended; Return to the place where you came from, your hut the campo.Sin But autorizóla to be the best and most wanted; It would be his farewell. She said: - Yes, dear husband, do what you command me - and throwing himself on him and kissing him, told him he wanted to say goodbye. Then he commanded to bring a sleeping pill box, to toast him farewell. King a hearty gulp, but she barely tasted it. So, the husband soon be plunged into a deep sleep, and then the Queen ordered a servant to the Lord King envelop in a beautiful white canvas and among several it delivered to the car waiting at the door; and thus he moved to his poor house. There put him in his bed, where he slept many hours, until at the end, awoke and, looking around, said - God! Where I am? - and he called his servants; but none appeared. In the after a while his wife drew near and said: - My dear Lord King, I commanded the best take me and what I most like palace; and as for me the best and what I love most is you, I took conmigo.Llenáronsele to the King to tears and exclaimed: - My dear wife, you must be mine and yours! - and she led her back to the palace, and he turned to marry her; and surely they are still alive.
The forest house	1613	431	Spanish	He lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and three daughters in a cabin located at the edge of a lonely forest. One morning going out to work, he told his wife: - Make the older girl take my food to the woods because not have time to finish. And do not miss - he added - I take a bag of millet and scatter them in the camino.Cuando the sun was high, the girl went in search of his father with a pot of soup. But the sparrows, larks, finches, blackbirds and verderones had eaten the grain was already many hours, and she did not find the way. He was walking aimlessly until the sun set and night came. In the darkness, the trees rumored, and whistled owls, so the girl began to feel miedo.Al finally found the distance a light shining through the trees, "Surely someone will live there - thought -; let me go the night with them "and walked toward the light. Not soon reach a house whose windows were illuminated. He called and a gruff voice said from inside: - Forward girl entered the dark hall, and tapped the puerta.- Forward! - repeated voice; and opening it he found himself before a grizzled old man sitting at a table; He had supported face in both hands, and his white beard reached almost to the ground. With home there were three animals: a chicken, cocky and spotted cow. The girl told the old man his mishap and asked him to let him spend the night in the house. Then the man said: "pretty chick, my dear cock, and you, good spotted cow, what do you say to the girl missing?." - Duks! - answered the animals, which undoubtedly would say, "We place !," for the old man continued: - There is everything in abundance; go home and prepare the girl cena.La found everything in the kitchen and cooked them a tasty dinner, but without thinking of the animals. Font he brought to the table and sitting down with the old man ate and were satisfied. When he had finished, he said: - I'm tired now. Where there is a bed in which to sleep and sleep Animals responded: "With him you've eaten, have drunk with him, for us, nothing saber.Donde wanted to spend the night, ready'll see." And the old man said?: - Go up the stairs and find a room with two beds; Throw on some clean clothes and shake them; I will come to dormir.Subió girl, and when she made the beds passed the night in one of them, without waiting for the old. In the After a while he came and girl watching the lamplight, he shook his head. A seeing he was asleep, he opened a trapdoor and dropped to the wine cellar.The woodcutter returned home at dusk and scolded his wife for making him go hungry all day.- not my fault - justificóse women - because I sent the girl with food; It must have gone astray and will not return until dawn mañana.Al the woodcutter got up to leave again, and instructed her daughter to bear his comida.- second'll take a bag with lentils - said -; grains are larger than millet; the girl will see them better and not err camino.A noon the second daughter came to pout. But lentils were gone; as the day before, the birds of the forest had eaten them, leaving no. The girl went wandering through the jungle until evening. He came, in turn, to the house of the old and, invited to enter, dinner and asked for shelter. The man with the white beard again asked the animals, "pretty chick, my dear cock, and you, good spotted cow, what do you say to the girl missing?." Animals respondents also: - Duks! - and the scene of the previous night was repeated. She prepared a nice dinner, ate and drank with Grandpa; but for a moment he happened to think of animals. And when asked about the bed, they answered them: "With him you ate with him have drunk; for us, nothing wanted saber.Donde spend the night, ready'll see." Once was asleep entered the old, Mirola, moving head, and rushed to the bodega.Al third day the woodcutter said to his wife: - Send me today with little food; always he is shown good and obedient, and not depart from the road as her sisters, those bumblebees only go to suyo.La mother resisted: - Should I also lost my beloved daughter? - dijo.- Fear nothing - Then said he -. The girl did not err, as it is clever and wise; In addition, I will scatter peas that are larger than lentils, and will show the camino.Pero when the girl came to the woods with his basket, the pigeons had peas in the craw, so she did not know where to go. Extremely worried constantly thought about his poor father who suffered hunger and his mother would be worried if she did not return soon. At the end, when it got dark, watching encaminóse little light to the house of the forest. Very modosita, he asked the albergasen for the night, and the man with the white beard again asked the animals: "Chick pretty, my dear cock, and you, good spotted cow, what do you say to the girl missing ?." - Duks! - answered. then he drew near the girl to the home where the animals lay, and stroked the chicken and the cockerel, alisándoles feathers, and the cow, scratching between the horns. And when, following the advice of his grandfather, he had prepared a good soup and brought to the table source said: - I'm going to eat, have nothing letting these poor animals? That it was all there in great abundance; I'll start looking ellos.Salió barley and threw the chickens and for cow brought a bunch of hay oloroso.- Go, eat and filled, good animals - said to them - And if you are thirsty, I will give you also a good drink -. And they brought a bucket of water. Chick and gallito boarded the edge and getting the peak in the liquid, then looked up, as do drinking birds; cow, meanwhile, cubo.Una half empty once the animals were served, she sat at the table in the company of old and dined with what he had left. In the After a while, cockerel chick and began to put his head under feathers and cow flashing. Then the girl said: - Would not it be time to go to sleep The animals answered "Duks" "With us ate, drank with us, you remembered us, cariñosa.Ve to sleep, and good peace rests?. "the girl climbed the stairs, shook the pillows and put clean linens on the beds. Then there was the old to bed, and his white beard reached to his feet. The girl got into the other bed, she said her prayers and stood quietly dormida.Durmió until midnight, at which time there was a rumor in the house woke strange. Were heard in rare corners creaks and squeaks, and the door swung open, giving the wall; They beams crackled, as if riled arrancasen; It seemed as if the staircase would collapse, and finally, a sound was heard, as if the roof came down. As then he returned to quiet all without the girl suffer any damage, tranquilizóse and went back to sleep. But when he awoke the next morning, under a splendid sun, what you say you saw their eyes? Hallábase in a spacious living room, and everything shone round about with extraordinary magnificence; the walls out, upward, golden flowers on a background of green silk; The bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet; and a chair placed at the side there were some embroidered with pearls slippers. The girl thought he was dreaming, but this came three servants in rich liveries, and asked his órdenes.- Can you go away - she answered them -; I will raise me right away to prepare a soup for the old and feeding the chick, to the cockerel and the good cow manchada.Pensaba that the old man had already raised; more to directing eyes to his bed was occupied by a stranger. Earnestly looked better and realized it was a handsome young man, who woke up and said: - I am a prince, to whom a wicked witch loved, condemning me to live in the forest under the guise of an old man with white beard, no one could stand beside me apart my three servants, converted turn into a chick, cocky and a cow spotted fur. And the spell was no cease until it came to our house a girl of such kind heart, it would show charity not only with men but also with animals. And that you were, so at midnight we were all redeemed, and the house of the forest is transformed back into my old palace real.Cuando they had risen, sent the prince to his three servants who were looking for parents girl and accompany them to the castle as guests of boda.- But where are my two sisters? - she Asked the muchacha.- Las locked in the cellar, and tomorrow will be taken to the woods, where they will, at a collier, until they are amended and do not starve the poor animals.
The mob	90	210	Spanish	It was once a cockerel who said gallinita wing "nuts are ripe to go together and let us assemble a good feast before the squirrel takes them all.." - "Yes," he said the hen, "varaos to give us that pleasure." the two were together and as the day was clear, stayed until the afternoon. I do not really know if it was so much they had eaten or because they became very arrogant, but the fact is they did not want to go home on foot, and the cock had to build a small car with nutshells. When he was finished, the hen seated herself and said to the cock, "Go, and you can hook up the shot." - "Do not!" gallito said. "Wow, what I needed! I'd rather go home on foot than let myself hook shot! That was not the agreement! What I want is to make coachman and sitting on the seat, but I pull ... Now that will not do "While thus disputing, a duck quacked" Hey, you, thieves who hath commanded you to come to my mountain would you nuts Whatever you are going to pay dearly "!?! That he said, pounced on the cock. But the cock also was not time and lambasted the duck and then nailed the ram so hard that it, begged for mercy and, as punishment, agreed to let themselves engage in the shooting of the car. The cockerel sat on the box and was coachman, and departed at the gallop. "Duck, run everything you can!" When they had gone a stretch of the road found two walkers: a pin and a sewing needle. They cried the high and told them they would soon be completely dark, so we could no longer take even one step further, further, the road was very dirty and that if they could mount a while; They had been at the door of the tavern and drinking beer the tailor had made them too late. The cockerel, as was skinny people who did not occupy a lot of space, let them ride, but had to promise not what would tread. Late in the afternoon they arrived at an inn, and as they did not want to continue traveling at night and duck, as well as not walk very well and was falling from one side to another, entered it. The innkeeper at the beginning made many objections and said his house was already full, but probably also thought that those travelers were not distinguished people. In the end, however, he relented when he said good words that would give the egg that the hen had laid down the road and could also keep the duck, which put one every day. Then they were made to serve a king and got the good life. Early in the morning, when he was breaking into the house and all were still asleep, the cock awoke the hen, brought the egg, pecked it HELMET and they ate it; shell, however, threw her into the fire. Then they went to the sewing needle, was sleeping still, the head gripped and put in the armchair cushion the host; the pin, meanwhile, put him in the towel. Then, without further ado they flew away over the fields. The duck who liked to sleep on the ceiling and had stayed in the yard, they heard whizzing out, he roused himself and found a stream and went swimming down stream much faster than when pulling the car. A few hours after the host did not get out of bed, she washed and when he went to toweling face tore with the pin. Then he went to the kitchen and wanted to light a pipe, but when he came to the hearth the egg shells jumped him in the eye. "This morning everything to ciarme in the head," he said, and sat angrily in his chair: "Ay, ay, ay!" The needle had pricked him and n an even worse place, and not in the head. Then I became very angry and suspected the guests who had come so late the night before, but when he went to look he saw that they were gone. So he swore that he would never admitiren his rabble house like this, it runs a lot, you pay nothing and on top thanks him with bad passes.
The Ant and the Grasshopper	4288	280A	Spanish	Arrived and cicada the rigurosola winter (the calurosodel long summer spent only singing), he was found desproveídade the need to preserve life, and to the extreme hard scarcity llegandode not have to fly or worm, not even the slightest pedacillo.A house ant, her neighbor and friend, went to beg for their hunger some relief, and begged wanted his grain ahorroalgún prestarlepara his subsistenciaque deemed to reimburse without mediase pressure and violence, at the next station: "I offer you pay on time, as I am, 'he said antesdel future Animal August, the principal and constant interest ".The ant (ie insurance) do not like to pay, and it's such defectoes the child. Yea, in efectopreguntó the cicada: "What hacíasen the díasde so long and ardent summer?". "He sang, everyone who pasabasin time except" "Did you sing? Okay, then it dances now. "
The Ant and the Grasshopper	4294	280A	Spanish	Singing cicada spent the whole summer, without making provisions for the winter there. The cold obligarona keep the silence and to benefit from the shelter of his narrow room. Saw himself desproveída of livelihood precise: no fly, no worm, no wheat, no rye. Ant lived there, partition in the middle, and a thousand expresionesde attention and respect the said Dona Hormiga, since in your spare barns provisions for your food, pay anything to live this winter this sad cicada, which, cheerful once, he never knew the damage, he never knew fear him. You do not hesitate to borrow; faithfully promise to pay you a profit, by the name tengo.La covetous Ant replied boldly, hiding back the keys to the barn: -¡Yo ganocon pay what a huge job! Tell me, then, lazy, what have you done in good weather? I, said the cicada, all pasajerocantaba cheerfully, without ceasing for a moment. Hello !, Yea sang when I was walking rowing? For now, I eat, dance, despite your body.
Maid Maleen	1873	870	Spanish	Once upon a king once whose son aspired to marry the daughter of a mighty monarch. The maid was called Maleen and marvelous beauty. However, he was denied his hand, as his father destined to another suitor. As the two loved each other heartily and did not want to separate, Maleen told his father - husband will not accept for anyone but él.Enfurecido father, he built a tower dark, which does not penetrate a single sunbeam or moon, and when he was finished, he said: - you'll have enclosed here seven years; at the end of it, I will come to see if you have broken your terquedad.Llevaron the tower food and drink for seven years and then were taken to her the princess and her maid, and walled up the entrance, leaving them isolated from the sky and Earth. In full darkness, and I did not know when it was day or night. Prince very often surrounded the prison, calling aloud to his beloved, but his cries could not penetrate the thick walls. What else could they do but lament and complain? Thus he was discoursing time, and, by decreasing its provisions, could realize that the end of the seven years approached. They thought it was time for his release; but not a hammer blow did not hear, nor a stone fell from the walls; it seemed as if her father had forgotten. When they ran out very few provisions and foresaw an agonizing death, he said Maleen maid: - We have to make one last try and see if we can break through the muralla.Cogiendo knife bread, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, when he felt fatigued, the waitress took her turn. After prolonged work managed to pull, then a second and a third, a stone and the end of three days, the first ray of light came to tear the darkness. Finally, the opening was large enough to allow them to look out and look at the outside. The sky was serene, and there was a cool breeze and comforting; But how sad it appeared all around! The father's palace was a heap of ruins; the city and surrounding villages, as far as the eyes, appeared on fire; fields, desolate, and not a living soul in sight. When the gap was wide enough so they could slip through, he jumped first, the waitress, then, Princess Maleen. But where to go? The enemy had destroyed all the kingdom, the king expelled and put to the sword the inhabitants. They stood off in search of another country, uncertainly; but nowhere they found refuge nor any person to give them a piece of bread; and thus their need was so extreme, that had to calm the hunger by eating nettles. When, Cape long pilgrimage, they came to another country, they offered their services everywhere, but always looked rejected, without anyone to pity them. At the end they came to a big city, and went to the royal palace. Neither wanted them there until the cook said in the kitchen as fregonas.Y turned out that the son of the King of the country where he had gone, it was precisely the Maleen love with the maid. His father had intended him another girlfriend, so ugly face and wicked heart. It was fixed the day of the wedding, and the bride had arrived. Aware, however, of his extreme ugliness, he stayed away from everyone, locked in her room, and Maleen maid served him food. A arriving the day he was to appear at the church with her boyfriend, avergonzóse of its ugliness and fearing that, if exhibited in the street, people would laugh at her, she told Maleen: - I threw up a lot. I've sprained my foot and can not walk right down the street; and thou shalt put on my clothes and take my place. You could never expect such honor.Pero the maid refused, saying - I do not want to honor not useless correspondan.Fue also offered him money; until, at the end, he said, angrily: - If you do not obey me, will cost you your life. I just have to say a word, and drop your cabeza.Y, so the princess had no choice but to give in and get the gorgeous dresses and trappings of novia.Al appear in the actual room, all present were astonished at her beauty and King said to his son: - This is the promise I have chosen for you and that thou bring the iglesia.Sorprendióse boyfriend, thinking, "it looks like my princess Maleen I'd say it herself But no.. you may be dead or continue locked in the tower "Taking her hand, led her to church and finding the way a clump of nettles, she said,".. Mata de ortigas.mata of tiny nettles, what are you doing ? so alone I ate many times without cocerte or salarte, wretched me "-. What do you say? Nothing asked the AU-PRINCE said she only thought about the Maleen.Admiróse maid seeing him who knew, but did not reply. A climbing the steps of the church, she said: "Step of the temple, do not break, I am not the true bride." - What are you saying - asked again príncipe.-Nada replied the girl;? only thought of the maiden Maleen.- Do you know the Maleen Maiden - No she replied. How would he know? But I have heard of ella.Y, on entering the church, he said again. "Gate of the temple, do not breaks, I am not the true bride" - What you say? He asked him.- Oh! He replied the princess. Only thought about the maid Maleen.Entonces Prince took a precious jewel, she puts it in the neck and fastened the clasp. They entered the temple and, at the altar, the priest joined their hands and married. Then he walked back to the palace without the bride say a word in all the way. Once back, she ran to the room of the bride and garments and precious ornaments removed, putting her poor gray blouse and keeping only around the neck, the jewel received from the príncipe.Al night came and with it, the time to be conducted the bride to the prince's room, covered her face with her veil, so he did not realize the deception. As soon as they were alone, she asked her husband: - What did you say to the nettle found in the way - What kills nettles? she replied. I do not talk to ortigas.- Well if you did, you're not the true bride replied it.The promised sought bail out saying. "Ask my maid, who is aware of everything" went out and, facing harshly with Maleen maid, asked: - Shameless, what did you say to the nettle - I just told him: "Mata nettles, Little nettle, why are you so lonely many times I ate without cocerte or salarte? , wretched me "the bride ran back into the room and said -. I know what I said to the nettle-and repeated the words he had just oír.- But what you said to the step of church, climbing the stairs? He asked the AU-PRINCE What rung? she replied. I do not speak to peldaños.- So you're not the bride verdadera.Repitió her: "ask my maid, who all are aware." And he went quickly rebuked back to the maid: - Shameless, what you told the rung of the church? - Just this: ". Step of the temple, I do not break, I am not the true bride" - This is going to cost you your life! cried the bride, and running into the room, he said: - I know what I said to the step-and repeated the words. - But what you told the church door? - At the door of the church? she replied. I do not speak to the gates of the iglesias.- Then you're not the bride verdadera.Salió furious her and asked the maid Maleen: - Shameless, what did you say to the church door? - Just this: ". Gate of the temple, do not breaks, I am not the true bride" - you will pay with his head! He said the bride, beside himself with rage; and, running to the room, said: - I know what I said at the door of the church-and repeated the words of the princesa.- But where do you have the jewelry I gave you at the door of the church - What jewel? she asked. I did not give you ninguna.- I myself put it in the neck; If you know, not that you're not the bride's veil verdadera.Apartóle face and seeing her extreme ugliness, backing scared exclaimed: - How did you come here? Who are you? - I'm your fiancée, and I was afraid that people would mock me if I appeared in public, and sent to mop put my dresses and go to church in my lugar.- And where is that girl? -He said-. I want to see. It Go get it! She went out and told the servants to mop was a liar, and he commanded them that go down to the yard and her head cut off. Sujetáronla servants, and they were about to take her when she burst into cries for help, and the prince, hearing them, left his room and ordered to be left free. Brought lights, and the prince was wearing neck collar had given him at the door of the iglesia.- You are the real cried girlfriend, who were with me in the church. Come to my cuarto.Y, when they were alone, he said: - At the entrance of the church uttered the name of the Maleen maid, who was my beloved and betrothed. If you thought possible, I would say that I have before me, because you look like her in todo.Respondió it: - I am the Maleen maid, who lived yourself locked in a dark dungeon seven; for you I have suffered hunger and thirst, and I have lived so far poor and miserable; but today the sun shines again for me. You have joined me in the church, and I am your legitimate esposa.Y and kissed and were happy all the rest of his life. False bride was beheaded as punishment for his maldad.La tower that had served prison Maid Maleen remained standing a long time yet, and when the children passed in front of it, singing. "Cling, clang, runs ¿ who's in that tower? Well, there is a princess locked and prey. Do not give up its walls are tough and hard. Juanillo colorado, you have not reached me. "
The girl without hands	291	706	Spanish	A miller had little things, and every day was poorer; to the end, no longer they left but his mill and a large apple tree behind. One day he went to the forest to collect firewood, and, behold, he came to the meeting an old man, whom he had never seen, and said to him - Why dost chopping wood? I will make you rich if only you promise me what is behind the mill. "What else could it be but the apple ?," he thought the miller, and accepted the condition of the unknown. He replied with a mocking laugh: - In three years I'll look what's mine is marchó.Al -and get the Miller home, he went out to meet his wife. - Tell me, how is that so suddenly we've become rich? In the blink of an eye they have filled all the chests and drawers do not know how without nadie.Respondió has entered the miller: - I met a stranger in the woods, and promised me great treasures. Instead, I promised you what is behind the mill. The apple is worth all that - what have you done, husband? She cried the horrified woman. It was the devil, and did not mean the apple tree, but our daughter, who was behind the mill sweeping the era.La of the miller's daughter was a beautiful, pious girl; during those three years he continued to live in the fear of God and free from sin. After that there was the time and the day came when the evil one was to fetch her, she washed herself clean and drew with chalk a circle around him. The devil appeared quite early, but could not approach him and said very angrily to the miller: - Remove all the water, so you can not wash, because otherwise I have no power over it.The miller, scared, did what he was commanded . The next morning the devil returned, but she had been crying with his hands in his eyes, so they were kept spotless. Neither can the devil could approach him, he said angrily to the miller: - Cut off the hands, because otherwise be I can not llevármela.- How I can cut my own daughter's hands! He said the horrified man. But the other said, threatening tone: - If you do not, you're mine, and I'll take ti.El father, frightened, promised to obey her daughter and said: - My daughter, if you do not short the two hands, the devil take me, thus I promised in my despair. Help me in my misfortune, and forgive the evil that you hago.- 'she answered my Father, do with me what you will; I am your hija.Y, holding hands, he let them cut. The devil came for the third time, but she had wept so many hours with the stumps pressed against his eyes, that was spotless. Then the devil had to resign; I had lost all rights to ella.Dijo the miller girl: - For your sake I have received great benefits; while alive, all my cares will be for ti.Pero she replied: - I can not stay here; I'll leave. Compassionate people will give me what necesite.Se did tie back the arms amputees, and the sunrise, set off. He walked all day until he closed the night. He then arrived in front of the garden of the king, and the moonlight, he saw that the trees were full of beautiful fruit; but he could not reach them because the garden was surrounded by water. Since he had not ceased to walk all day without eating a single bite, suffered greatly from hunger and thought, "I wish I could get to eat some of those fruits If not, I'll die from hunger." He knelt down and worshiped God, behold, an angel suddenly appeared. He closed a lock, so that the ditch was dry, and she could cross on dry land. He then entered the girl in the garden, and the angel with her. He saw a beautiful pear pear loaded, all of which were counted. He came over and ate one, taking her tree with her mouth to silence hunger, but no more. The gardener was watching; But as the angel was at his side, he did not dare to intervene, thinking that she was a spirit; And so it was quiet, without calling or speak to him. I ate there was the pear, girl, feeling the hunger satisfied, he went to hide among the maleza.El King, who owned the garden, appeared the next morning, and counting pears and notice missing one asked to the gardener who had made it. And the gardener replied: - Last night came a spirit, who had no hands, and ate one directly with the Mouth. And how could the spirit through the water? said the King. And where was, after eating pear - lowered from the sky a figure with a snow white dress, which closed the lock and stopped the water, so that the spirit could cross the moat. And how could it be anything but an angel, I did not dare to call or ask. After eating pear, spirit retiró.- If things have happened as you say 'she said the king, tonight will watch contigo.Cuando getting dark, the King went to the garden, accompanied by a priest to speak to the spirit. They sat three under the tree, attentive to what happened. At midnight the girl, coming from the grove, and, approaching the pear tree, and again ate one pear off it with her mouth appeared; beside the angel was dressed in white. He then left the priest and asked: - You come from the world or come from God? Are you a human being or spirit to which he replied the girl - I am not spirit, but a human being, abandoned by all but Dios.Dijo then the King: - If the world has abandoned you, I will not leave. and he took her to his palace, and, like so beautiful and pious saw it, fell in love with her, she sent him some silver hands and grabbed esposa.Al a year later, King had to leave for war, and instructed his mother the young queen, saying: - When it's time to give birth, atendedla and Care for it well and send me soon one carta.Sucedió that the queen had a son, and grandmother hastened to communicate to the king good news. But the messenger stopped to rest on the road, beside a stream, and, exhausted from the long march, he fell asleep. He then came the devil, always ready to harm the virtuous Queen and bartered for another letter in which was written that the Queen had brought to the world a monster. When King read the letter he was shocked and greatly saddened; but he wrote in reply that cuidasen Queen until his regreso.Volvióse the messenger with the answer, and went to rest in the same place, again fell asleep on the way. The devil came again, and again changed the letter from his pocket and replaced by another containing the order to kill the Queen and her son. Grandma horrorizóse to receiving that letter, and may not give credit to what I read, again wrote to the King; but he received an identical answer, because every time the devil changed the letter bearing the messenger. At last he ordered even in testimony that had fulfilled its mandate, keep it tongue and eyes Reina.Pero old mother, desolate that had to be shed innocent blood so he ordered that evening bring a deer, to which cut out the eyes and tongue. Then the Queen said: - I can not bring myself to kill, as ordered by the King; but you can not stay here. Begone with your child about the world, and do not turn jamás.Atóle the child on her back, and left unhappy woman with eyes filled with lágrimas.Llegado there was a very large and wild forest, he fell to his knees and invoked goodbye. He appeared the angel of the Lord and led her to a little house, which was written in a little sign: ". Here everyone lives for nothing" He left the house one, white as snow maiden, who said: "Welcome, Lady Queen," and accompanied the interior.Desatándole back to his son, put it on his chest so she could breastfeed, and then he stretched out on a well-made little bed. then the poor mother asked him: - How do you know I'm Queen and white maid replied: - I'm an angel that God sent to earth to take care of you and your young hijo.La lived in that house for of seven years, well maintained and cared for, and piety was so great that God pitied, they returned to grow you made the manos.Finalmente, King, completed the campaign, returned to the palace, and his first wish was to see her wife and son. Then his aged mother began to mourn, exclaiming: - Evil Man! You do not send me the order to kill those two innocent souls? -and showed him the two letters forged by the devil, adding: - I did what you told me and taught him the language and ojos.El King burst to mourn with great bitterness and despair, for the sad end of his unhappy wife and his son, until the grandmother, pitying, said: - Take comfort, still living. I secretly killing of a deer, and save these parts as a witness. As for your wife, I tied the baby on her back and sent her to wander the world, making him promise never to return here because you were so angry with ella.Dijo then the King: - Do not cease to walk while watching sky over my head, without food or drink, until you've met my wife and my son, if you have not starved or frío.Estuvo King wandering during those seven years, looking at all the crags and caves, without finding it anywhere, and I thought I would have starved. In all that time he neither ate nor drank, but God said. Finally he came to a great forest, and he discovered the little house with little sign: "Here everyone lives for nothing." He left the white maiden, took him by the hand, led him inside and said - Welcome, Lord King-and then asked him where venía.- For nearly seven years wandering answered him that I'm looking for my wife and my son; but I can not find them partly alguna.El angel offered him food and drink, but he refused them, asking only to be allowed some rest. He stretched himself to sleep and his face was covered with a pañuelo.Entonces the angel entered the room where the Queen was with her son, who used to call Aching, and said: - Get out there with the child, who has come your esposo.Salió her to the room where the king lay, and the handkerchief fell from his face, so said the Queen: - Aching, pick up the handkerchief of your father and returns to cover his child rostro.Obedeció and she puts the canvas on his face; but the King, who had heard him in a dream, again dropping purpose. The child grew impatient, exclaimed: - Madrecita. How I can cover my father's face if I do not have any father in the world? In prayer I learned to say: Our Father who art in Heaven; and you told me that my father was in heaven, and was God Our Lord. How would you know this man so wild? It's not my father! A King hearing these words, he stood up and asked who he was. Then she answered: - I am your wife, and this is Aching, your hijo.Pero to seeing the King his hands meat, replied: - My wife had the hands of a merciful God PLATA me back the natural mine said she; and the angel went out and came right back with silver hands. Then the king had the certainty that was before his wife and son, and he kissed them both, he said, beside himself with alegría.- What a terrible weight has fallen me heart! The angel of the Lord gave them eating for the last time together, and then the three made their way to the palace to meet with the grandmother. There were great celebrations and rejoicing, and the King and Queen were married again and lived happily until the end.
The duration of life	1682	173	Spanish	When God our Lord, after creating the world, was about to assign to each of his creatures the duration of his life, man came the ass and said: - Lord, how many years live - Thirty - answered the Creator? -. Is that okay? - Oh, Lord! - answered the ass -, many years. Consider my sad fate: from morning to night with heavy loads, carrying sacks of grain to the mill so that others may eat bread, while to me it incites me and revives lashes and kicks. Acortadme a little life! Our Lord had compassion and reduced the number to twelve. Ass retired comforted, and presented the perro.- How long you want to live? - asked him the Creator -. A thirty ass they seemed too many years, but you will seem bastantes.- Lord - he answered the dog -. Do you want it? I think what I'll have to run; my feet will not resist so long; and once lost her voice for barking and teeth to bite, what other recourse but I will go from one corner to another and spend time grunting? Our Lord knew he was right, and then played down twelve years.Customised mono.- came to you surely will satisfy thirty, right? - said to the Lord -. You do not need to work like the donkey and the dog, and you are always good humor.- Oh, Lord! - he cried the monkey -. It seems, but the reality is very different. When rain potatoes millet, I have no spoon. I am doomed to spend jokes and grimacing to make people laugh, and when they give me an apple and I bite, it is green. How often sadness hides behind mirth! Años.Dios not resist thirty, pious, assigned only diez.Finalmente, man, happy, healthy, fresh, introduced himself and asked God that would set his time LIFE.- Vivirás thirty years - said to the Lord - Have pretty - Very little it is - observed the man -. When you have built my house and burning fire in my own home; when you have planted trees start to bloom and bear fruit; when you start to enjoy life, then I will die. O Lord, grant me more time - you add eighteen of the ass - said God. not enough - answered the man.- Well also have twelve of the perro.-'s still little - insisted the man.- Look, I grant even twelve of the monkey, but not more.And the man left, but not satisfecho.He here why he lives man lasts seventy years. The first thirty are his own, and pass quickly; healthy, cheerful, works with ardor and enjoy life. then follow eighteen of the donkey, it should carry a burden on another: it must convey what will eat another and receive blows and kicks reward for his loyal service. They come after twelve years of the dog: there you have the corners, snarling teeth without chewing. And when this ends, they close down their lives ten years of the monkey: he softened hulls, becomes extravagant, it makes all sorts of nonsense and is the laughingstock of the children.
Ear of corn	1838	779	Spanish	In the days when the Lord himself still walked the world, the fertility of the soil was much greater than today; then they are carrying the pins, not fifty or sixty times the seed, but four or five hundred times. Beans out on the stem from the top to the floor: the entire stem was spike. But so are the men in abundance forget that that blessing comes to them from God, and become indifferent and frívolos.Un day passed a woman in a wheat field, and his son, who was with her, fell in a pond and soiled dress. The mother plucked a handful of good ears and used to clean the clothes of the child. In the see Our Lord, who happened to also go through there, he said indignantly: - Henceforth, the stem of the wheat will spike; men do not deserve the gifts of the cielo.Los present at the hearing those words, they were frightened and falling on his knees, begged the Lord to leave some grain on the stalk; if they did not deserve it, he would, at the least, considering the innocent chickens, who otherwise would starve. The Lord, foreseeing the misery that condemned, apiadóse and agreed to his request. And so was the spike on top, as we see it today.
The daughter of the Virgin Mary	23	710	Spanish	At the entrance of a vast forest he lived a woodcutter with his wife and one son, who was a three-year-old; but they were so poor they could not keep it, because they lacked the daily bread. One morning was very sad woodcutter to work and while he was cutting wood, he suddenly appeared a very tall and beautiful lady wearing on her head a crown of shining stars, and giving her the word said, "I'm Mrs. this country; you are wretched, bring me your daughter, take her with me, I'll be your mother and I will take care of it. " The woodcutter obeyed; He went looking for his daughter and handed it to the lady, who took her to his palace. The girl was very happy there: eating biscuits, drinking good milk, her clothes were of gold, and the oblige. When he was fourteen, called one day the lady, and said: "Dear daughter, I have to make a long journey, I give those keys of the thirteen doors of the palace, you can open twelve and see the wonders that contain, but you are forbidden to touch the thirteenth opens with the tiny key, beware good to open it, then great misfortunes befall you. " She promised to obey, and as Mrs. split began visiting room; every day he opened a different until he had finished watching the twelve; in each seat of the king, adorned with so much taste and magnificence he had never seen such a thing was. Llenábase of rejoicing, and the pages who accompanied her as she also rejoiced. No longer he was it prohibited the door, and had a great desire to know what was hidden inside, so he said to the pages that followed. "I do not want to open it all, but I would like a little half-open so we could see through the crack." - "Ah no," said the pages, "would be a great fault, it has forbidden the lady and some misfortune could happen." She did not answer, but the desire and curiosity continued to speak in his heart and torment her without letting her rest. Passes just left, he said to himself: "Now I'm alone, and no one can see me." He took the key, put it in the keyhole and turned as the was placed. The door opened and, amid the most vivid ray glow, the statue of a king magnificently attired; light it was clear slightly touched the tip of a finger and turned golden color. Then he was afraid, he closed the door very light and ran, but continued to dreading although he did and his heart was beating constantly without regaining his usual calm; and the color of gold on her finger was not removed despite everything the lavarse.Al returned after a few days returned the lady of his journey, called the young man and asked for the keys to the palace; when he handed the said: "Have you opened the thirteenth door?" - "No," she answered it. The lady put her hand on his heart, he saw beating a lot of violence and realized he had violated his mandate and open the forbidden door. Díjola yet again. "Really you have not done?" - "No," he replied the girl a second time. She looked at the finger, which had golden light to the touch; no longer he doubted that the girl was guilty and said for the third time: "Have not you done?" - "No," he replied the girl for the third time. The lady then said, "I would not have obeyed and have lied, do not deserve to be with me in my palace." The young man fell into a deep sleep and when he awoke he was lying on the floor in the middle of a desert. He wanted to call, but could not utter a single word; He got up and tried to run away, but for any part he did, he looked stopped by a thick forest that could not cross. In the circle that was found locked with an old tree trunk hollow had to be her room. There was asleep at night, and when it rained or snowed, found shelter there. Their food consisted of leaves and grass, which looked as far as he could get. During the fall met a lot of dry leaves, leading to the hole and came as time snow and cold, he would hide in it. Gastáronse to order his clothes and fell to the pieces, having also covered with leaves. When the sun was warm, he came, stood at the foot of the tree and her long hair covered her like a blanket everywhere. Remained long in that state, experiencing all the miseries and sufferings imaginables.Un all spring day hunting the king of the country in that forest and chasing a gazelle; the animal escaped to the bush surrounding the old hollow shaft; Prince fell from the horse, spread branches and pushed with the sword. When he had got through, he saw sitting under the tree at a wonderfully beautiful girl, which entirely covered her golden hair from head to toe. He stared in amazement and said, "How did you come to this desert?" But she did not answer, for she could not open her mouth. King added, however. "Will you come with me to my castle?" He answered affirmatively head. King took her in his arms; the mounted his horse and took her to his home, where he dressed and everything else I needed, because even though I could not speak, was so beautiful and graceful that she lusted and married shortly after one year ella.Había more or less, when the queen gave birth to a son; at night, being alone in her bed, she appeared to her old lady, and said: "If you want to tell to the truth and confess that you opened the forbidden door, I will open your mouth and back the word; If you obstinate and insist on sin and insist on lying, I take with me your newborn son. " Then the queen could speak, but he said only: "No, I did not open the forbidden door." The lady took arms newborn son and disappeared with him. The next morning, as were the child, the rumor spread among the servants of the palace that the Queen was ogra and killed him. All I heard and could not answer, but the king loved her too tenderly to believe what was said about ella.Trascurrido a year, the Queen had another son; the lady's appeared again at night and said, "If you confess to you opened the forbidden door I return to your son and you untie your tongue, but if you obstinate in your sin and continue lying, I I also take this other child. " Queen answered the same as the first time: "No, I did not open the forbidden door." The lady took her son in her arms and carried him to his home. In the morning when it became known that the child was gone, he said loudly having been eaten the queen and the king's advisers asked that the procesase; but loved her so tenderly that denied them permission, and ordered not to return to talk over this matter under penalty of vida.Al third year the queen gave birth to a beautiful girl, and the lady also presented to her during the night, and said, "Follow me." Took her hand and led her to his palace, and taught his first two children, who knew her and played with her, and as the mother was very glad to see you, the lady said: "If you confess now that you opened the forbidden door, you return to your two beautiful children. " The queen replied for the third time: "No, I did not open the forbidden door." The lady returned to her bed, and took his third hija.A the next morning, seeing that they did not find, all palace said in one voice: "The queen is ogra, we must condemn her to death." The king took this time to follow the advice of his advisers; Queen appeared before a court as he could not speak or defend, was sentenced to die in a fire. The pyre was ready, she tied to the stick, and the flame began to surround her, when repentance touched his heart. "If I could," thought each other, "confess before his death that I opened the door." And he said, "Yes, ma'am, I am guilty." Hardly the this thought had happened, when it began to rain and the appeared lady taking sides the two children who were born first and in her arms the girl who had just given birth, and told the queen an accent full of goodness, "All who repent and confess their sin is forgiven." He gave their children, untied her tongue and made her happy for the rest of his life.
The lazy spinner	1213	1405	Spanish	They lived in a village a man and his wife, who was extremely lazy, and there was no way to make it work. What her husband gave her to spin, he left it half done, and what was spinning, he rolled it in any way, instead of devanarlo. If her husband scolded her, she always had the answer to punto.- How will rewinding - Then said once - if I have not coiler! You go to the forest and let me una.- If it is just that - the husband said - I will go to the forest to look for wood and I will una.Temió the woman who once had her husband material, he did, indeed, a winder and forced her to spin again. He was thinking a little, until it came up with a good idea. He continued secretly to the man and the climb it to a tree to pick a branch and cut, she disimulándose the bushes so that it could not be seen, he shouted: "He who cut wood, die, who Devane with it, will be lost. "at the hearing the husband left the ax for a moment, thinking about what it might mean aquello.- Bah! - he cried to the end -. What can be! A any noise. It would be a fool if I worry -. And again wielding the ax, he went back to work. But he heard the same voice: "He who cut wood, die, who Devane with it, will be lost." He stopped him, he was afraid and he was thinking. But after a while the, took new courage, he picked up the ax ... and dale! And behold, the third time repeated aloud from the forest: "He who cut wood, die, who Devane with it, will be lost." That was too much, they will be passed to man all desire; He fell from the tree more quickly and made his way home. The woman also returned, running shortcuts to reach before. When the man entered the house, there she was innocently as if nothing had happened, and asked: - What? ¿You bring a good turner - No - he said -. Have to leave the winding - and telling what had happened in the woods, he left her alone in adelante.Sin but soon returned the husband to complain about the mess that reigned in the casa.- woman - said to her - it's a shame that flax yarn in hanks still there, any manera.- you know what? - the woman said -; because you could not get your hands on a reel, you'll go upstairs to the attic and I'll put down; you will miss the floss up and you take me back to down, and thus will get a madeja.- good - the husband said; and they did so. And when they had finished, he continued: - Well, we have the enmadejado thread; now it needed cocerlo.A the woman that came to him also uphill, but replied: - Yes, tomorrow morning I coceremos - and imagined a new truco.Levantóse early, lit the fire and put the kettle; but instead of the thread, and cast lots of tinder, leaving cociese. Then he went to see her husband, who was still in bed, and said - I have to leave; Rise and monitors the thread being cooked in the kettle. But try not to fall asleep and be the goal, because if when the rooster crows do not watch, instead of thread we estopa.El man eager to do things well and not neglect any detail, he rose and dressed with all diligence, down, Then, to the kitchen. But getting to the cauldron and take a look inside, he saw with horror a mass of bast. Unhappy said nothing, thinking that misfortune was because of carelessness, and never again ment thread and spinning. But there's bad to see the piece was that woman!
Blue Lamp	1100	562	Spanish	Once upon a soldier who had loyally served his king for many years. At the end of the war, the waiter, I who, because of the many wounds he received, could not continue in the service, was called to the presence of the king, who said to him: - You leave your house, and I do not need. You shall not charge more money because I pay only one I sirve.Y the soldier, not knowing how to make a living, was very concerned and went to the venture. He walked all day, and dusk came into the forest. He saw a light in the darkness, and addressed her. It came to a house in which lived in a hostel bruja.- Dame Cathedral, and something to eat and drink -pidióle- so that I die of hambre.- Go! she exclaimed. Who gives anything to a soldier lost? However, I want to be compassionate, and take you, provided you do what I'm pedirte.- What want to do? - Asked the soldado.- That morning my huerto.Aceptó the soldier caves, and the next day everything was working hard from morning and evening, there was still no terminado.- I see today can no more; I will give you another night shelter; but tomorrow you will tear off a cart of firewood and astillarla into pieces pequeños.Necesitó the soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and the sunset, the witch proposed that he stay a third night. work tomorrow will be easy 'I said-. Behind my house there is an old dry well, where I dropped the lamp. It gives a blue flame unquenchable; You have to subírmela.Al other day, the witch took him to the well and lowered to the bottom in a basket. The boy found the light and made to sign him up again. He pulled her rope, and, when I was almost on the surface, reached out to take the lámpara.- No, 'he said, guessing his intentions perverse. Do not give it until my feet touch the suelo.La witch, angry, let it out, precipitating it again at the bottom of the well, and there they dejó.Cayó the poor soldier to the wet bottom unharmed and without light blue is extinguished. What he would serve, I nevertheless? He realized then that he could not escape death. I sadly remained sitting for awhile. Then, getting to chance, hand in pocket, found his pipe, still half loaded. "It will be my last pleasure," he thought; He lit in blue flame and began to smoke. To the spread smoke through the cavity of the well, he was seen suddenly tiny little man who asked him: - What you send my love .- What I can send you? replied the soldier, atónito.- must do everything that you send me enanillo.- Bien said the soldier replied. In that case, help me, first of all, to leave the pozo.El man took him by the hand and led him through an underground passage, without forgetting also be blue light lamp. On the way he was teaching the treasures that the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier charged with all the gold he could llevar.Al reach the surface told the dwarf: - Now bind the old witch and bring her before the court .Poco after passing witch saw, mounted in a wildcat, running like the wind and with frightful cries. It did not take the man to be back: - Everything is ready, 'he said, and the witch and hanging from the gallows. What you order now, my lord? 'I .- anything else when the soldier replied. You can go home. Stay tuned to appear when you care llame.- Lose said the dwarf. As you turn the pipe in the blue flame, I have in your presence. - vista.Regresó and disappeared from the soldier to the city he had left. He stayed at the best inn and took care gorgeous dresses. Then he asked the innkeeper who prepare the most luxurious room I could have. When he was ready and the soldier lays down, calling the black man, he said - I Served the King loyally, and instead, he fired me, condemning me to starve. Now I want vengarme.- What should I do? When asked the enanito.- either night and the daughter of the King is in bed, bring her here asleep. The'll work as sirvienta.- To me that is very easy remarked the little man. But for you it's dangerous. Bad you'll have if you descubren.Al to twelve o'clock had struck the door abruptly, and presented the little man charged with princesa.- Yea you, eh? She cried the soldier. Well, to me work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the cuarto.Cuando had finished, he sent approaching his chair and, stretching his legs, said: - Take my boots! - and he threw in the face, taking her pick them up, clean and brighten. The girl made no resistance whatever he ordered, silent and his eyes narrowed. In the first song of the rooster, the dwarf carried her back to the palace, leaving in its cama.Al up the next morning, the princess went to his father and told him that he had an extraordinary dream: - I was taken through the streets with lightning speed up a soldier's room, where I had to serve as maid and for the lowest chores, such as sweeping the room and clean boots. It was not a dream, and yet, I'm tired as if he really had done everything aquello.- The dream could come true said the King. I'll give you a tip: llénate pocket peas, and make a small hole in it. If you take, peas fall and leave their mark on your way through the calles.Mientras King said this, the little man was present, invisible, and heard. At night, when the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets through, peas true that fell, but left no trace, because the cunning man tried to plant other throughout the city. The daughter of the King had to serve again raised to the edge of the gallo.Por morning, the King sent his people in search of traces; but all proved futile, as could be seen in every street poor children were sitting, picking up peas, and saying, - it has rained tonight guisantes.- We think the father said nothing. When you lie down, let your shoes; before you return from there, hide one; and I manage to enanito encontrarlo.El black also heard those instructions, and when, the night came again ordered the soldier who was the princess, tried to dissuade him, telling her that, against that trick, did not know any resource, and if the shoe were found in his room it would mal.- Do what you command said the soldier; and the daughter of the King maid was serving a third night. But before you take the again unto hid a shoe under the cama.A the next morning the king commanded that seek citywide her daughter's shoe. It was found in the room of the soldier, which, although -aconsejado by the dwarf was at one end of the city, which thought out, not soon be arrested and imprisoned in the cárcel.Con the rush of flight he had forgotten his greatest treasure, the blue lamp and money; He had only one ducat in his pocket. When, in chains, looking out the window of his prison, he saw pass one of his companions. He called striking the glass, and approaching the other, he said: - Do me the favor of going to look for the little bundle that I left at the inn; I will give you a ducat to cambio.Corrió the other in search of the order, and the soldier, as was alone again, he lighted his pipe and call the man: - Fear not said this to his master. Go where you keep and do not worry. Seeks not only forget the light azul.Al next day the court martial was held against the soldier, and even though his crimes were not serious, the judges sentenced him to death. A being led to the place of execution, he asked the king to grant him one last gracia.- What? asked Monarca.- That I may smoke one more pipe on camino.- can smoke three said the king, but do not count vida.Sacó to forgive the man his pipe, lit it at the blue flame and they had just gone up in the air smoke rings appeared the little man with a small cudgel in his hand and said: - What does my lord command - lashes out against these false judges and their henchmen, and do not let one foot? no not forgive the King, who with so much injustice I have been there tratado.Y to the little man like lightning, darting this, wham !, handing home runs left and right. And who he played his club, I was lying on the ground without daring to lift a finger. To the king he took such a fear that began to beg and plead and, not to lose life, the soldier gave the kingdom and the hand of his daughter.
The prodigious lettuce	1154	567	Spanish	Once there was a hunter who went to the forest to reach his paranza. He marched with cheerful and florid heart and moved whistling songs when he appeared ugly little old lady, who said: - Good morning, dear hunter. You seem happy and satisfied, and I, however, suffer hunger and thirst. Give me a hunter limosnita.Compadecióse poor grandmother tucked into his pocket and gave what their means allow. A self preparing to go his way, detúvolo old, saying: - Listen, hunter, what I'm going to tell you. Given your good heart, I want to make a gift. Keep going, and after a while come to a tree, whose leaves are nine birds, and buffeted holding a blanket with claws. ApÃºntales with the shotgun and shoot. They will release the mantle, and also will fall dead one. Bring the mantle, he is delighted. As you would hang your shoulders, you just have to ask you transportation to the place you want and you'll be on it in the blink of an eye. A bird dead will take out the heart and swallow it, and since then, every morning, the wake up, find a gold coin under the almohada.El Hunter thanked the old thinking: "Nice things promised me. With this to be true !. " But behold, there was scarcely advanced a hundred paces, he heard a shouting over his head and chirping birds in the branches, so strong, that made him lift his head. And then he saw a flock of birds that peck and undertook with claws against a cloth, fighting as if their posesión.- disputasen It's strange! - he exclaimed the hunter -. Viejecita exactly as I said -. He picked up the shotgun and fired in the middle of the group, causing a stir feather. The animals took flight with great screaming, but one, who was killed, and with it, the robe came off. The hunter then did as he indicated the old. Opened the bird, he brought him forth the heart and swallowed. And llevóse the manto.A the next morning, waking up, remembering the promise wanted to check its veracity. And behold, to raising the pillow, he was there, gleaming, gold coin. And so every morning he found one on the rise. Collected, thus a lot of money, and so he asked: ". What will me all this gold, if I stay at home I will leave to run the world" took leave of his parents, hung on the shoulder backpack and gun and set off. One day, through a thick forest, saw rise in the plain that followed the forest, a majestic palace. In one of the windows he was an old and beautiful damsel, looking down. The old woman was a witch and said to the girl: - That out of the woods an individual who takes the body a wonderful treasure. We have to take it off, my child. Maybe it will be in our power than theirs. Has swallowed the heart of a bird, thanks to which every morning is a gold coin under the almohada.Instruyóla then about how to proceed and in threatening tone with angry look, he said: - If you do not obey me, you will even closer to the hunter and see the maid, he said to himself: ".. I walked a lot, it is best to rest at this magnificent palace Money I do not lack" But the real reason for his decision was that he was attracted to this beautiful muchacha.Llamó at the door, and was greeted kindly and politely served. A little cape was so madly in love with the girl who could think only of her, or see it in his eyes; and thus it did what it demanded. The old woman said: - It is time to seize the heart of the bird. He did not notice that it no longer tiene.Preparó a concoction and once was ready, he poured it into a cup and handed it to the girl for him to do drink the hunter. Said to the girl: - Come on, darling, gives me lifted the cup, and as soon as he had drunk, the heart of the bird jumped out of his cuerpo.La girl had to take him away secretly and swallow it in turn! therefore the old so wanted. Thereafter, he found more and money under the pillow. However, he appeared beneath hers, and old gathered it every morning. But the boy was so in love and blind, thought only be at the side of the then muchacha.Dijo Witch: - Now we have the heart of the bird; but we have to take the mantle prodigioso.Contestó the maid: - It is not right. Simply riqueza.Pero has lost its old said angrily: - A miraculous mantle so rarely found in the world. I want it for me, and no more than hablar.Y gave his instructions to the girl, threatening that if she did not obey him, it would wrong. The maid had no choice but to submit to the commands of the witch, and, looking out the window, he began to contemplate the vast panorama with triste.Preguntóle face the hunter: - Why are you so distressed - Oh, my treasure ! - she said -. There is opposite the mountain of garnets, full of the richest gems, but, anyone reach them! Flightless birds can only get there, but not men.- If you have more pain than that - said the hunter - the sooner you remove from the corazón.Y, taking her under his cloak, he asked to be moved to the mountain of garnets . In an instant they were in it. Precious stones glittered everywhere, and it was a glory contemplate. They picked the most beautiful and effulgent. But the old, with devilish arts, he had made the hunter felt a heaviness in his eyes, so he said to the girl: - Let's sit a little rest. I'm so tired that I barely sostienen.Sentáronse legs, he rested his head on the lap of the maiden and soon fell asleep. Quitóle then she shoulders the mantle, put it on themselves, and collect all the gems, asked to be transported to its casa.Al wake hunter, he saw his beloved had tricked him, leaving him in the wild that mountain. - Ouch! - exclaimed -, how much falsehood in the world! - and plunged into anxiety and sadness, he began to consider their plight. Mountain belonged to a giant, wild and monstrous, living in her making mischief, and not much time had passed when he saw who approached him three hombrotes of those. Tumbóse on the floor, pretending to sleep profundamente.Al reach giants, gave him the first foot saying - What bug is this that lies here Said the second: - Crush him with pie.Intervino the third, contemptuous: - Not worth it! Let him live. Here you can not go on, and if you climb to the summit, we will take the nubes.Y, they said that, they went on their way. But the hunter had heard her words and no sooner were gone, he rose and climbed to the top. Shortly after sitting in it he floated a cloud and taking him in her womb, after transporting it through the air, dropped it on a large garden surrounded by walls, and the boy was found on the ground, unharmed, from cabbages and other hortalizas.- If the least had something to eat. I'm hungry, and this will become increasingly worse. But here there is not a pear sad, nor, no fruit of any kind. All are coles.Al end, he thought: "Ultimately, I eat lettuce Not very appetizing, but always refreshed me something.." He looked for a good lettuce and began to eat the white sheets. He had just swallowed a couple of bites experienced a very strange sensation, as if to change his body. Creciéronle fours, a headstrong and two long ears, and saw with horror that had been transformed into an ass. But, nevertheless, famine raged, and the juicy salad Avenia with its new nature, continued to eat hungrily. He came finally another lettuce variety, and there was no sooner tested occurred in a new transformation and regained its original form humana.Tumbóse then down and fell asleep, it was tired. At the wake, the next morning, pulled a head of lettuce and other pernicious good, thinking. "I help you get next to mine and to punish disloyalty" Vegetables saved himself, jumped the garden wall and walked to the palace of his beloved. After two or three days' march reached him. After blacken his face so that his own mother would have recognized, he entered the building and asked for shelter: - I'm very tired - he said -. Today I can not take a step más.Preguntóle Witch: - Who are you and what you are engaged - I am a messenger of the King - he answered - he sent me in search of the tastiest lettuce growing in the sun?. I was fortunate to find her and take her with me; but the sun is so ardent that the plant is about to wither away, and I do not know if I can get her to hear the old woman palacio.Al the beautiful salad, entráronle want to eat it and said - good farmer, let me try that wonderful lettuce. - Why not? - he said. I bring both. I give you one - and opened his backpack, took ill and handed. The witch suspected nothing, and as his mouth water make an effort to eat this new delicacy, was straight to the kitchen to prepare it. When already had a point, can not wait for lunch, he took some leaves and stuffed them into his mouth. There was barely swallowed lost his human figure and transformed into donkey, ran to the patio. In these the maid came into the kitchen and seeing the seasoned and ready to serve salad, yielding to his old habit of trying all the dishes, comióse also some leaves as he carried her to the table. Immediately he performed the miraculous virtue of the vegetable. Wench became, in turn, in borrica and ran to join the old, throwing the soil the source containing the lechuga.Mientras both the messenger course stood by the beautiful girl, who, seeing that did not reach the salad and feeling an irresistible desire to try it, said - I do not know what about this lettuce and hunter, thinking, "Surely has already taken effect," he said: - I'm going to the kitchen to get down informarme.Al he saw the two asses running around the yard, and salad on the floor. "Very good - it was said -; those two already have theirs." He picked up the rest of the lettuce, put it in the fountain and went to serve the same muchacha.- I bring you this delicious delicacy - he said - so you do not have to esperarte.Comió her then, and now, like the other, losing the human figure, ran to the transformed courtyard burra.El hunter, after washing the face so that the transformed women to recognize it fell to the courtyard and said: - Now you shall receive the prize that your perfidy deserve - and tied at three a rope and brought to a molino.Llamó to a window and looked out the miller to ask what I've been here three beasts deseaba.- very reluctant - he said -. I can not keep saving them. If you want to take care of them and treat them as I say, I will pay what I pidáis.- Why not? - answered the miller -. ? But how should I treat the hunter said to him then that the old donkey - that was the witch - give him once eating three sticks each day; the median, the maid three times to eat and sticks, and to lower the maid three times to eat and no sticks, because he had no courage to make mistreat the girl. He then returned to the palace, where he found necesitaba.A few days as the Miller presented himself to inform him that the old donkey, who had received more than sticks and only think of the day, had died. - The other two - man continued - live feed and receive three daily; more seem so sad, I do not think will last a long tiempo.Compadecióse the hunter and, feeling anger had happened, he told the miller that devolviese. When they arrived, they fed them lettuce good, and immediately regained their human form. Beautiful girl knelt before him and said: - Oh, my beloved, forgive the wrong I did to you, forced by my mother! It was against my will, because I love you with all my heart. Your prodigious mantle is hung in a closet, and, as for the heart of a bird, I'll take one vomitivo.Pero he quickly replied: - Save it, then it does not matter who owns one another, and I think take for wife .And the wedding was solemnized, and they lived happily until the time of his death.
The table, the donkey and the Cudgel	340	563	Spanish	Once upon a time a tailor who had three sons and one goat. As goat milk fed his whole family, he needed good feed, and every day had to take her out to pasture. This took care children in turn. One day, Major led her to the cemetery, where the grass was very lush, and gorging left and jump to their hearts content. At dusk, when it was time to go home, he asked, "Goat, are you satisfied?" what the animal responded: "So sick I find that another sheet does not fit me into Beee, baa." "Then let's go a little house," said the boy, and, taking her by the rope, took her to the barn, where he tied her up securely. "What," he asked the old tailor, "has eaten well the goat?" - "I think so!" He replied the boy. "Tan is sick, do not you fit or a sheet." But the father wished to satisfy himself, he went down to the barn and petting the animal, he asked, "Goat, art thou satisfied?" A goat which he replied: "How can I be satiated only stayed in zanjitasin found no leaves Baa, baa." "What do you say!" cried the tailor, and ran upstairs, he puts his son back and a half: ". Liar told me that the goat was sick, when you done starve" And, angry, midióle back with the rod, and sticks kicked him out of casa.Al next day it fell to the second son, who sought a great little place in a corner of the garden, full of juicy grass, where the goat swelled eating, leaving everything pelado.Al evening, back when he asked, "Goat, are you sick?" A goat which he replied: "So sick I find that another sheet does not fit me into Beee, baa." "Let's go, then!" the boy said, and led her home, tied her to the barn. "What," he said the old tailor, "has eaten well the goat?" - "You bet!" - answered the boy. So sick is that you can not be more than one sheet "But the tailor, not trusting the words of the boy, went down to the barn and asked." Cabrita, are you satiated "and said the goat," How can I be satiated? Just stayed in zanjitasin found no leaves. Baa, baa! "" Scoundrel! Soulless! "Cried the tailor." Look to starve such a good animal! "And up the stairs two at a time, threw sticks at the second hijo.Tocóle then turn to the third, which, wanting you do things right, looked for a place overgrown thick and lush and let the goat graze at ease a dusk, when to go home he asked. "? Cabrita, are you satiated" he replied goat " I am so sick that another sheet does not fit me. ! Baa, baa! "" Well, walk, home, "he said the youth, and led her to the barn, tied solidly" What, "said the old tailor," has eaten the goat right? "-." I think so, "replied the boy." so tired is that you can not be a sheet "But man, distrustful, went down to ask:". Cabrita, are you satiated "and the rascal animals replied," How can I be satiated? Just stayed in zanjitasin found no leaves. Baa, baa! "" Brood of liars! "Cried the tailor." So bad piece and is so ungrateful one another! Whatever it is about me, not shall return to make fun! "And, beside himself with anger, he rose and gave little beat up such that the poor boy ran away from home as a soul by the diablo.Y the old tailor he was alone with his goat the next morning went down to the barn and stroking her, said, ".. Come on, my little animal, I'll take you pacer" and, taking her rope, condújola to green hedges abounded plantain . and other herbs very taste of goats Here you can fill your belly to bursting she said, and left her pacer to sunset the sun Then he asked. "Goat, art thou satisfied?" and she replied, "Tan I find myself tired, another sheet does not fit me. ! Baa, baa "" Come home, "said the tailor, and led her to the barn, he made it subject But the leave, yet he turned to ask him." Have you been satiated this time? "The goat, however, he repeated incorrigible? "How will I be satiated only stayed in zanjitasin found no leaves. Baa, baa! "At hearing this, the tailor he lay turulato, realizing then that he had driven away his three sons without cause." Wait a bit, "he bellowed," ungrateful creature! It is little you out. I'll point out to you so that you may never again introduce home of an honest tailor! "And, climbing upstairs, he took his razor and after soaping head the goat, she was shaved to smooth leave it as the palm of his hand. and thinking that the yardstick would be an instrument too honorable, went to the whip and gave him such a thrashing that no good could come loose, the beast ran like a soul diablo.El the tailor, and all alone at home, he felt a great sadness she missed her children. but no one knew his whereabouts major had entered apprentice to a cabinetmaker and worked with such application and diligence to the finish learning. sound the time to go around the world, his teacher gave him a table, ordinary-looking, common wood, but it had a very unique and advantageous property when put on the floor and said:. "table, cover thyself! "immediately was covered with clean white tablecloth, and above it, a plate, knife and fork; In addition, many sources as it could hold, filled with delicacies cooked and roasted, and with a glass of red wine, which gladdened the heart. The young officer thought: "With this me enough to eat well throughout my life." And he went his way, very lively and happy, never fret about whether or not the inns were well stocked. If you are so pleased, quedábase in a clearing in a forest or a meadow, or wherever he fancied, he took the table back and placing it in front of him, said, "Table, cover yourself !," and a time was within reach as he could wish for. In the end, he thought back to his father's house; surely he would have appeased anger, and would welcome him to the present prodigious table. And behold, one night, en route to his people, he entered an inn which was filled with guests. I received very well and invited him to dine with them, saying that otherwise would be difficult for the innkeeper will serve lunch. - he said the ebanista- No, I do not want to deprive you of your little dinner; before, to the contrary, I who calls you. Others laughed, thinking he wanted to play a trick; but he set his wooden table in the middle of the room, and said, "Table, cover yourself !," and immediately was filled with delicacies, so appetizing, that would fondista never been able to prepare, and laying off a whiff able to delight the most reluctant smell. - To serve, folks! cried the joiner, and the guests, seeing that the thing was serious, not to be asked twice, but drew near, their respective armed with knives, they attacked the viands. What was most admired them, as a source, it was immediately replaced by another equal and full emptied. The innkeeper watched everything from a corner, not knowing what to say, but thought to himself: "A cook and would make good service at the inn!" The carpenter and his guests extended their revelry until late at night, until at the end they went to sleep, and the young apprentice also went, his magic table against the wall. But the innkeeper was still in his thoughts, he did not let a moment of rest, until he remembered he had in the attic an old table much like magic, and so prettily was callandito to look and bartered on the other. The next morning, the joiner paid the amount of the bed, took in tow the table without realizing that it was not true, he resumed his way. At noon he came home from his father, who received him with open arms. - Well, son, what have you learned? -preguntóle. - Father, I became a cabinetmaker. - Good job, 'said the old man. And what have you brought your wanderings through the world? - Father, the best thing I bring is this table. The tailor looked everywhere, and then said - it does not seem anything of the other Thursdays; It is a small table, old and poor vulgar. - But it's a haunted table replied the son. When I placed on the floor and cover command that immediately fills with a few dishes so tasty, with corresponding wine, the heart leaps for joy. Just invite all our relatives and friends who come to get the belly of punishment; you will see how satisfied they will leave the table. Gathered who was the crowd, the waiter set the table in the room and said, "Table, cover yourself !." But the table was ignored and as empty as a common table that do not listen to reason. Then he realized the poor boy that he had changed the table, and was ashamed at having to go through trickster. Relatives laughed in his face, returning as hungry and thirsty as they had come. The father went back to his scraps and needles, and son placed himself as the official home of a teacher ebanista.El second son had gone to a mill, where he learned the profession of miller. Finished his apprenticeship, his master said to him: - As you've done well, a very special gift you ass, that neither pulling carts or support loads. - What is then? He asked the young officer. - Spits gold -respondióle the schoolmaster. You just have to extend a canvas on the floor and say, "Bricklebrit !," and the animal will drop gold pieces for front and back. - Here is a wonderful animal! She cried the young man, and, thanking the miller, and went out into the world. When he needed money had nothing to say to her ass. "Bricklebrit !," and then rained gold coins, he had no other trouble than pick of the ground. Wherever it was not but was satisfied with the best. What matter the price, if you always had a bag full! When he was tired of seeing the world, he thought: "I must go home my father when I was present with the Golden Ass, he'll get me anger and get well." It happened that he went to the same inn where his brother had lost the haunted table. He led the ass of the halter; the innkeeper wanted to tie him to go to catch him; but he would not permit the young: - Do not bother, I myself take my gray horse to the stable and bind it, because I know where I have it. To the innkeeper seemed to him that something strange, and thought that an individual who personally took care of his ass would not have much to spend; but when he saw the stranger put his hand into his pocket and took out two gold coins will charge you prepare as best he could, the man's eyes opened oranges and hurried to please him. After eating, the guest asked what was, he thought he could carry the hotelier hand and apprentice must give two coins over gold. He felt in his pocket, but it was empty. - Wait a while, sir fondista said, I will look for gold. And he went out, taking the tablecloth. The other, intrigued and curious, escurrióse behind him, and as the stranger shut in the barn and will bolt, looked through a hole. The stranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried, "Bricklebrit !," and immediately the beast began to drop gold coins ahead and behind, it did not seem it rained down. - Caramba! said the landlord, be soon ducats coined there! Not bad a bag like this! The guest paid his bill and went to sleep while the innkeeper down to the barn quietly and purse donkey had to replace it with another. The next morning he left the boy with the donkey, believing that it was "of gold." At the arrival, at noon, to her father, recibiólo it with great joy. - What happened to you, my son? - Well, I'm miller father said the boy. - What you bring your wanderings through the world? - Nothing but an ass. - are asses enough here; better would have been a goat replied the father. - Yes' said the son, but my ass is not like the others, but a "Golden Ass," just say, "Brielebrit !," and then you loose a whole bag of gold coins. I call upon the relatives, I'll make them all rich. - That's more like it said the tailor; so I will not need to continue giving the needle-and hastened to go in search of relatives. As all gathered were found, the miller and arranged them in a circle, extending a canvas on the floor, he went for the ass. - Now, he said attention first, and then: "Bricklebrit!" -; but what fell were not exactly ducats, which was demonstrated that the animal did not know iota on coins minted art that not all donkeys dominate. The poor miller made a face of three feet; he realized that he had been duped and apologized to the relatives, who went home as poor as they came. A old was left with no choice but to continue driving the needle, and the boy was placed waiter in a molino.El third brother had entered apprentice to a turner, and as it is difficult craft, learning was much more long. His brothers, told him in a letter, of what had happened and how the innkeeper had stolen their magical treasures the eve of his arrival home. When the boy had learned the craft, the master, in reward for good behavior, gave him a sack, saying: - In there is a stake. - The bag can colgármelo to serve my shoulder and said the lad, but what I'll do with the stick? It is but a weight more. - I'll explain -respondióle the schoolmaster. If someone mistreats you or you are looking for trouble, simply to say: "Staff outside the bag !," and then you'll jump and jump on the backs of people, with such vigor and enthusiasm that in eight days no they may move. And will not stop the battering until you shout: "Staff at the sack !." He gave him thanks and left the young man with the sack on his shoulder; and every time someone looked for the body to say it: "Staff outside the bag !," and he was dancing and Cascando nit to the offender or offenders, and would not stop until they had no jacket or doublet in back, and with such lightness, passing from one to another without giving them time perceiving. One evening the young turner entered the inn where his brothers had been victims of deception usual. Leaving the bag on the table, the young man began to explain all the wonders he had seen in his travels. - Yes he said, I know that there haunted tables, donkeys gold and other things like that, all of them very good and keep me well to despise, but these are nothing compared to the treasure that I won and I carry in my bag. The host listened. "What the hell can it be ?," he thought. "Surely the sack is filled with precious stones. I'll have to think how to get my hands on him, because good things always go in threes." When sleep came, the stranger stretched out on the bench, putting the bag for a pillow. The innkeeper, as soon as he thought he slept, he sidled up and began cautiously and gently pull the sack, with the idea to remove it and replace it with another. but that was what I was waiting for the turner, and when the innkeeper threw a little louder, shouted: "Staff outside the bag !." Immediately came the stake and began to measure the ribs to the innkeeper with such vigor that was good to see. The man asked for compassion, but the more he screamed, fell hardiest frequent bats, until at the end, they found him on the ground, exhausted. Then the turner said: - If I now deliver the magic table and the Golden Ass, start again dance. - Right away, right away! said the host faintly; I'll give it all, provided you withdraw yourself this elf. - I will behave with clemency said the young man; but to serve you from lesson-. And shouting: "Staff at the bag !," left him in paz.El turner left the next morning, in possession of the haunted table and the Golden Ass, and took the route of his father's house. The tailor rejoiced at the sight of it, and asked what he had learned about the world. - Father -respondióle the boy, I learned the trade of a turner. - An office of great wit declared the father said. But what do you bring your wanderings? - something of great value, dad replied the lad; a stake in a sack. - What! He exclaimed the old man. A stake! Well, yes it was worth it! Here you can cut one in each tree. - But not like this, Father. If I say, "Cane, out of the bag !," and he jumps gun with malicious such a dance, which puts it like new, and does not stop until the other asks for mercy. Look, with this stake have recovered the haunted table and the Golden Ass innkeeper that this thief stole my brothers. Call them both and invite all relatives; I give them food and drink and fill their pockets with ducats. The old tailor summoned the relatives, but did not feel very confident. Then the turner spread a cloth on the floor of the room and bringing the Golden Ass, his second brother said: - Come on, brother, entiéndete with him. Miller said: "Bricklebrit !," and immediately began to fall a real shower of ducats, and the ass did not stop until every drop had collected so many that no longer could with them. (Ah, rascal, what you would have liked to be there!). Then the turner brought the little table and said to the carpenter: - Brother, now it's your turn -. And no sooner said the other brother: "Table, cover yourself !," when she saw himself full of exquisite dishes. Then they held a feast as good tailor ever seen in his house, and the whole family gathered remained until evening, during the celebration and joy. The tailor locked away needle and thread closet, rods and plates, and lived on in the company of their children in peace and felicidad.Pero, anyway, what had become of the goat who was to blame for the tailor driving out his three sons? Well, I'll tell thee. He ashamed of his shaven head, went to hide in the den of a fox. A return it to the home saw the darkness of the den watching her two large eyes twinkling, and fled scared the sea. She encountered the bear, who, seeing her so flustered, he asked: - What's up, bitch sister who wear this face fright? - Ouch! He said the zorra-, in my burrow has gotten a monster and scared me with eyes like hot coals. - Bah !, soon we will miss said the bear, and the fox walked to his lair; to arriving, he looked inside; but seeing those eyes of fire, entróle turn fear and not wanting to deal with the fierce animal, put in dusty feet. Topóse with bee, which, noting that not all him, said: - Bear, crestfallen look. Where you left your good mood? - It is very easy to talk said the bear. The fact is that in the cave of the redhead is a ferocious animal, fiery eyes, and do not know how to throw it. Bee said: - I pity you, bear. I am a poor weak that neither you consider worthy of your eyes, and yet, I think I can help. And, flying fox's den, posóse on the bald head of the goat, and drove the sting with such fury that it jumped out, shouting, "baa, baa !," and breaking into a run as crazy. And this is the time when no one has heard more of it.
The death of the little hen	759	2021	Spanish	Once, Hen and Cockerel went to the Mount of walnut and agreed that he found the walnut it with the other. Then the hen found a large, but did not say anything, because I wanted to eat it herself. But both bulged nut, he could not swallow and was choking him. She was in great trouble, because he feared drowning, and shouted: - Gallito, please bring me running water as you can and then I'm drowning! Cockerel ran, as fast as he could, toward the source, and the reach it, he said - Source, give me water; Gallinita is in the nogaleda, it is choking him a very fat nut and drowning. The source answered: - Run before looking for the bride, and tell him to give you red silk. Gallito ran the bride. - Bride, give me red silk that take her to the fountain, and she will give me water to carry Gallinita, which is in the nogaleda with a choking walnut and about to suffocate. Source answered: - Corre first for me one guirnaldita that I was hanging from willow. Gallito and ran to the willow and, picking up a branch wreath, carried it aside to the bride; and the bride gave her red silk, and the give the red silk, gave him water source. Gallito then took the water to Gallinita, but it was too late; when he arrived late; when he arrived, Gallinita, asphyxiated, he was lying on the ground, motionless. It was so sad Gallito, who burst into tears bitter, and hearing it, all the animals came to share their grief. And six mice built a buggy to drive Gallinita to his final resting place; and when the stroller was ready, they hooked him, and stood Gallito coachman. But on the way they were presented with the fox - Where are you going, Cockerel? - A Hen bury. - Will you let me come with you in the car? "Yes, but you'll have to sit behind, or can not take my horses." The fox sat behind, and successively rose wolf, bear, deer, lion and all the animals of the forest. And so the procession continued down to a stream. - How do we cross? - Gallito asked. Behold, there was a straw, which said: - I will miss you can pass through and over me. But as soon as the six mice had reached the center of the bridge, hundióse straw, falling to the river, and with it, all six mice, which were drowned. Before the trouble, a coal drew near and said: - I am long enough to reach from one bank to the other, you will pass over me. And he crossed over the water; but, having had the misfortune to touch a little, he was heard a hiss and was dead. To view the stone, he felt compassion and eager to help Cockerel, stood at Cockerel, stood turn on the water. Uncióse the Gallito he owns a car, and when almost already had Gallinita on firm ground, to the arranged to drag those behind, as excessive was the weight of all desplomose the car and they all fell into the water and drowned. Cockerel was left alone with Gallinita; cavóle a grave, buried her and erigióle a cairn on top. then perched on its summit, he was llorándola until he died. And here they are all dead.
Godfather Death	418	332	Spanish	Very poor man had twelve children; and though he worked day and night, not enough to feed them bread. When her son was born number thirteen, she did not know what to do; He hit the road and decided that the first thing would happen to him godfather to his son. And the first thing that happened was God our Lord; he already knew the plight of the poor and said. "My son, I pity you want to be the godfather of your last son and take care of him to be happy." The man asked: "Who are you?" - "I am your God." - "Well, I do not want you to be godfather to my son; no, I do not want you to be the godfather, because you give so much to the rich and let the poor go hungry." Thus man answered the Lord, because he did not understand how wisely God divides out wealth and poverty; and he turned away from God and went on his way. He then met the devil, who asked, "What if I want to choose your son's godfather, will give him a lot of money and have everything you want in this world." The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I'm the devil." - "No, I do not want you to be the godfather of my child, are bad and always deceive men." He walked, and found death, which was thin and bones; and death said, "I want to be godmother to your son." - "Who you are?" - "I am death, which makes all men equal." And the man said, "you agree me; You take away the rich as the poor, without distinction'll be the godmother.." Death answered, "I will make rich and famous to your son, my friends never lack anything." And the man said, "Next Sunday is the baptism; do not let go in time." Death came as promised and was madrina.El little child grew and became a boy; and, one day, her godmother came into the house and told him to follow. He took the boy to a forest, taught a plant that grew there and said, "I'll give you now my gift Godmother: I'll make a famous doctor when you are called to a sick person I always find at the side of his bed. . If I am at the head, you'll ensure that you will cure him;. you will give this herb and will be good But if you see me at the foot of the bed, the patient will belong to me, and you say it is hopeless and that no doctor you can save not give any herb against my will, because I'd pay dearly "a little time, the boy was already a famous doctor in the whole world..; people said: "As you see a sick, can say whether it will heal or not a great doctor.." And they called in many countries to make it to visit the sick and gave a lot of money, so he became rich very soon. It happened that the king put bad. The famous doctor called to tell if he could cure; but as he approached the king saw that death was at the foot of the bed. There were not worth herbs. And the doctor thought, "If I could fool even once Death Of course I take this wrong, but as I am his godson, may make the view fat I'll try!.." He took the king and turned his back on the bed, and put his feet on the pillow and head to toe; And so Death stood beside his head; then he gave the grass and the king convalesced and he regained his health. But death was home from the doctor very angry, threatened him with his finger and said, "I've teased For once, I forgive you, because you are my godson, but as you ever do, you'll see!: I'll take you. "And little time, the daughter of the king became very ill. He was an only child, and his father was so desperate that he did nothing but mourn. Sent word that which heal his daughter marry her and make her his heir. The doctor, coming into the room princess saw that death was at the foot of the bed. Let the boy would have remembered the threat of her godmother! But the big blleza princess and happiness to marry her upset him so much that discarded all thoughts. He did not see the looks angered that he missed death, nor how threatened him with a clenched fist picked her the princess and put his feet on the pillow and head to the feet, gave him the magic herb, and the Before long the face of the princess perked up and began to mejorar.Y Death, furious that she had been cheated again went to great strides home from the doctor and said, "it's over Now I'll take you! " Cold gripped his hand, he gripped so hard that the poor boy could not let go, and took him to a very deep cave. And the doctor saw in the cave thousands of lights, rows of candles that never ended; candles were large, some medium and some small. And every few moment extinguished, and others again were lighting; It was as if the little lights were bouncing. Death said, "Look, those candles you see are the lives of men great Las are the lives of children, the medians are the lives of the spouses, and the little ones of the elderly But there are also children and.. young people who have only a tiny candle. " - "Tell me what is my light!" said the doctor, thinking that it still would be very large. And death showed him a candle stub, almost consumed: "There you go." - "Oh, godmother, godmother MIA light a new Please do it for me Look I still have not enjoyed life, they're going to become king and I'm going to marry the princess!!! " - "can not be," said Death. "I can not turn on a light until it has been off another." - "Well light a new candle with which it is shutting down!" He begged the doctor. Death made as if to obey him; It took a new and long candle. But he wanted revenge, knowing he threw the stub of candle to the floor, and the little light went out. And at the same time, the doctor fell to the ground, and gave already in the hands of Death.
White Bride and the Black Bride	1283	403	Spanish	A woman was cutting grass in the meadow with her daughter and stepdaughter. They were presented with Our Lord in figure beggar and asked: - What is the road leading to the village - If you want to know - answered the mother - I seek him you mismo.Y daughter added: - If you are afraid to lose you , pack a guía.Pero stepdaughter he said: - Poor man, I will go with you. Come conmigo.Enojóse Our Lord with the mother and daughter and the turn his back, he cursed them, condemning them to be black as night and ugly as sin. Instead, he was kind to the poor stepdaughter and arriving with her near the village, blessed, saying: - Choose Three Graces and tea concederé.Respondió girl: - I want to be beautiful and pure as the sun - and immediately it was white and beautiful as the light of day -. Second place would have a bag of money that never vaciase -. And Our Lord gave, warning: - Do not forget what mejor.Y she replied: - As a third grace ask the glory of heaven for after my muerte.Otorgósela also Our Lord and said goodbye to ella.Cuando to arriving home, the mother saw that she and her daughter were black as coal and hideously ugly, while the step-daughter was white and beautiful, the perversity of his heart grew still, and I had no desire that tormenting girl . But this had a brother named Reginer, whom he loved exceedingly, and told him what happened. Reginer then said: - My sister, I want to make a portrait to constantly keep you in my sight, because I love you so much I want to be seeing all momento.- Well - she replied - but please do not show anyone portrait he .Pintó him to his sister and hung the painting in his room in the royal palace, it served as coachman. Every day stopped to contemplate, and thanked God for having granted such hermana.Sucedió the King, whose service was the waiter, had lost his wife, who was so beautiful that it was not another like it, and that loss had sunk to the monarch in deep sorrow. The servants of the palace, noting that the driver spent long moments absorbed in the contemplation of his beautiful picture, full of envy, they betrayed to the King. He commanded him to bring the portrait, and seeing her resemblance to his late wife and that even surpassed in beauty, he fell in love with the girl shown in the table. He called the coachman and asked whom the portrait was; the waiter told him it was his sister. Then decided the King to marry her and no other, and giving the driver a chariot and horses, and gorgeous dresses of gold, sent him in search of his elegida.Al get Reginer with the embassy, ​​her sister felt a great joy, but the stepsister, jealous black of his fortune, was angry, exceedingly, and said to his mother: - What use me all your gear if you are not able to provide me with a lucky so - Calm - replied the old - because I will take care of your felicidad.Y with witchcraft clouded eyes the coachman, until he was half-blind, half deaf as she returned to her stepdaughter. They then got into the car, first girlfriend, with its splendid dresses reais after the stepmother and her daughter, while Reginer occupied the seat. In the after a while driving, said the coachman: "Cover yourself, sister, do not dip the lluviani cover you dust the wind, for beautiful appear before the King." He asked the bride: - What my brother wanted to say - Oh! - she replied the old - has said take off your golden dress and give your hermana.Quitóselo her and what happened to the black, which gave his ordinary gray blouse. And continued until shortly after, again said the brother, "Cover yourself, sister, do not dip the lluviani cover you dust the wind, for beautiful appear before the King." He asked the bride: - What my dear says brother - Ouch! - he said the old - has said take off the golden coif and give your hermana.Quitóse her coif and became black, keeping her prominent. And moved on, until, after another while he repeated the brother: "Cover yourself, sister, do not dip the lluviani cover you dust the wind, for beautiful appear before the King." He asked the bride: - What my dear says brother - Ouch! - she replied the old - has said that you lean out the window of the car. At that time they were crossing a bridge, lying on a deep river. A girl getting up and look out the window, the other two gave him a shove and thrown into the water. A sinking into the bed of the river, arose from its surface a white duck, as snow, which began to swim, following the corriente.El brother had seen nothing of what happened and the car drove up to the palace. He presented to the King black girl, mistaking her sister, because she was half blind and saw only the brightness of the dress. A King contemplating the extreme ugliness of his alleged girlfriend, exceedingly wroth and ordered the driver to cast them into a pit full of snakes and other poisonous vermin. The old witch, however, knew with his evil arts, dazzle the king to the point that not only gave up beside her and her daughter, but even ended up marrying ésta.Un sunset in the black wife was sitting on the lap of the King, came swimming to the kitchen sink a white duck and told the fucking "Kid, light fire, so you can warm up then." he did so the boy and lit fire in the hearth. The duck approached, sacudióse and smoothed feathers with the beak; and as well it preened, asked: "What does my brother Reginer?." answered the click ". It lies in a dark prison, among vipers poisonous tongue" He kept the bird asking, "What does the black witch the house "and said the waiter:".. in his arms resting King, of the King, who is the wife, "said the duck:" God have mercy, "and swimming, he left the fregadero.Volvió him! evening of the next day, repeating the same questions, and so the third day. The assistant cook, unable to keep silent any longer, was to give an account to the King of what was happening. He wanted to see for himself, and that night went down to the kitchen. When the duck stuck his head in the sink, he cut her round with his sword, and at the same moment he was transformed into the beautiful maiden portrait that his brother had painted. King had an immense joy, and as the girl was completely wet, sent for precious clothes and dress them. Then the girl told her as he had been a victim of deceit and betrayal of his people, who had finished throwing to the river; and the first thing he asked for was the freedom of his brother. It was out of this pit of snakes, and then the King, addressing the room occupied by the witch asked this: "What deserves whoever did so and so ?," saying what it was. Was old so obfuscated that without realizing, he replied: - deserves to be you locked naked in a barrel bristling with nails, is a horse hitch a barrel and the animal is released to the trote.La sentence was fulfilled in her and in his black daughter while espousing the King with the white and beautiful girl, and rewarded his brother faithful, filling him with riches and honors.
Bride of the brigand	379	955	Spanish	Once upon a time a miller who had a beautiful daughter, and when he was grown, married and wanted to see her well placed. I thought: "If a suitor as God commands and requests comes, I will give it." Shortly afterwards came one that looked very rich, and as the miller knew nothing bad about him, he promised his daughter. The girl, however, did not feel the inclination for it is natural that a bride sitting by her boyfriend, nor confidence in him. Every time I saw or thought about him, a strange anguish oppressed his heart. One day he told: - You are my fiancee, and never have come to visitarme.Respondió the maid: - We do not know where your casa.- My house is in the middle of the dark forest, 'he said the novio.Ella everything was inventing pretexts , saying that I could not find the way, but one day the groom said very determined: - on Sunday you must come home. I have invited my friends, and to find the way in the forest, scatter cenizas.Llegó on Sunday, and she set off; without knowing why, she felt a strange fear, and to ensure that the return will not go astray, llenóse pockets peas and lentejas.A the entrance of the forest he saw the trail of ash and followed him; but at every step he pulled to the ground, left and right, some peas. I had to walk most of the day before reaching the center of the forest, where darker era. There was a solitary house, dark and gloomy. Dominating her apprehension, she went into the house; a profound silence reigned inside, and nobody looked somewhere. Suddenly a voice was heard: "Turn, turn, young prometida.Asesinos living in this den." The girl looked up and saw that the voice was that of a bird in a cage hanging on the wall. Which he repeated: "Turn, turn, young prometida.Asesinos living in this den." He kept the girl walking through the house, from room to room; but it was completely deserted, without a living soul. He came to the winery, where there was a very old woman, who did not stop wagging the Head. Could you tell me the girl asked my fiance if you live here? - Oh, poor girl! She cried the old woman. Where have you been! You are a den of robbers. Believed to be a bride and celebrate your wedding soon, but death who'll marry you. Look what I had to prepare for you: This large pot with water. When you are in possession, they will tear you mercilessly, and after cocerte, you will eat, because they feed on human flesh. If I do not pity you and save you, you perdida.Dichas these words, the old woman led her behind a large barrel, which could not be vista.- remains quiet as a mouse, 'he said, without lifting a finger . Otherwise there is no salvation for you. At night, while sleeping bandits, we will flee. While I'm waiting for oportunidad.Casi at the same time the gang of thugs was presented. Raptada brought another maid, they were drunk and did not heed their lamentations and tears. They gave him to drink three glasses of wine, one white; other red, and the third yellow. After drinking them, you broke my heart. Arrancáronle then the beautiful dresses and spreading it on a table, cut his body to pieces and salted. The bride unhappy, hidden behind the barrel trembled and shuddered with horror, because clearly saw the fate that would have run into the hands of those wicked. One noted that the murdered girl wearing a gold ring on the little finger and as he could not remove it, cut his finger with an ax. Finger leapt into the air, and over the barrel landed in the lap of the bride. The robber took a light and went to look for him everywhere. Not finding it, he said another of the murderers: - Have you looked behind the large barrel But the old woman cried,: - Come to eat, I will seek tomorrow. Will not escape dedo.- Old is right, 'he said the bandits, and, abandoning the search, they sat at the table. The woman dropped some sleeping stuff into wine, and a little while everyone was asleep and snored, lying in the cellar. At the hearing the girlfriend he left behind a barrel and had to step over the sleepers, they all lay on the ground; and he was scared to death, afraid to wake them. But God helped and could happily leave that place, and with it, the old, which opened the door and escaped both hastily. The wind had scattered the ashes, but the peas and lentils had budded and bloomed, now showing the way to the moonlight. The two women were walking all night, and did not reach the mill until the next morning. Then the girl told her father everything that had ocurrido.Cuando came the day designated to celebrate the wedding, the friends and neighbors. The father had invited all his relatives and acquaintances, all sitting at the table asked everyone to narrate something to entertain the crowd. The bride was silent, and then told her fiancé: - Come on, sweetheart, do not you know anything? Tell us something she answered: - Well, I'll tell you a dream I had. Here I dreamed I was walking through a forest, alone, and came to a house. There was no living soul in it, but the wall hung a cage and a bird trapped in it I cried, "Turn, turn, young prometida.Asesinos living in this den." I cried twice. Tesoro mine, it's just a dream. Then I went through all the rooms, and all were deserted; But they gave a fear !. Finally, I went down to the cellar, where there was a very old woman, who could not stop shaking his head. I asked: "Do you live in this house my boyfriend ?." And she replied: "Alas, my daughter, has fallen into a den of murderers Your boyfriend lives here but will kill and break it in pieces, and then cook and eat you!". Tesoro mine, it's just a dream. But the old woman hid me behind a big barrel, and, while there concealed, entered the bandits with them brought a maiden, which was forced to drink three kinds of wine: white, red and yellow, so you She broke my heart. Tesoro mine, it's just a dream. then Quitáronle their gorgeous dresses, cut on a table her beautiful body to pieces and threw salt. Tesoro mine, it's just a dream. One of the bandits noted that still had a ring on the little finger, and as it cost him out, grabbing an ax cut his finger, which, leaping over a barrel, was to fall in his lap. And here is the finger with the anillo.Y, with these words, he brought his finger and showed the bandit presentes.El, which in the course of the story had been turning white as wax, he arose from a jump and tried to flee, but the guests held him, and handed him over to the authority. And he was executed with his entire band, as punishment for their crimes.
Guinea's girlfriend	628	311	Spanish	once upon a woman and her daughter, which lived in a beautiful garden planted cabbage. And behold, in winter, is a guinea and gets to eat sprouts. Then the woman said to her daughter: - Go to the garden and starts Guinea. And the girl says Guinea: - Chú! Chu! Guinea, just eat cabbages and Guinea says: - Come on, girl, hop on my tail and I'll take to my house! But she does not want. A back the next day Guinea and eat sprouts; He says the woman and her daughter - go to the garden and starts guinea And the girl says Guinea: -! Chú! Chu! Guinea, just eat sprouts! Guinea says: - Come on, girl, hop on my tail and I'll take to my house! But she does not want. In the third day still returns Guinea and cabbage is eaten. woman tells her daughter: - Go to the garden and starts Guinea says the girl - Chu! Chu !, Guinea, just eat sprouts says Guinea: - Come on, girl, hop on my tail and I'll take my casita The ride girl on the tail of Guinea, and Guinea takes far! away to his house and said: - Now cook collards and millet; I invite those who are to attend the boda.Y came all the guests. (Read who the guests As they told me, I will tell you: they were all rabbits, and the rook made of priest to marry the couple, and the fox was sacristan, and the altar was under the rainbow iris.) But she was lonely and I was sad. Guinea comes and says: - Live, Live! The guests are happy! The bride is silent and begins to mourn. Leaves Guinea, Guinea again, and says: - Live, Live! Guests are hungry! And the bride calla calla weeping and cries. Leaves Guinea, Guinea again, and says: - Live, Live! Guests expect Bride goes silent and Guinea, but she draws up a straw doll with her clothes, puts a bucket and placed next to the pot of millet!; then goes home to his mother. Guinea back again and says: - Live, Live! -tira something to the doll head and drops the cap. Then you go Guinea is not his girlfriend, and went away and was very sad.
The true bride	1769	510A	Spanish	Once upon a time a young and beautiful girl. He was very young when he was orphaned mother and stepmother treated her with extreme hardness. The girl put all his good will and all forces in any work that women send him, however hard it was; but still he could not satisfy the evil; always it showed discontented, never had enough, and the greater the diligence of the small burden imposed more. Just I thought about how I could rankle day of unhappy muchacha.Un said: - There are twelve pounds of feathers; desbárbalas before dusk; otherwise, you will receive a batch of lashes. Do you think you have to spend the day lazing The poor girl went to work; but tears ran down her cheeks as she realized she could not finish the task in one day. Placed before it a pile of feathers, and that made the slightest movement or the slightest breath he took, all took flight and had to start again. Desperately, rested his elbows on the table and, hiding his face in his hands, he exclaimed: - God! Is not there anyone in the world to have mercy on me and behold he heard a sweet voice say: - Take comfort, my child, I come to ayudarte.La girl looked up and saw an old woman, who was standing beside him. The woman took her hand affectionately and said - trust me your pena.Como spoke so warmly, the girl told him her sad life; how should withstand load after load, and could not work with him tonight mandaban.- If I have not done these feathers, my stepmother beat me; what I said and he will fulfill the promesa.Y her tears turned to flow in abundance; but the old woman said: - Calm down, my daughter; lie down to rest and I'll take care of the trabajo.La girl lay in bed, and the little time she fell asleep. The woman sat down at the table and began to deburring feathers. It was to see how beard jumped the guns, not well played their shriveled hands! Soon they were ready twelve lbs: and when the girl awoke, he found himself with great white as snow piles. The whole room was clean and uncluttered, but the old woman had disappeared. The girl thanked God and waited quietly sitting and nightfall. In entering, the stepmother asombróse to seeing the task terminada.- You see, what can be done when working with application? - Told him -. You could have done even more, instead of staying here hand over hand -. At the exit, he said: - This girl does more than to eat bread. I'll have to put more tasks duras.A the next morning called the girl and said: - Here a spoon; with her I will empty the big pond side of the garden, and if you have not finished dusk, you know what you espera.La girl took the spoon and saw that he was bored; but even if he had not been, he never could have emptied the pond with it. Immediately stood at slaughter, kneeling the edge of the water, which fell tears, and empty to empty. It was reintroduced the old good and knowing the reason for his grief, he said: - Calm down, my little one, lie down to sleep in the bushes, I'll do trabajo.Cuando the woman was alone, touched the water with finger, and the liquid rose as steam, blending with clouds, and was gradually dried pond. When, in the afternoon, the girl woke up and went to the shore, he saw only fish in the silt coleteaban. It was the stepmother, and announced that the task was lista.- Rato has finished you should have - answered this, pale with rage: and began to ponder new ways to fastidiarla.A the third morning said to the girl: - Vas to build me on the plain a beautiful palace, and must be completed by the anochecer.Asustada, the girl cried: - How do you want me to do such a thing - Do not answer me! - she screamed the stepmother -. If you're bored with a spoon able to empty a pond, it also will be to build a palace. The same night I stay in it, and if the smallest detail, you know what awaits you needed in the kitchen or the cellar -. And sent to the chiquilla.Al get it to the valley, he found himself with a chaos of piled rocks; even though he strove failed to move even the smallest, so he sat down to mourn, though he was hoping to come to their aid the elderly. Indeed, the good woman did not wait too long; He reassured again and said: - Lie down in the shade, and sleep; I will do. And if you like, you can live in él.Cuando the girl had gone, the woman touched the gray rocks, which put themselves in motion, and coupled lining up as if giants had built a wall. Above the building it arose, and would have said countless invisible hands that worked by placing one stone on another. He rumbled the ground, and large columns rose themselves and placed in the proper order. On the roof, the tiles also had fashion due, and noon at the highest point of the tower turned a vane, as a golden girl whose clothes waving to the wind. The interior of the palace was ready to dusk. How he managed the old, I would not know how to speak; the truth is that the walls of the rooms were hung with silk and velvet; multicolored chairs lined around the room; primorosos chairs surrounding marble tables and crystal chandeliers hung from the limpid ceilings, reflecting burnished pavements; green parrot cages occupied gold, and other exotic birds sang delightfully; desplegábase everywhere magnificence worthy of a rey.Ocultábase the sun when the girl woke up and saw glistening brightness of a thousand lamps. Ran to the palace and entered through the open door: the staircase was carpeted in red, and the golden balustrade appeared flowering trees. In contemplating the beauty salons, she was ecstatic. Who knows how long have remained there not been agreed stepmother! "Oh - it was said - if you give the least satisfied and do not torment me !." And it was to announce that the palace was terminado.- Then I - the woman said, standing up. And when he reached the building had to be hand before the eyes glow as both the deslumbraba.- You see - he said the girl - how easy it was? Should send you one more thing difícil.Y toured all the rooms, peering into every corner if something was missing or found a flaw but it was perfecto.- Now go to the ground floor - the girl said, casting an evil eye -. It remains to check the kitchen and cellar; and as you've forgotten a single detail, you will not escape punishment -. But the fire burned in the hearth; in pots they were cooked meats; tongs and shovel were in place, and walls hung the gleaming brass battery. Nothing was missing: neither coal nor the cube of the water. Where's the wine? - I ask -. As is not well stocked with barrels of wine, black'll pass he lifted the trap door and started down the stairs!; but the second rung above the trap cayósele heavy, which was ajar. The girl heard a cry and hastened to lift the timber to run to their aid; but the woman had fallen to the bottom and was muerta.Así, girl sole owner of the magnificent palace was found. At the beginning I could not believe in so much happiness, because the cupboards were full of beautiful clothes and chests, gold and silver, precious stones and pearls, and there was no desire that could not satisfy. Soon it spreads throughout the world fame of her beauty and wealth, and began to appear suitors. None was to his liking, until he reached a prince who knew how to touch his heart, and promised him. In the garden of the palace was a green linden tree, in whose shade would sit the two lovers, and one day I told him - I'm leaving home to seek the consent of my father. Stay there under this linden. I will return in a few horas.La girl, giving her a kiss on the left cheek, he recommended: - Be faithful and do not let anyone else kiss you on the cheek. I will wait under this linden regreses.Y girl until she sat at the foot of the tree to the setting sun; But the prince did not return. Three days was waiting for him in vain, from morning to night. And the fourth day, he did not return the said: - Surely some misfortune has happened to him. I will go in search and will not return until encontrarlo.Envolvió three of her most beautiful dresses: I one embroidered with bright stars; the second, with silvered moons, and the third with golden suns, and, tying a handful of gemstones in a scarf, set off. He asked everywhere for her betrothed, but no one had seen or knew about him. He toured much of the world, finding none. In the end, he placed himself at home as pastor of a farmer, and he buried his clothes and precious stones under a piedra.Y began to make life as a shepherdess, keeping flocks, always sad and thinking of his beloved. A gentle ternerita would eat in his hand, and when she said: "Ternerilla, double the rodillay not forget your shepherdess, like Prince olvidóa the maid under the linden waited," The animal threw at his feet and acariciar.Llevaba left and two years in this lonely and melancholy existence, when the country ran the rumor that the King's daughter was about to celebrate his wedding. The town road passing through the village where he lived our girl, and it happened that one day he was tending his herd, happened to stop by her fiance. He was riding a horse, arrogant demeanor, and did not see her; but when she recognized her beloved. It seemed that a sharp knife broke his Heart. Ouch! - he said -. I thought I was faithful, but has olvidado.Al me next day, the prince walked the same path. When he was near, said the girl to calf: "Ternerilla, doubles do not forget rodillay your shepherdess, as the prince olvidóa the maid under the linden waited for him," A hearing his voice, looked down and stopped the horse. He looked at the face of the shepherdess and then his hand to his forehead as trying to recall something; but then he resumed the march and desapareció.- Ouch! - she sighed -. I did not even know already - and felt himself sadder than nunca.Anuncióse very soon a big party at the palace; It was to last three days, and were invited to it all the subjects of the King. "I will make the last attempt," thought the girl; and when arrived the first night, he lifted the stone under which he kept his treasures, took the dress of gold sols, put it on and arrayed with precious stones. He is disengaging the hair that hid under a scarf, long desprendiéronse and magnificent loops. Then he went to the city, and as it was dark, nobody watched. A penetrating into the room, splendidly illuminated, all present were shocked her way, without anyone recognize her. King's son came to meet her, danced with her and was so captivated by her beauty that for a moment he remembered his girlfriend. At the end of the party, the girl disappeared into the crowd and returned to the village, where he dressed again pastora.Ala stood next night dress silver moons and hair was adorned with a diamond tiara. In the present palace, all eyes focused on her. The prince, overcome with love, ran to greet her, she danced all night with her and ignored any other. Before leaving, he forced her to promise that the third night would not break the fiesta.Cuando was presented for the third time wore the dress of stars, which sparkled at every step, and the tiara and sash were stars of precious stones. The prince wore long time waiting for her and hurried out to his encuentro.- Tell me who you are - asked -. I have the impression that you know for a long time.- Do not know what I did when you said goodbye to me? - ella.Y answered, approaching him, kissed him on the cheek left. And at the same time it seemed to the prince that he was falling blindfold and recognized his true prometida.- Come - he said - I do not have to stay here - and, holding out her hand, led her to the car. They impelled by the wind as the horses ran up to the enchanted palace, whose windows and shone from afar. A walk past the linden, they saw it invaded by innumerable fireflies, shaking the branches, scattered aromas. They appeared on the stairs open flowers, and the room came the cries of exotic birds; but in the main hall he was gathered all the Court, and the priest was waiting to bless the union of the two lovers.
The golden goose	610	571	Spanish	A man had three children, a third of which called "The Simpleton," which was despised and target of mockery of all. A day would go to the forest more firewood cutting; his mother gave him a cake very good and tasty eggs and a bottle of wine, so that will not go hungry or thirsty. To get to the forest found himself with a little man with gray hair and very old, who greeted him politely and said: - Give me a piece of your cake and a sip of your wine. I am hungry and thirsty. The waiter replied ready - If I give you my cake and my wine I just be for me; go your way and let me -and the old man was standing and went on. He began to chop down a tree, and a little while false hit a hatchet and ax stuck in his arm, so he had to go home to that vendasen. With this wound he paid his conduct with the man. Then he set the second to the forest, and, as the eldest, his mother provided him with a cake and a bottle of wine. He also went over the gray old man, and asked for a piece of cake and a drink of wine. But the second son replied airily: - What you give me remove it to me; Follow your me; Follow your road! and leaving planted the old man walked away. it did not expect the punishment. He had just dealt a pair of ax to a tree when he was wounded in a leg and had to drive home. he said "The Simpleton" - Father, let me go to the forest to collect firewood. - Your brothers have hurt -contestóle the father; do not mess you about this, because you do not understand anything. But the boy insisted so much that, in the end, his father said, 'Go, then, if you insist; the hard way you gain experience. Mother gave him a kneaded cake with water and cooked in the ashes. and a bottle of beer sour. When he reached the forest was also found with the little gray man, who greeted him and said: - Give me some of your cake and a drink of what you take in the bottle, as I have hunger and thirst. - Do not take but a cake baked in the ashes and sour beer was' I replied "The Simpleton" -; If you settle, sit down and eat. And they sat. And behold, when the waiter brought out the cake, turned out to be a wonderful cake eggs, and sour beer had become an excellent wine. - Since you are kind-hearted and generous, I will give you luck. Do you see that old tree there? Well, I cut it off; You find something at the root -. And with these words the man said goodbye. "The Simpleton" walked to the tree and tree and dropped him with a hatchet, and falling at the root appeared a goose feather pure gold. He took her with him and went into an inn for the night. The owner had three daughters, who, seeing the goose, felt for her a great curiosity, and desire to have one of its golden feathers. Most thought: "It will be much you can not find an opportunity to wrest a pen," and a moment when the boy left his room, grabbed the goose by a wing; but the fingers and hand him were glued to it. He soon came the second, with the idea of ​​also be a gold pen; but he not well touched her sister clung to her. Finally, it was the third with identical purpose, and the others shouted: - Go away, for God's sake, get out! But she, not understanding why he should step aside and thinking that if her sisters were there, as well she might be, approached and had scarcely touched the second, was also imprisoned unable to get loose. And so they had to spend the night stuck to the goose. In the morning, "the Simpleton," taking the animal under his arm, he made his way home, without worrying about the three girls, who followed him like it or not, zigzagging, as he carried his legs. In the middle of the field they found the priest, who, in the view of seeing the procession, said: - Are not you ashamed, shameless, thus running after this young man in the wilderness? Do you think it decent? And he grabbed the child by the hand with intent to separate; but no sooner he touched it, was in turn hooked and had to participate in the race. In the little time he happened to pass the sacristan, and the sight of the priest that followed the girls, surprised said: - And then, Father, where does it go so fast? Have you forgotten that today we have a christening? -and running toward him, she took him by the sleeve also being subject. and trotted five, topáronse with two farmers who, with their hoes to shoulder, returning from the field. The priest invited them, asking them to desenganchasen, him and the sexton; but they had not played well last men to this, Helos also imprisoned! And there were seven running after "The Simpleton" and goose. Shortly after they arrived in a city, whose king was the father of such a serious and dour daughter, no one had managed to make her laugh. Why the King had proclaimed that give the hand of the princess to the man who was capable of provoking laughter. At the hearing this, "the Simpleton," dragging his entourage, he was presented to the daughter of the King, and seeing her that row of seven people running nonstop one after another, he laughed such a laugh so loud and so comfortable, he could not cease their laughter. Then "The Simpleton" the wife asked. But the King, who did not like the son, opposed all kinds of objections, and so he said that was to bring him before a man can drink all the wine cellar fit in the palace. He thought the young man in his man of the forest and went to him for help. And behold, in the same place where the tree was cut granted to an individual whose face was painted affliction. Asked him "The Simpleton" the reason for his grief, and the other replied: - I suffer from a terrible thirst, I can not calm at all. I can not with cold water, and although I have drunk a whole barrel of wine, what is a drop on a hot stone? - I can remedy this -díjole the youth. Vente with me and I promise I will drink until they burst. And so saying, it led to the actual winery, where the man undertook, drinks drinking tea with bulky tanks, until they were aching hips, and before it was over the day, had emptied the entire winery . "The Simpleton" came back to claim his bride; but the King, irritated to think that a lad that everyone was to fool had to take her daughter, and called a new condition. It was before condition. Before she must find a man who could eat a mountain of bread. It did not think much the boy, but immediately went to the forest, and in the same place as before, found a man engaged in belt-tightening and, with rueful face, he said: - I have eaten a whole batch bread. But what is this for a hungry like I have? My stomach still empty, and I have no recourse but to tighten my belt to not starve. Said unto him happy "The Simpleton" - Come with me and you'll overeat. And he brought him to the court of the King, who had commanded gather all the flour and cook the kingdom with it a huge mountain of bread. The man of the forest stood in front of her, she began to eat, and the sunset, that huge mole was gone. For the third time he called "The Simpleton" the princess; but the King, looking still procrastinating, he demanded to bring him a ship capable of going by land and water. 'As -díjole- get him browsing, my daughter will be your wife. Again the boy made his way to the forest, where he awaited the gray old man who give away their cake, and said: - For you have eaten and drunk, and now I will give the boat. I do all this because you were merciful to me. And he gave the ship going ship going by land and water; and when the King saw him, and could not continue refusing to give his daughter. Then the wedding; the death of the King, "The Simpleton" inherited the crown, and for many years lived happily with his wife.
undine	749	313A	Spanish	A brother played with his sister at the edge of a spring, and behold, playing both fell inside. In the background there lived a Ondina, who told them: - I have already caught! Now you are going to work for me, and firme.A the girl gave him a dirty linen spinning and tangled, and then forced her to pour water into a bottomless pit; the child was cutting a tree with a blunt ax. And he gave them to eat no more than a few meatballs, hard as stone. Finally, children lost patience and waiting for a Sunday the witch was in the church, fled. After the function, the Undine realize that his birds had flown, went in pursuit leaps and bounds. The children saw her from afar, and the girl threw a brush behind him, he became a mountain bristling with thousands of spikes, over which he had to climb Undine with great works; but the end could pass. Then the boy dropped a comb, which became a huge mountain with many peaks; but he managed to cross Undine. As a last resort, she threw back a mirror, which produced a flat mountain, so smooth and polished that his pursuer could no longer go through it. He thought then: "will go home quickly and fetch my ax to break the glass." But the time came and went and was busy breaking glass ax, the children had taken a huge lead, and Undine had no choice but to become, step by step, to its source.
Undine of the pond	1724	316	Spanish	Once upon a time a miller who lived happily with his wife. They had money and land, and wealth increased year by year. But misfortune comes when least expected. And if even then his fortune had grown, from one point he began to wane without knowing how, and to the miller could hardly call the mill in his living. He walked the sad man and worried, and when, after the work of the day, retirábase to rest, I could not sleep and spent hours turning in the cama.Una rose morning before dawn and went out into the field, thinking that it will lighten the heart. A passing through the dam of the mill, the sun sent its first rays, and the man heard a rumor coming up out of the water. He turned and saw a beautiful woman walking slowly from the pond. His hair long, with delicate hands, kept holding on his shoulders, fell on both sides, covering the whitest cuerpo.Bien realized the miller that the woman was Undine of the pond, and, overcome with fear, I did not know whether to stay or flee. But Undine his harmonious voice was heard and, calling him by name, and asked the reason for his sadness. For now, the miller remained mute; but hearing that he spoke so amiably, he took courage and told how, after being so rich and happy, was reduced to such extreme poverty, not knowing how to get out of the paso.- Calm - said to Undine -. I'll make you richer and happier than you ever were. You just promise me you'll give me what has just been born in your casa.- What else can be - thought the miller - but a puppy or kitten? - and he agreed to what he pedía.Desapareció Undine in water, and the man returned, comforted and happy, his mill. Before arriving he went to meet the maid, congratulating him because his wife had just given birth to a child. He stopped the miller as struck by lightning, then he realized that the nymph perfidious had deceived him. He approached, head down to the bed of his esposa.- Why did not you glad the sight of this beautiful child? - he asked ella.El miller then told him what had just happened, and the promise he had made to the ondina.- Of what will serve wealth and prosperity - he added - if we lose our son! But what can I do? -. Also found no remedy relatives who came to felicitarlo.Y, indeed, prosperity returned to the house of the miller. Salíanle well all businesses that undertook. It seemed as if the coffers filled themselves, and as if money multiplied night in the closet. At the end of a short time, and was richer than ever it was. But he could not enjoy his fortune quiet because the promise to Undine gnawing the heart. Every time he passed the pond, he feared see out of the water to remind you of your debt. A child he was forbidden to approach the water.- Guard yourself to approach the shore - constantly said - because if you touch the water will one hand, you grab and take you to the bottom However, seeing the years passed! and undine not show up, the man began to tranquilizarse.El child became a big boy and was sent to a huntsman to teach him the trade. He finished learning, and being already a skilled hunter, entered the service of the lord of the site. It was in the village a beautiful and honest girl, which the young man fell in love. At the observe his master, he gave him a house. They celebrated the wedding and lived peacefully and happily, because they wanted tiernamente.Un day, the hunter was chasing a deer. The animal came out of the woods and ran cross country; the boy followed him and knocked him down with one shot. Unaware that he was very close to the pond, once gutted the room, he approached the water to wash their hands stained with blood. But barely had gotten into the water, appeared Undine with smiling face, he walked around the body with her wet arms and took him to the bottom, so fast that the waves jumped on his dark cabeza.Al, seeing that he did not return the hunter, a great anguish invaded his wife. He went looking for him, and, as I had heard many times he should beware of the wiles of Undine and not approach the dam, immediately suspected what had happened. He ran to the pond and finding the backpack on the shore and could not continue doubting his misfortune. Crying and wringing her hands, she cried a thousand times the name of her lover, but in vain. Moving on to the opposite side of the dam, he repeated his calls and directed hard reproached Undine, but did not get the slightest response. The surface of the water continued quiet, reflecting the still face of the luna.La average poor woman could not deviate from the pond. A big steps, without a moment of rest, turned it over and over again, and silently, and bursting into screams acute or mumbling his regrets. To order his forces were exhausted. He desplomose on the ground and fell fast asleep. And then he began to dream ... He climbed agonizingly between large boulders; thorns and tendrils caught him at the feet; rain whipped his face, and the wind made her long hair floating. To the reach the summit, the picture changed completely: the sky was blue, the air warm; the ground sloped, and in the middle of a green and flowery meadow, rose up one gorgeous cabin. He went to her and opened the door. Inside was an old woman with white hair, which made him a friendly sign. At that time awoke poor mujer.Amanecía ... The girl took the decision to follow the directions of sleep. He climbed laboriously to the top of the mountain, finding it all as we see at night. Old amiably received and indicated a chair, inviting her to sentarse.- certainly have suffered a misfortune - he said - since come to me choza.La lonely woman, crying, he told his infortunio.- Consuélate - said, The old woman -. I'll help you. There you have a golden comb. Wait until the moon is full. then go to the pond, sit on the bank and comb your long hair black with this comb. When you have finished, leave it on the shore and see what ocurre.Volvióse the woman home, and time was made long waiting for the full moon. At the end shone in the sky silver platter, and she walked to the pond. He sat on the bank, peinóse long black hair with the golden comb, and when he was finished, laid it at the edge of the water. A few moments rose from the bottom of a deep gurgle, and rose a wave that swept the shore and dragged the comb kickback. He barely had time to get to comb the bottom, when the surface of the pond opened and appeared the head of the hunter. He said nothing, merely looking at his wife with sad eyes. Immediately a second wave came and covered the man's head. Everything disappeared; the mirror of the water was calm as before, with only the face of the moon reflecting in él.Volvióse the disconsolate woman, and went to sleep ... and dream transported back to the old cottage. In the morning he repeated the way and presenting the old woman, told him what happened. The old woman then handed a golden flute, saying: - Wait again it is full moon. Then you grab the flute and, sitting on the shore, intone with her a nice melody. Once a've finished, you leave the instrument in the sand. Sucede.Siguió see what instructions women of old, and no sooner had deposited the flute on the sand, prodújose a new gurgling, and a wave, the instrument was increased. A few moments later returned to break the surface and out of the fund not only the head but half man's body, which lay, panting, arms at his wife. But a second wave covered him and dragged him to the fondo.- Alas! - he exclaimed the unfortunate -. What good I see my beloved, if I am to lose him again? -. And his soul fell back into despair. But the dream carried it aside for the third time the old woman's hut. He came to her the next day; old gave him a golden distaff and consoling her, she said: - You have not finished everything. Looked at the full moon. You go with the distaff to shore, hilas all a faucet and, when finished, let the spinning wheel to the side of the water and see what ocurre.La woman faithfully followed his instructions. As the full moon shone, it was with the spinning wheel to the bank and was spinning until you have a full bobbin thread. had just left the wheel at the edge, prodújose in water even more intense agitation the previous times; a wave rushed powerful against the shore and took the distaff. At the same instant, the whole head and body of the man emerged from the bottom of the pond. He jumped quickly to shore, grabbed his wife's hand and ran with it. But scarcely they had run a few steps when the water mass rose with great fury and roar and invaded the entire meadow. And the fugitives saw death before their eyes. Then the woman, distraught, invoked the aid of the elderly and the instant, were both transformed: her into a toad, and he into a frog. Flood, to the catch, could not hurt, although separated, dragging far one of the otro.Al withdraw the water and touch both dry land again, they regained human form; but neither she knew where the other was. They were among foreigners who did not know their country. Separábanlos high mountains and deep valleys, and to make a meal, the two had to be pastors. And so many years passed, keeping the herds and driving through fields and forests, fills the soul with sadness and nostalgia.Una spring once again made the meadows bloom out both on the same day with their flocks, and it chanced to take every one direction of the other. He sighted on a distant mountainside a herd of sheep, and drove his way there. They met in a valley and, although they were not recognized, felt some relief not to be so alone. From that day they took their flocks to the same place. They spoke little, but felt comforted. One night when the moon shone in the sky, when the sheep were sleeping, took the shepherd's flute pocket and stood to touch such a beautiful song as sad. In the end, he noted that the shepherdess was crying amargamente.- Why are you crying? - le preguntó.- Ouch! - she said -. The full moon shone also the last time that I playing the same song, the head of my beloved rose from the waters of the estanque.Miróla him and it was as if a veil fell from my eyes. He recognized his beloved wife. And when she, in turn, raised hers to her face, illuminated by the moonlight I reconociólo too. They embraced, besáronse and ... you need to ask if they were happy?
Straw, grilled and haricot	170	295	Spanish	He lived in a village an old woman who, having picked up a plate of beans, was about to cook. I prepared fire in the hearth and to burn faster, lit it with a handful of straw. In the pouring the beans into the pot, dropped a without her noticing, and went to the ground beside a straw. Soon, one ember jumped from home and fell to the side of other two. Then he opened the conversation straw: "Friends, where do you come from?" And grilled she replied: "Good luck I've had to be able to jump from the fire were not for my courage, ran my days here I would have burned to ashes!.." Alubia said: "I have also saved my skin, because if the old gets me into the pot, at this time would have been cooked to mush without mercy, like my comrades." - "It would have been better fought me," interjected straw. "All my sisters have been thrown into the fire by the old, and now are nothing more than smoke. Sixty picked up once to take away life. Fortunately, I was able to slip through his fingers." - "What do we do now?" He asked the coal. "I am of the opinion," proposed the bean, "that since we had the good fortune to escape death, we continue meeting the three in friendly company, and to prevent it from happening to us here some other mishap, we leave together other lands. "the proposition like the other two, and all went their way. A Cape little they reached the bank of a brook, and as there was no bridge or gateway, did not know how to cross it. But straw came up with an idea: "I will miss through and will bridge to come over you." Straw stretched himself from shore to shore, and the ember, who by nature was fiery, hastened to venture into the new gateway. But when he was in the middle, listening to the murmur of the water beneath his feet, he was afraid and stood, not daring to go a step further. Straw caught fire, and splitting into two, he fell into the stream, dragging the ember, which creaked, expired at the touch water. The bean, which, prudent, had remained on shore, could not help laughing at the scene, and such was his laughter that burst. She too would have ended there his existence; but luck would have it, a tailor who was traveling, tarried to rest in the margin of the stream. As a man of compassionate heart, he took a needle and thread and sewed the rip. The bean thanked him for the most effusive way; but as the tailor used black thread had from that day all beans have a black seam.
Shepherdess of geese	846	533	Spanish	Once lived an old queen, a widow for many years, I had a beautiful daughter. A greater done, the promised prince from a distant country, and when it came time agreed for the wedding celebration and the girl had to be on his way to court her fiance, the queen mother prepared a beautiful trousseau, brocaded with gold and silver, glasses and jewelry; It was, in a word, a feat worthy of a royal princess, as the old queen wanted her daughter dearly. Also he gave him to accompany her and serve, a waitress who also had to deliver the princess in the hands of the groom. He received each of the two horse; but the princess had the gift of speaking and was called Falada. Arrival time of farewells, the mother entered her bedroom and, picking up a knife, cut her on a finger, so that blood flow; a piece of cloth picked three drops, and gave her daughter, saying - daughter, store them carefully; you need them during the camino.Separáronse mother and daughter with abundant tears. The princess kept within the telita with blood and, riding, he undertook the journey to the court of her fiance. When they had one hour riding felt an intense thirst and told his waitress: - Alight water and fill me the cup brook for this you bring; I beber.- If you thirst - the waitress answered - you apeaos and drink. I do not want to be your criada.La princess, beset by thirst, he fell from his horse and knelt on the shore, drank straight from the stream, without using the glass. Then he exclaimed: - Oh my God! - and the three drops of blood replied: - If your mother saw this, her heart would burst in pecho.Pero, humble as was the princess, she was silent and returned to riding. They rode, and Cape leagues thirst again, as the day was hot, and the sun burning. They came to another river, and Princess waitress repeated: - Alight and pour me a drink in my golden cup - having already forgotten the impudent words sirvienta.Pero repeated this in turn more haughty than before: - If want to drink, you arreglaos same; I do not want to be your princess criada.Apeóse again, beset by thirst, and, lying on the flowing water, he exclaimed crying - my God! - and the three drops of blood returned to exclaim: - If your mother saw this, the heart would break him in the pecho.Y to the stooping to drink, fell from within the fabric containing the three drops, and water is the He led, without her advirtiese, anxious as it was. But the waitress if she had seen, and was glad, because it was to him about the princess, who, to those losing the drops of blood had been weak and impotente.Al preparing to climb back on his horse Falada said waitress : - a Falada I'll ride, and you will come up on my nag you and the princess had to resign himself. Then with harsh words, charged him waitress that their real take off dresses and as wrong and eventually forced her to swear, in the light of heaven, in the Court of the King would not say none of that will put an anyone ; and if he had refused to take the oath, he would have killed himself there. But Falada witnessed it all and put it in the memoria.Montó, then, the waitress about Falada, and genuine girlfriend on the nag, and so continued up to the royal palace. Great was the rejoicing at its entrance, and the prince hurried out to meet them, and the waitress helped her down from the horse, mistaking her for his bride. Then they drove up, while the real princess stayed down. At the look out the window and see the old king in the courtyard, so distinguished, delicate and beautiful, she entered the royal apartment to ask who was the novia.- take it in the way to accompany me; Give him some work, do not stay ociosa.Pero the old king had no work for her, and only came to say - I have a boy in charge of keeping the geese, which will ayudarle.El boy named Conradito, and Princess was sent to serve in auxiliar.No took the bride false to say to the prince: - my Beloved, let me ask you one you gladly grant the gracia.- - said him.- As to the knacker ordered to cut the neck of the horse I rode, it has bothered me during the camino.En reality, which feared that the animal was discovered what happened to the princess. So, loyal Falada had to die, and the hearing of this, the real princess promised to the knacker a piece of gold in exchange for a small service. In the city there was a big dark door, which she had to spend every morning and every evening with geese; he asked, then, the man who nailed Falada head in the door, so she could see her often. This was done, and the head of the noble horse sank into the gloomy portal.Cuando, at dawn, the princess and Conradito passed under the doorway, she said: ". Oh, Falada, sadly hung here" and said head "Oh, princess, how these people treat you if your mother knew, grief is to die!." she left the city and went with the boy to the field, to keep the geese. To get to the meadow sat on the grass to comb her hair, which were of pure gold; and Conradito enjoyed watching their luster. Wanted to wrest some, but she said. "Blow, blow, little wind, remove the hat Conraditoy force it to run down the pradohasta I have peinadoy me again spruced" At the same moment a very strong wind arose, which took the Conradito hat, forcing the boy to run after him for a long time; and when he returned, he had already finished combing and grooming maid, so the boy ran out of her hair. Angry, stopped speaking, and so kept the geese until evening, they returned to palacio.A the next morning, as they passed back through the portal, said the maiden, "Oh, Falada, sadly hung here !." and Falada replied, "Oh, princess, how these people treat you if your mother knew, grief is dying!". already in the meadow, sat down on the grass and combing. Conradito came to wrest a hair; but she said quickly. "Blow, blow, little wind, remove the hat Conraditoy force it to run down the pradohasta I have peinadoy me again spruced up" stood blowing in the wind, taking the hat from the head of the boy, who he was running in pursuit, and when he returned, the girl made good time and I was ready for her hairstyle, which Conradito could not get away with it. And so they were keeping the geese until anochecer.Pero, when they had returned to the palace, Conradito was presented to the old king and said - I do not want to continue saving geese that girl: - Why? - the KING: Because he asked him spends the day making me rabiar.Entonces King commanded him to tell him what happened, and Conradito said: Every morning when we go through the herd through the dark door, goes to a horse's head there staring at her and says, "Oh, Falada hanging here sadly!" and the answer head: "Oh, princess, how treats these people If your mother knew, grief is to die!. "and so continued Conradito counting what was happening in the meadow, and how he always run after sombrero.El old king told him that the next day I was to go with the herd, and the King himself, at the dawn , he hid behind the door, where he could hear the words passed between the maiden and the head of Falada. Then he followed the two to the meadow, hiding in a thicket. Soon he could see with his own eyes how the boy and the girl came with geese and how, a little while, she sat on the grass and let go of the hair, and how it radiated a golden glow. Immediately repeated the damsel. "Blow, blow, little wind, remove the hat Conraditoy I force it acorrer by pradohasta I have peinadoy me again spruced up" Immediately came a gust of wind and hat was forcing the boy to undertake a long run to recover, while wench combed loops. l old King witnessed it all. then he retreated without being observed, and when, at dusk, he returned the shepherdess of geese, he called her aside and asked the reason for his proceder.- I can tell you - she said - or reveal my misfortune to anyone, because I swore under heaven to save my life.The King insisted and insisted strongly to speak; but seeing that I could not get a word out, he said, to the end: - If I do not want confiármelo me, go tell your sorrows to the iron stove - and the princess alejó.Acercóse the stove, and among lamentations and tears, pouring out his heart, said: - Here I am abandoned of the world finds out and yet, I am the daughter of a king; a perfidious waitress reduced me to this situation by using violence, forcing me to take my princess dresses and suplantándome her as promised to the prince, while I do menial jobs and save geese. If my mother knew, grief would burst his heart in the chest! But the old King listened all through the chimney flue, and so learned of his misfortune. He returned to the room and told him to come out of the stove; put him princely dresses, and then show her beauty was wonderful. The king summoned his son and revealed the alleged fallacy of his fiancee, who was but a vulgar sirvienta.mientras the true bride, who was there, had to be keeping geese all the young prince time.The felt great joy to see her so beautiful and virtuous, and prepared a great feast, to which were invited many people and good friends. At the head of the table sat the groom, who was beside her, the princess and the other to the waitress, who, dazzled, did not recognize his rival under his magnificent attire. Once they had eaten and drunk, great animation reigned among the guests, the old King posed a riddle to the waitress. What he deserved a person who had cheated his master of such and such a way ?; and after detail you the whole case ended up asking: - What sentence dictaríais against this person and said the promised alleged: - does not deserve but undresses completely and the Draw a barrel whose interior is bristling with sharp nails and which, drawn by two white horses, is paraded through the streets of the city, until the evil has muerto.- Well that's you - answered the King - and you will be fulfilled the sentence you just pronunciar.Y when he had accomplished, he was celebrated wedding of the young princes, and they reigned in peace and happiness.
Shepherdess of geese at source	1710	923	Spanish	On one occasion there was a good old woman who lived with a flock of geese in a desert in the middle of the mountains, where he had his room. The desert was in the thickest part of the forest, and every morning he took his crutch old and was to the entrance of the forest with tremulous step. Once there, good old worked with an activity that is not the thought would be able to to see his many years, grass gathered for her geese, reached the wild fruits that were at the level that could be reached, and had then all in tow. It seemed he was going to succumb under such weight; but always he brought her home easily. When he found someone greeted him amiably. . "Good morning, dear neighbor, very good weather makes you wonder that I should drag grass about, but we all must take his burthen." He did not like, however, anyone the finding and preferred to go around, and if passed near her a father with his son, he said. "Be careful with that old; it is crafty like a demon, is a sorceress" A morning through the forest a young handsome; the sun shone, the birds sang, a wind blew fresh foliage, and the young man was cheerful and in good spirits. I still had not found a living soul, when suddenly he saw the old hag crouching cutting the grass with his scythe. He had already gathered a whole load into his bag and side had two large baskets, filled up enough wild pears and apples. "Grandma," he said, "how thou carry all that?" - "Well I have to take it, I wanted gentleman," he replied, "the children of the rich do not know what they are jobs but the poor are told: It should work, not having any other being.." "Do you want help?" He added the old saw that stopped, "you still have the right shoulders and strong legs. This is worth nothing for you Besides, my house is not far from here. It's in a scrub, to the other side of the hill Treparéis there up in an instant. " The young man took pity on the old, and said: "It is true that my father is not a farmer, but a rich count, however, that you may know that not only the poor who can carry things, I will help you bring yours. " - "If you do so," he replied the old woman, "I shall be very glad'll have to walk one hour, but what you care also shall bear pears and apples.?." The young Count began to reflect a little when he talked about an hour away; but the old woman left no turning back, hung the sack on his back and put his hands on the two baskets. "You see," he said, "that weighs nothing." - "No, this is heavy," I answered the count, making a horrible gesture, "your bag is so heavy that anyone would say that is filled with stones, apples and pears are as heavy as lead, just I have strength to breathe . " He had much desire to leave his load, but the old woman was not allowed. "Bah! Do not think," he said mockingly, "a young gentleman, can not wear what I wear constantly, as old as I am. They're ready with fine words, but if you get to the facts just try to dodge. Why, "he added," you stay so haltingly? in march, no one will deliver you and this burden. " As they walked across the plain, the young man could resist; but when they reached the mountain and had to climb, and the stones rolled behind him as if they were alive, it was beyond his strength. Drops of sweat trickled down his forehead, and ran some cold times, burning others, all parts of your body. "Now," she said she, "I can not, I'll rest a little." - "No," said the old woman, "when we come able to rest, now you have to walk Who knows if this will serve for something.?" - "Old, you're very brazen," said the earl. And wanted to get rid of the sack, but he labored in vain, for the sack was so well tied as if part of her back. He turned and twisted, but without getting drop the load. The old woman laughed, and began to jump very happy with his crutch. "Do not incomodéis, my dear gentleman," he said, "You are truly embodied as a rooster; Take your burden with patience, when we get home I will give you a good tip." What was there to do? He had to submit and crawl patiently behind the old woman, who seemed to be getting ready at every moment while his load was heavier each time. Jumping career suddenly takes up his sack, and sit on it; although it was ethical, it weighed twice more robust villager. Young knees trembled; but when he stopped, he gave her leg with a stick. He climbed the mountain panting and finally came to the house of old, at the same time, next to succumb to the last effort. When the geese perceived the old woman extended their beaks up, they pulled the neck forward, and met him with shouts of "hu! Hu!" Behind the flock would a tall girl and sturdy but ugly as night. "Mother!" He said the old woman, "Has something happened to you? You've been gone a long time." - "No, my child," the answer, "has not happened to me is nothing wrong, however, this good gentleman, you see here, I brought me my grass, and besides, as I was tired, has also brought me slopes. The road has not seemed very long, we were in a good mood and we had a very pleasant conversation. " Old finally dropped to the ground, removed the charge from the back of the young, the baskets of their hands, looked at him cheerfully and said, "Now seat yourself on the bench before the door, and rest . you have fairly earned your wages and not lose him. " Then he said to the girl who looked after the geese: "Come home, my daughter, is not right that you stay here alone with this gentleman, should not put wood with fire, might fall in love with you." She count not knows whether to laugh or mourn. A woman of that class, said under his breath, could not expect much from my heart, even though he had more than thirty years. However old, he fondled her geese as if they were their children; then she went with her daughter at home. The young man lay down on the bench under a crabapple. The atmosphere was calm and mild; around him primroses meadow stretched, thyme and a thousand other kinds of flowers; at its center a clear murmuring stream, gilded by the rays of the sun, and the white geese were walking along the shore or submerged in water. "This place is delicious," he said, "but I'm so tired that I close the eyes. I want to sleep a little, as long as the air does not take my legs, because they are so light as grass" As slept a the old woman came and woke him meneándole. "Get up," he said, "can not stay here I've tormented a little, it is true,. But it did not cost you life Now I will give you your wages,. You do not need money or property; I will give you something else. " He is saying this he put in his hand a box of emerald, one-piece. "Keep it well," he said, "will bring fortune." Count got up and saw that he was rested and had regained his strength, he thanked the old for your gift and set off without thinking a moment to look at the beautiful nymph. It was already some distance when I heard the distant yet joyful shout of Count gansos.El spent three days in these solitudes lost before you can find your way. Finally he came to a city, and as he did not know anyone, it did lead to the palace of the king, where the prince and his wife were sitting on his throne. Count put one knee, pulled from his pocket emerald box and placed it at the foot of the queen. He commanded him up and went to present its case. But hardly she had opened and looked, when he fell to the ground as if dead. The count was seized by the servants of the king, and was to be put in prison, when the queen opened her eyes and sent them to release him, and they left all, because I wanted to talk to secreto.Cuando the queen was alone she began to mourn bitterly and said, "What good are my glory and honors around me all full awake mornings cares and woes He had three daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that all looked at her as?. wonderful. white was as snow, red as the flower of the apple tree, and shone her hair like the rays of the sun. When she cried, not tears fell from her eyes, but pearls and precious stones. When he reached the age of thirteen, the king commanded to come to his three daughters before his throne was worth seeing how open everyone's eyes when the youngest entered, believed one witness out of the sun the king said.. 'daughters, do not know when I got my last day, I decide today what you should get each of you after my death. You all love me, but who loves me will be the best part. ' Each said it was she who loved more than his father. 'Could Not,' replied the king, 'tell me everything you love me? So I know what your feelings are. ' Most said: 'I love my father as the sweetest sugar.' The second: 'I love my father as the most beautiful dress.' But the youngest was silent. 'And you,' he said his father, 'how you love me?' - 'I do not know,' he replied, 'and my love can not compare to anything.' But the father insisted that designate an object. At the end he said: 'The best food does not please me if it lacks salt; Well, I love my father like salt. ' - 'As you love me like salt,' reward, 'also your love with salt.' He divided his kingdom between his two eldest daughters, and did tie a bag of salt to the back of the youngest, and sent two servants that would lead to an uncultivated forest. We all begged and prayed for her, more it has been no means of appeasing the wrath of the king. How she cried when she had to leave us! He has planted all the way with pearls that have fallen from their eyes. The king was quick to repent of his cruelty, and made the poor girl looking through the forest, but nobody could find it. When I think about whether they have eaten wild beasts I can not live with sadness; I sometimes solace in the hope that he is still alive and is hiding in a cave, or has found shelter with compassionate people. But what surprises me is that when I opened your little emerald contained a pearl like everything that fell from the eyes of my daughter, so you can imagine how much this view has touched my heart. It is necessary to tell how you came by that pearl. "The earl said that he had received from the old forest that had seemed to be a strange woman and such a bewitching time, but had not seen or heard anything that had me relationship with his daughter. the king and queen took the decision to go looking for the old, waiting where they had found the pearl they would obtain news of her hija.Estaba old in solitude, sitting in the doorway next to her distaff and spinning was already dark, and some chips burning home a scanty light suddenly heard noise outside... the geese came from the bush to the room, giving the grunt of his cries Shortly after he entered the young in turn. Just old greeted her and only shook his head slightly. the young sat beside her, took her spinning wheel and twisted the thread with the same lightness that could have done the smartest girl. remained for two hours and sitting without saying a word. They felt finally noise by the window and saw two eyes shining fire. It was an owl who shouted three times HU! HU! The old woman looked up just a little, said: "It is time, my son, you go out to do your homework." He got up and left. Where was I? Far, far away, to the meadow next to the valley. He came finally edge of a fountain, whose side were three oaks. The moon, round and full showed up the mountain, and it was so light you could find a pin. The girl raised skin that covered his face, leaned toward the fountain and began to wash. When he had finished, he put the skin into the water fountain to should bleach and dry in the moonlight. But what changed was the girl! You've never seen anything like it. As he untied her braid gray, her hair shone like golden rays of the sun, and spread like a blanket over her body. His eyes shone like the stars of heaven, and her cheeks were soft pink flower of the manzano.Pero the girl was sad. He sat down and wept bitterly. Tears fell one after another from his eyes and rolled to the ground through his hair long. Had remained there a long time, if the noise of some branches creaked in a nearby tree had not reached his ears. He jumped like a gazelle who has heard the shot of the hunter. The moon was veiled at that moment by a dark cloud; the girl was covered in a moment with the old skin and vanished like a light blown out by the viento.Corrió toward the house shaking like leaf poplar. The old woman was standing at the door; the girl was about to relate what had happened, but the old woman laughed kindly and said: "Everything I know." He led her to the room and lit some chips. But he did not sit with his daughter; He grabbed a broom and started sweeping and dusting. "Everything must be clean and tidy here," said the girl. "But my mother," he replied this, "It's too late to start this work. What is that?" - "You know what time it is?" the old asked. "They are not yet midnight," I replied the girl, "but they have already given eleven." - "Do not you remember," continued the old woman, "that three years ago today that have come to my home time is up, we can no longer remain together?." She said scared, "Oh good mother, will you give me where will I go I have no friends, no country where finding a haven've done everything you've wanted and have always been satisfied with me, when ye turn!?. . " Old did not want to tell the girl what was going to happen. "Can not you stay here longer," said she, "but when I leave this dwelling, it must house and room are clean not stop me, because in my work As for you not to be careful;.. Will find a roof that lets you live and you will be well pleased with the reward will give you. " - "But tell me what will happen," he asked the girl again. "I repeat, do not interrupt me in my work not say a word. Go to your room, take off the skin covering your face, and wear the dress you brought when you come to my house, then stay in your room until I call you. "But I have to talk to the king and queen, who had left with the count to go look for his old solitude. Count had separated from them during the night, and was forced to continue his way alone. At the next day I thought it was on the right track, and continued walking until near dusk. Then he climbed a tree to spend the night, fearing lost. When the moon shone in the field, he saw a person coming down the mountain. He is carrying a stick in his hand, so he knew that was the young man who kept the geese had seen in the old house. Ah! said, coming here, I see one of the two witches: the other shall not escape. But how was his amazement when he saw her approach the source, remove the skin; when they covered her golden hair and was more beautiful than any of the women who had seen the world! Hardly she dared to breathe, but stretched his neck all he could; through the foliage, and she watched her eyes without turning; whether it was that had tilted too much, or for any other reason, suddenly a branch creaked, and saw the girl at the moment hidden under the skin; He jumped like a gazelle and the moon being hidden at the time, escaped his miradas.Apenas had disappeared under the young tree, and began to pursue a hurry. He had not given more than a few steps when he saw the twilight between two people who marched through the meadow. They were the king and queen who had distinguished from afar a light in the house of the old and going to it. Count he told them the wonders he had seen near the source and did not hesitate to talk about her lost daughter. Advanced cheerful and soon reached the house. The geese were placed around them, they slept with his head hidden under her wings, and none moved. They looked out the window into the room and saw the old woman sitting and spinning as calmly, bowing his head without moving your eyes. The room was as clean as if inhabited by the little mist they have no dust on their feet. But they did not see their daughter. I looked around for a few moments, they finally perked up and called softly to the window. He would have said that waiting for the old, because he got up and said with his rustic voice: "Come in, I know who you are." As they entered the room, he said the old: "You might have spared that long road, if you had not taken unjustly, three years ago, your daughter is so good and so funny Nothing lost, because for three years he has saved. geese, during which time he has not learned anything wrong and has retained the purity of his heart. But you are sufficiently punished by the misery in which you have lived. " Then he went to the room, and said, "Go, my daughter." the door opened and out came the king's daughter dressed in her silk dress, with her golden hair and bright eyes. Would have said that an angel descended from the cielo.Corrió to his father and his mother, he threw himself into his neck and hugged everyone crying helplessly. The young count stood at his side and when he saw him, his face turned red as a rose; she herself did not know the cause. The king said, "Dear daughter, I have given away my kingdom, what can I give you?" - "I do not need anything," the old woman said, "I lay it tears you have shed for you, are so many more beautiful pearls than those found in the sea and are of a much higher price than your whole kingdom Y. a reward for their services, give my little house. " The old disappeared when he said these words. They rattled a little walls, and when they returned they found the small converted house in a superb palace; a real table was in front of the guests and the servants came and went alrededor.La story continues still; but my grandmother who referred me had lost her memory and forgot the rest. I think, however, that the beautiful daughter of the king married the Count; they remained together in the palace, and lived in the greatest happiness as long as God wanted. If the white geese were kept near the house were so many young people (no one need take offense), that the old woman had picked up their hand if they took human form and were as ladies to the side of the queen, I can not although they presume to say. The truth is that the old was not a witch, but a good fairy who wanted nothing more than to do good. It was probably she who gave the daughter of the king birth mourn the gift of pearls instead of tears. This does not happen now, or else the poor would soon become rich.
Cook impish	730	1741	Spanish	Once upon a cook named Grethel, who wore shoes with red rosettes; and when he went with them, he waddled, very satisfied and conceited, and thought: "You're a pretty girl!." And when he came home, pure happy a sip of wine was drunk, and as the wine he opened the appetite , she began to try the savory meat that was on fire until she was satisfied, at the time saying: "the cook has to watch how it tastes the stew." One day he told his master - Margarita, tonight will come a guest; Prepare a couple of tender chickens, they are well asadas.- Disregard the Lord! replied Margarita.Degolló two fowls, scalded, plucked them, the on the spit and the evening set to fire that they might roast. The chickens began to brown, and the host did not appear, so Margarita said to his master: - If there is the guest have to draw the hens fire, and will be shame not to eat them soon, as it is now when they are juiciest and its punto.- I get to look at the guest replied the dueño.No good master had returned back, Margarita put aside the spit with the chickens, saying: "being next to the fire makes you sweat and is thirsty . God knows when they will return! Meanwhile, I go down to the cellar to take a sip. " Very light down, he sets a jug, saying, "May God bless you, Daisy," burst into the coleto a good drink. "That of the wine she added paste, and not good to cut it," and returned to tipple. He then returned to the kitchen, she puts again the chickens to the fire, well buttered, and began to spin merrily grill. Roast off a whiff of the most delicious, and thought Margarita: "I have to try it, if it were not missing something," and passed them a finger and sucked. "Gosh he cried, and what good are the chickens! It's a sin and a shame not eat them when they are about." He ran to the window to see if they were the owner and his guest; and as no one came, he turned to his chickens and thought, "This wing will burn, is better than my coma." Journeyed with this flower, then, is the licked-and how well you knew him! Once finished, he said: "We must also remove the other, so that the Lord will not notice that something is missing." Gobbled the two wings, returned to the window was; but the master does not appear anywhere. "Who knows He will ocurrió-, you might not come, will have gotten somewhere," and the after a while: "Come on, Margarita, courageous, one is already started, another I sip and you eat it whole, you see how calm you stay Why waste this gift that God makes you ?. ". Down then to the cellar, took a swig and hen ate in great glee, Disappeared and the first, and however it still was appearing the Lord, looking the other thought Margarita: "Where is the one must being the other two go together; you need to measure everyone with the same brush I think another little drink would not do me any harm. ". And again he raised his elbow, and made the second chicken follow the path of the first. And behold, the Lord and shouts, being in full delight, comes: - Hurry up, Grethel, will be here on invitado.- Yes, sir, I'll serve immediately she replied Margarita. Meanwhile, the owner went to check if the table was well placed, and taking the big knife to cut the chickens thought, he sharpened on the edge of a plate. In this guest he arrived and knocked politely and courteously at the door. Margarita ran to open and see who it was, and the meeting with the guest, putting his finger on his lips said: - Chiss, chiss! Turn back quickly, because if you catch my lord, what shall pass wrong. I was invited to dinner, but his real intention is to cut off both ears. Listen, if not, as is sharpening the noise cuchillo.Oyó the stranger and started running down the stairs. Margarita did not fall asleep, but running to the dining room, exclaimed: - Valiente character have invited - Why, Daisy!? What do you mean? - Well, she said it was bringing the two chickens and me removed from the source and escaped with ellas.- Go manners! the owner said, feeling in the soul birds-loss. If the least we would have left one, we would have been some cena.Y hit the streets, shouting to return, but the other turned a deaf ear. Then he ran after him, knife in hand and shouting: - Just one, just one! -so that, at the least, not all carry dinner. But the guest, understanding that meant that settle with one ear, hastened the race with all the vigor of his legs, eager to save the two.
Princess Pea	2012	704	Spanish	Once upon a time a prince who wanted to marry a princess, but it was a real princess. In search he toured worldwide, but there was always a but. Princesses were many, but never could make sure they were what really; ever he found something that looked suspicious. So he returned home very sad, for he was determined to find a princess auténtica.Una evening a terrible storm broke out; sucedíanse without interruption lightning and thunder and pouring rain; It was an awful time. In these knock at the gate of the city, and the old king went to abrir.Una princess was at the door; but Good God, how had put the rain and bad weather! Water dripped from her hair and clothes, he is got by reeds shoes and out at the heels; but she said she was a real princess "We will soon know," he thought the old queen, and, without a word, went to the bedroom, lifted the bed and laid a pea on the wire.; then twenty mattresses piled on top, and on top of these, as many edredones.En this bed was to sleep the morning princesa.Por asked how she had slept. "Oh, too bad!" he exclaimed. "I have not slept a wink all night. God knows what was in the bed! It was so hard, I have the body full of bruises! Horrible!" Then they saw it was a real princess, since despite the twenty mattresses and twenty quilts, she had felt the pea. Nobody but a real princess could be as sensible.El prince took her for his wife, for he had convinced married a princess fledged; and the Pea went to the museum where it can still be seen, if no one has llevado.Esto that's a story, right?
The queen bee	591	554	Spanish	Two princes, sons of a king, they departed one day in search of adventure and surrendered to a life dissipated and licentious, so not reappeared on your house. The third son, who was called "the bobo," stood in the way, searching for his brothers. When finally he found them, they mocked him. How I wanted, being so simple, make their way in the world when they, who were much smarter, they had not succeeded? They left the three together and reached an ant nest. The two oldest wanted to destroy it to have fun watching the animals were hurrying to put safe eggs; but the less said - Let alone these animals; I will not suffer that molestéis.Siguieron walk down to the shore of a lake, whose waters swam many ducks. The two brothers wanted to catch a few to roast them, but the child objected: - Let alone these animals; I will not suffer that molestéis.Al finally reached a wild beehive, installed in a tree, so full of honey that it flowed down the trunk. The two largest were going to light a fire at the foot of the tree to suffocate the insects and be able to take possession of honey; but "bobo" stopped them, repeating: - Leave the little creatures alone; I will not suffer them to be stifled. A cape came three to a castle in whose stables were some stone horses, but not a living soul; Thus, throughout all the rooms until they found themselves facing a closed door with three locks, but had in the center a window through which he could look to the interior. I saw a little man with gray hair, sitting at a table. Called out to him once or twice, but did not hear them; the third got up, drew the bolts and left the room. Without uttering a word, condújolos a richly laid table, and after they had eaten and drunk, he took each to a separate bedroom. The next morning the little gray man calling the biggest and took him to a stone table, in which he had written the three papers that had to be met to disenchant the castle. The first said: "In the forest, the moss, the pearls of the daughter of the King are have to be collected before the start of the sun, with the understanding that if needed one, that any undertaking the search. it will become stone. " He left the greatest, and spent the day searching; but when dusk had not met more than a hundred; and it happened what was written on the table was turned into stone. In the next day he tried the second adventure, but had no more success than most: he found only two hundred pearls, and, in turn, was transformed into stone. Finally, came the turn to "The fool," which finished off the moss. But how difficult it was seeking, and how slowly it gathered pearls! Sat on a stone and began to mourn; suddenly the queen ants appeared, which had saved his life, followed by five thousand of his subjects, and in a trice had the animals pearls together in a montón.El second job was fishing on the bottom of the lake the bedroom key princess. At the get "El bobo" to shore, the ducks had saved came swimming, immersed, and a little while, reappeared with the requested key. The third work was the most difficult. Of the three daughters of the King, who were asleep, they had to find out what the younger and beautiful, but it was the case that the three seemed like three drops of water without noticing the slightest difference; It was known only that, before falling asleep, had eaten different goodies. Most, a lump of sugar; the second a little syrup, and the youngest, a tablespoon of honey. He then appeared the queen bee, "El bobo" had saved from the fire, and explored the mouth of each, perching, finally, in the mouth which had eaten honey, which the prince could recognize true. the spell faded; all awoke, and the petrified regained their human form. And "bobo" married the youngest and loveliest princess, and became king after the death of his father. His two brothers were wives the other two princesses.
The white snake	160	673	Spanish	It's been this long, behold, there lived a king, famous throughout the country for his wisdom. Nothing was hidden; One would have said that the air you came news of the most secret things. He had, however, a singular custom. At midday, after removing the table and when nobody was present, trusted servant served him a plate more. It was covered, and no one knew what it contained, nor the same server, because the king not discovered neither eating it until he was completely alone. Things went well for a long time, when one day the servant picolé to an irresistible curiosity and the source was his room. Which was closed the door carefully, lifted the lid and saw that the tray was a white snake. He could not suppress the craving to try it; He cuts a little bit and put it into his mouth. There was barely touched it with his tongue, heard strange voices whispering melodies coming from the window; to the approach and give ear, he noted that sparrows were talking to each other, telling a thousand things seen in fields and forests. A bit to eat that snake had received the gift of understanding the language of animales.Sucedió that same day the Queen's beautiful ring was lost, and suspicion fell on the server faithful who had access to all rooms. King sent him appear to his presence, and in the strongest terms, he threatened that if the next day I could not find the thief, he will have for such and would be executed. Nothing helped the loyal servant to protest his innocence; King did out without removing the threat. Full of fear and grief, went down to the yard, always pondering the way out of trouble, when he observed three ducks pleasured themselves quietly in the creek, Preening with beak and holding an animated conversation. The servant stopped to listen. They were recounted where they had spent the morning and what they had found to eat. One said peevish: "I feel a weight in the stomach, in the rush I've swallowed a ring he was at the bottom of the window of the Queen." Without another thought, the servant grabbed him by the neck, took him to the kitchen and told the cook: "Kill this one, which is already well primed." - "You say true," nodded the cook, and weighed by hand, "has given trouble to fatten and is already asking to be put on the spit." Cut off his neck and the empty, he appeared in his stomach ring Reina. Easier it was to the servant to prove to the King his innocence, and to make amends for injustice, he offered his server grace he chose, promising to charge more felt like it in his Corte.El servant refused everything, and only asked a horse and money for the trip because he wanted to see the world and go about a little. Granted their petition, stood in the way. and one day came next to a pond, where he saw three fish that had been caught between the reeds and struggled, panting, to return to the water. Whatever they say that fish are dumb, the truth is that man really understood the complaints of those animals, who complained of being condemned to a miserable death. Being, as it were, compassionate heart, he got off and returned the three fish to water. Coleteando of joy and poking their heads, they said: "We will remember you saved our lives, and we will have occasion to repay you." The waiter kept riding, and Cape a while it seemed as if sensing a voice from the sand at his feet. Listening intently, Diose realized it was a king of ants complained: "If at the least these men, with their clumsy beasts, leave us quiet This horse stupid, with their helmets heavy, is crushed without mercy to my people. " The rider twisted onto a path that followed the side, and Anthill shouted: "We will remember and we will pay!" The path led him to a forest, and there he saw a couple of crows, to the edge of the nest, throwing him to his sons: "Get out of here, scoundrels!" they shouted, "We can not continue hartándoos,. already you have age to seek for pittance" The poor little children were on the floor, waving his wings weak and whimpering: "Unhappily for us, helpless, we have to get us food and fly still do not know what we will do but starve!?" He alighted the boy, killed the horse with his sword and left his body for grazing of small crows, which lanzáronse jumps over the dam and, sick time, said his benefactor: "! we will remember us and we will pay" the servant had to continue their journey on foot, and Corporal many hours, came to a big city. Rebullían streets of people, and great excitement was observed; in this he appeared a crier mounted on horseback, making it known that the daughter of the king was seeking husband. Who sues for was, but I will make a difficult feat: if fulfilled would receive the hand of the princess; but if he failed, he would lose his life. There were many who had already tried; more they perished in the company. The young man saw the princess and was so dazzled by her beauty that he forgot all danger, before the King to ask the hand of his hija.Lo conducted offshore, and in his presence threw a ring bottom. King charged him to recover the jewel, adding: "If you come back without it, you'll be rushed to the sea until you die drowned." All those present sympathized with the handsome lad, who was left alone on the beach. The young man stood there, thinking way out of his predicament. Suddenly he saw three fish who approached him together, and they were only those he had saved. The one in the middle in his mouth a shell, which deposited on the beach, at the foot of the young. He picked it open, and inside appeared the gold ring. Jumping for joy, ran to take it to the king, hoping to be granted the promised reward. But the princess pride to know that her suitor was of inferior lineage, he rejected it, demanding the implementation of a new job. He went out to the garden, and scattered in the grass ten sacks full of millet. "Tomorrow, before the sun comes up, you have collected all without missing a grain" The doncel sat in the garden and began to ruminate on how to fulfill that mandate. But he could not think of anything, and was very sad to think that the next morning would be led to the gallows. But when the first rays of the sun lit up the garden. What it was what he saw! THE TEN were fully booked and well aligned without missing a grain of millet! At night he had gone the Anthill with thousands of subjects, and the grateful creatures had collected millet with great diligence, and had placed in the bags. He lowered the princess in person to the garden and saw with astonishment that the young man had come out with good test. But his proud heart was not appeased yet, and said: "Although the two works have made will not be my husband until I bring an apple from the Tree of Life." The she did not know where the tree grew. I stood in the road, determined not to stop while his legs would, though he had no hope of finding what he sought. When he had already walked three kingdoms, he came one evening to a forest and lay down to sleep under a tree; Suddenly he heard a rustling in the branches, long a golden apple fell into his hand. A moment later they flew down Three Ravens, who, alighting on his knees, he said: "We are those little crows you saved from starving when we had grown, we knew we were seeking the golden apple, we cross the sea flying. and we arrived to the ends of the world, where the Tree of Life grows, to bring fruit. " Overjoyed, he resumed the boy the way back to take the golden apple to the princess, which did not put any more delay. Journeyed apple of life and ate together. Then he burned in the heart of the maiden a great love for her fiance, and lived happily to a ripe age.
The old forest	1163	442	Spanish	Poor maid crossed one day a forest accompanying their masters, and being in the thickest, emerged from the bush bandits, who murdered everyone but the girl, who, frightened, had jumped from the car to hide behind from a tree. When the bandits were gone with the booty, she came out of hiding and watched that huge misfortune. Bursting into mourn bitterly, he said: "What will I do now, I will not know me miserable out of the woods, where no living soul Habré to starve!.." And it raced from one side to another looking for a way, he could not find any. At dusk he sat at the foot of a tree and encomendóse God, firmly determined to stay there, no matter which pasara.Al after a while came a white dove flying with a little golden key in its beak. Depositing it in his hand, he said: - Do you see that great tree there? It has a lock; open it with this key. Inside you will find plenty of food, and not have to suffer hambre.Dirigióse girl at the tree, she opened it and found inside a bowl full of milk, and white bread in such abundance that could not eat it all. Once was satisfied, said: "This is the time when the chickens up his stick I feel so tired I also sleep with taste in my bed.." Behold turned dove with another golden key in its beak : - Open that other tree - he said to him -. You find in him a cama.Y, indeed, to the opening he appeared a beautiful and soft little bed. She said her prayers, asking God our Lord that keep it overnight; then he got into the bed and slept. The next morning he appeared for the third time the dove and said - Open that tree there and you will find dresses - and doing so, came out gorgeous dresses, adorned with gold and precious stones, worthy of the most exalted princess. And the girl lived there a season, presenting the flies daily to meet the needs of muchacha.Y was really a good life and tranquila.Pero one day he asked the dove: - Want to do something for me - With all my soul - replied the girl. Then said the little dove: - I'll take you to a very small house. You enter and, next to the home, you are sitting an old woman who will say, "Good morning." But you do not answer, whatever you do, but you headed to the right, where there is a door. Open it and you will find yourself in a room with a table, on which you see a lot of rings of all kinds. There are magnificent, with sparkling gemstones; but let them. Looking, however, one very simple which is to be among them. Pick it up and bring it as quickly as puedas.Encaminóse girl to the house and entered. There was the old woman who, seeing her, opening eyes like oranges, he said: - Good morning, daughter mía.Pero she did not answer and went to the puerta.- Where are you going? - he exclaimed the old woman, holding it by the skirt -. This is my house, and no one can enter without my permiso.Pero girl did not open her mouth and letting go of a jolt, entered the room. On the table was a lot of rings that sparkled and glittered like stars. Esparciólas all looking for the simple; but not nowhere to be found. While thus occupied, he saw the old woman slipped away with a cage enclosing a bird. Running her hand quitóle the cage. The bird had the ring looking at the peak. He is taken hold of him and hurried out of the house, thinking it would come the flies to find the ring: but it was not. then Apoyóse in a tree, ready to await the arrival of the pigeon, and, whilst such wise, it seemed as if the tree is again soft and pliable, and down the branches. And suddenly, the branches circled his body and transformed into two arms, and coming back she saw that the tree was a handsome young nobleman who, hugging her and kissing her, said: - I have redeemed and delivered from the power of old, who is a wicked witch. I had become a tree, and every day made me for two hours on a white dove, without being able to I recover the human figure as she was in possession of the anillo.Quedaron disenchanted at the same time his servants and horses, all transformed also trees, and together they left his kingdom, because he was the son of a king. There the girl and the prince married, and lived happily.
beam	1416	1290	Spanish	One day a wizard surrounded by spectators, before which effected his tricks was wonderful. Among them he had a cock up a beam and carried from one place to another as if a light pen. But among the attendees was a girl who had found a four-leaf clover and therefore was smarter and smarter than others. As nothing could with her arts of prestidigitation, he saw that the beam was nothing but a straw. He then shouted: - Hey, good people! Can not you see what takes the cock is not a beam, but a simple straw? Disappeared spell, and viewers, realizing the trick, took to the witch with jeers. The man, with rage in his heart, he said to himself: "I Will Avenge You!." At the end of some time, the girl was celebrating her wedding. Very well-groomed and attired dirigiese the church, followed by a large retinue; to reach the temple had to go through an unpopulated. Suddenly they came to a stream coming down very grown up, and there was no bridge or gateway to cross. The bride, not idle, and climbed the slopes, ready to wade across the stream; and behold, when he was in the center, the wizard of yore, who was nearby, he began to shout mockingly: - Hey! Where's your eyes that you take this water? The girl looked up and saw himself, with raised clothes, amid a field of linen, covered with its blue flowers. A fellow I see all those present began to laugh at her.
The carrot	1387	1737	Spanish	There were once two brothers who had sat square soldiers. One was rich and the other poor. The poor, wanting out of their misery, licencióse and became farmers, dedicated to digging and tilling their small piece of land, where he planted carrots. seed germinated and sprouted a carrot that continued to grow. He grew visibly; every day was higher and more stout, and could well be called the queen of carrots, for he never had seen or will see another like it. In the end, he came to reach such an extraordinary size, filling a cart and two oxen were needed to transport; and the farmer did not know what to do with it, nor should there be if fate or misfortune. In the end, he thought, "If I sell, not draw much, if I eat it, the same can eat small'd better take her to the king and give it away as a rare thing, proof of compliance.." Consequently, loaded in the car, she hooked him two oxen and went to the Court, to offer to the KING: Wow a strange vegetable! - he said -. I have seen many wonders in my life, but never a monster, what kind of seed has gone? Or perhaps you're a favorite of luck, and why these things happen to you? - Nothing like that - replied the farmer -. I'm not a favorite of fortune, but a poor soldier, to provide for my needs, I ordered the license and dedicate myself to cultivate the soil. I have a rich brother, whom your Majesty well knows; but I, like nothing I have, I am unknown todos.Compadecióse the King of him and said: - Well you have finished your poverty; I will give whatever it takes to not be unless your hermano.Y gave a quantity of gold and fields, meadows and radishes, making it so rich that his brother's fortune could not compare with it. At the hearing it than he had paid his brother a simple carrot, I felt himself dominated by envy and brooded looking for some way to get a similar gift. Wanting to proceed more intelligently, King took gold and horses, thinking that would correspond much more valuable gifts. For if his brother had given him a carrot so, what would not give to him in return for his presents! King accepted the gift, and said that the best thing that could correspond with was very rare that carrot; and thus, the rich had to charge your car the vegetable of his brother and take her home. Once there, he did not know about who vent their anger and moodiness, until he came evil thoughts and decided to kill his murderers to hermano.Contrató about him would tend an ambush, and meanwhile he went in search and he said: - Brother, I know where there is a hidden treasure. We will go together to look for it and we repartiremos.Parecióle well to the other, and went with him, wary nothing wrong. When they reached a deserted place, I asaltáronlo bandits and, binding him, prepared to hang it from a tree. But at that moment he was heard a distant sound of hooves and the voice of someone singing to cry peeled. They were frightened bandits and took to their heels, leaving her prisoner in a sack, which was tied to a branch. The name, from that height, at the cost of many efforts managed to open a hole in the sack and peered around him cabeza.Resultó that whoever came along the road was a vagabond student, who rode singing merrily through the woods. In noting the above it was a single individual who passed, gritóle: - Good morning to you God The student looked everywhere, and seeing where the voice came, he asked: - Who is calling me answered the another, from the tree: - look up. I'm here in the sack of wisdom. In very little time I have learned great things. All schools are worthless compared together. A little bit more and I'll know everything, and will lose the tree more wise than any other man. I understand the stars and constellations, blowing of the winds, the sand of the sea, the cure of disease, the virtue of herbs, birds and stones. If you were you here, you'd see the wonders flowing from the sack verdad.Al hear everything the student said, full of admiration: - Blessed be the hour when I found you! Do not go upstairs for me a while to sack Replied the above, as if reluctantly grant: - I'll let up for a while as a reward for good your words? but still have to wait an hour because I still need to learn cosa.Cuando the student had already been waiting a while, he began long hacérsele waiting and begged the other to allow you to quickly enter, because his thirst for knowledge was irresistible. Then the top, as if reluctantly cede said: - So you can get out of the sack of wisdom have to drop the rope holding it. Then you shall put tú.Bajólo, therefore, the student and, untying the sack, put it in libertad.- Now Beam me up right away - he said, and wanted to get up. - Wait! - he cried the other -. So no - and grabbing his head, dipped it in upside down. then tied the bag firmly, he rose, pulling the rope to the top of the branch and letting it Swung at the mercy of the wind, he said: - How are you, friend? You must be feeling that you feel the wisdom and you learn many things. You stay there, until you have won listeza.Y horse riding student, he walked away, although at the end of an hour he sent it libertasen.
The tsarevna Rana	3526	402	Spanish	There in very ancient times had a tsar who had three sons, all three boys. One day I said: Sons of mine: Make a bow each and Shutter an arrow. Women bring each arrow is the wife of which shot: If you do not bring anyone, that is not casará.El eldest son shot his arrow, and brought the daughter of a nobleman. He fired the medium, and brought his arrow the daughter of a general. As for the arrow Tsarevich Ivan, the youngest, brought a frog between the teeth of the pantano.Los older brothers were delighted; but Ivan Tsarevich began to mourn thinking: How will I live with a frog? And it's for life ... But as much as he brooded had no choice but to marry her. The all they married according to the rite of those places. During the ceremony, held in a frog bandeja.Así were living. The tsar wanted a day that the wives will give away some clothes to see which was the most skillful. A hearing your desire, Ivan Tsarevich began to mourn again thinking, "What can my frog? I'll be the risión of all. "The frog, meanwhile, jumped on the floor croaking. But when Ivan Tsarevich fell asleep, she left the house, he removed frog skin becoming a beautiful maiden and shouted: 'What come my governesses and my maids appeared As explained what he wanted, and! governesses and maids brought him instant a shirt that was adorable. She took it, folded it and left side of the Tsarevich Ivan, turning back into a frog as if such a joy cosa.El Tsarevich was waking up. He took his shirt and took her to the Tsar, who cried after contemplating: -¡Magnífica shirt! It is worthy of carrying on the day of the Lord. The middle brother brought another camisa.-This could serve, if any, to be reached until baño.Y shirt that had the highest, the tsar said: 'This could only be used in a isba.Los miserable children Tsar returned their houses. The two largest were saying we should have laughed No wife of Ivan. Sure it's not a frog, but some maga.El czar wanted their wives after cocieran some bread and the presen-taran to see which of them cooked mejor.Las older daughters had laughed frog at the beginning, but were now chastened: a maid sent to spy what hacía.La frog, who imagined, prepared mass, spread with the roller and tossed to the stove through a hole opened arriba.Después observe everything, the server ran told his ladies, daughters of the czar, and they did the same. But after deceiving them with that ruse, the frog took the dough from the oven, cleaned it all very well, revoked the hole, let impeccable ... Jumped then to the porch, he took off his frog skin and shouted -¡ come my governesses and my maids as were ordered: I want a bread like my father ate only on Sundays and days of fiesta.Las governesses and maids presented it at the moment and she left him at the side of the Tsarevich Ivan, turning back into rana.El Ivan Tsarevich woke up and took the bread to his father. I was just getting those who had their older children: some bread awful, all scorched, because their wives had done what the maid told them. Tsar first took the bread that brought the eldest son looked at him and sent him to the kitchen. He took of the second child and did the same with him. It was his turn to the Tsarevich Ivan. His father took the bread he had, he looked up and said yes -This is a worthy bread eaten on the day of the Lord! It is not like those coals that have sent my other daughters ... Later it occurred to the Tsar the idea of ​​giving a ball to see which of his daughters danced better. They came all the guests, and children with their wives, Ivan Tsarevich least. "Where can I go with a frog?" He asked, and burst into tears. But the frog said, -¡No cry, Ivan Tsarevich! You go dancing, that within an hour I'll be there.The Tsarevich Ivan, something quieter to hear what the frog said, he went to the dance. Then the frog took off his skin and attired wonderful-mind. When he arrived at the dance, she was so beautiful that the Tsarevich Ivan was delighted and all present aplaudieron.Se served a feast. Tsarevna frog ate, but was keeping the bones in a sleeve he had left. He drank, but was thrown into the other sleeve what was left in his glass. The other daughters, who were watching, did the same: they were laying the gnawed bones in a sleeve and the remains of drink in otra.Llegó when dancing. Tsar asked to open older daughters; but they gave him the honor of the frog, without being hard to get, went to the center of the room with the Tsarevich Ivan. She danced so gracefully, both turned and heels, which were all astonished. Then he waved his right arm and raised forests and streams; He waved his left arm and began flitting birds ... Finished desapareció.Las dance and all other daughters also went to dance and wanted to do the same. Once a waving his right arm, the bones had up his sleeve shot out against the people ... As his left arm shaking, spraying people with water sleeve. That he was not pleased with the Tsar, who shouted: Enough, enough And the daughters returned to their sitios.Terminaba dancing!. Ivan Tsarevich went ahead. He found the frog skin lying on the floor and set it on fire. When he returned his wife wanted to get back her skin, but had burned. She slept with the Tsarevich and Dawn said, 'I lacked a little patience, Tsarevich Ivan. Soon it would have been yours forever. Now, only God knows ... Goodbye. If you want to find me, find me on the ends of the earth in the far-and desapareció.Pasó countries one year. Ivan Tsarevich missed his wife. At the start of the second year asked permission from his father and mother to go on your busca.Caminaba long time when he met with an attached house facing the woods and back to it.-Casita, casita He pronounced the zarévich- : ponte as before, as you planted your mother back to the forest and facing mi.la house turned. The Tsarevich entró.-F-f-f ... said an old woman who was inside. So far they had not heard or seen bones Russians; but today they get into home. Where you go, Ivan Tsarevich? -Podías offer eating and drinking, old, old and ask later.Dosage served food and drink and then prepared a bed. Tsarevich Ivan said to her Grandma: I'm looking for Elena Hermosa.-¡Cuánto you so, baby! The first time, I thought a lot about you, but now you can not remember anymore. Moreover, much that does not come around here does. Look: go home my middle sister, she is more enterada.Por morning Ivan Tsarevich went on their way, he came to a house and said -Casita, casita: ponte as before, as you planted your mother, back to the forest and facing mi.la house turned. The Tsarevich entró.-F-f-f ... said an old woman who was inside. So far they had not heard or seen bones Russians; but today they get into home. Where do you go, Ivan Tsarevich? Well ... I'm looking for Elena's Hermosa.-¡Oh, how slow you, Ivan Tsarevich! She is already beginning to forget. She is getting married and will soon be another wedding. Now he lives with my older sister. Go there, but carefully. When you're close you warn your presence. Elena, who will be wearing a dress of gold thread, will become spindle. My sister will wind the yarn on the spindle. When you have rolled around and see who keeps the spindle in a drawer and closes it, you are looking for the key, opened the drawer and the spindle part two. then throws the tip back and the thickest part of your feet. At that time she will appear before ti.El Tsarevich Ivan was on his way, he came to the house of another old and entered. He found spinning a golden thread. When filled the whole spindle, it locked in a drawer and put the key on a shelf. The Tsarevich took the key, opened the drawer, pulled out the spindle and brake and was told, throwing back the tip and the thickest part to their feet. At the same moment he appeared in front of the beautiful Elena it.-How you so long, Ivan Tsarevich? -I ask-. I almost have not had a new suitor marido.El was about to arrive. Elena the beautiful took a flying carpet old, sat on it with Ivan Tsarevich and together they set out into the air as little time pájaros.Al suitor arrived, he learned who had left and as it was not dull, it he launched after them at full speed. Romario ten sazhenas to achieve them, when they entered on the carpet at the boundaries of Rus. And as the suitor, for certain reasons, he had no input in Rus, was forced half to vuelta.El Tsarevich Ivan and Elena the Beautiful came to her home, where they were received with great joy, and there lived and prospered for the benefit of few around them.
The Zarevnade the Riddles	3528	851	Spanish	THE tsarevna OF ADIVINANZASErase an old man who had three children. At last they called Tonto.El Tsar Ivan the then reigning ago-a long time-this had a daughter. said this to him one day to his father, I'd like to dwell on it right charades. To which I say a riddle and I guesses right, his head cut off. If not success, I will marry él.Inmediatamente one side and many young people who had been executed because their adivinanzas.Conque was right tsarevna one day was Ivan the Fool to his father and said trumpeted: Give me your blessing, Batiushka : I want to go to the palace to see if he hits my guessing the zarevna.-¿Adónde you go, so silly, when so many, smarter than you, they have already lost my mind in that endeavor Well, I, with or without your blessing? , I think go.The father finally give the blessing. Ivan the Fool was heading palace when wheat was scattered on the road and, above wheat, a horse. He picked up a stick, pushed the horse to not trample wheat, and said, "I already have a riddle." He walked and saw a snake; the he pierced with his spear and said, ". I already have another riddle" He came to the palace, was admitted to the presence of the Tsar and asked him what his adivinanza.-came over here when on the road I found a good and above good another well; I grabbed this good and to do good, it apart from good; good, for the sake of the good escapó.La tsarevna reached into his magic book, but this riddle he was not, and did not know how acertarla.-Batiushka he said to his father: today it hurts a little head and not I have very clear ideas. Acertaré.Aplazaron morning the answer for the next day. Ivan the Fool assigned a room, and stayed there the evening smoking his pipe. Meanwhile, the tsarevna called a faithful servant and said, Go and ask Ivan the Fool the answer to that riddle. In return we can promise silver, gold ... which quieras.La servant came and knocked on the door. Ivan the Fool opened, she went and asked the answer to the riddle, promising mountains of gold and silver.-¿Para do I want money? Ivan the Tonto- said. I just spare me with what I have. If the tsarevna want to tell you the answer, pass the night here in my room without dormir.Enterada the tsarevna, he accepted the condition and spent the whole night without sleep. In the morning, Ivan the Fool told he had departed horse wheat, and tsarevna gave the right answer. Then Ivan the Fool proposed another adivinanza.-coming toward said here, when on the road I found a wrong: I grabbed it, and with another bad stuck to evil; Thus, evil died again threw hand mal.De tsarevna his magic book, and not finding the answer to the riddle, asked to postpone until tomorrow afternoon siguiente.Por sent his servant to ask the answer to Ivan the Tonto.-Promise 'I dijo.-¿Para money do I want money? I just spare me with what I have said Ivan the Tonto-. If the tsarevna want to tell you the answer, that night without dormir.La accepted tsarevna is passed, spent a sleepless night and could give the answer acertada.A the third time, Ivan the Fool did not make his riddle as above, but in the presence of all senators, told in a very muddled what was happening with the tsarevna, which in power does not hit his riddles, he sent a servant his to ask the answer in exchange for money. the tsarevna not hit the hidden meaning of that conundrum, and again sent to ask the answer, promising Ivan all the gold and silver he wanted and back home without any impedimento.Pero quia! Again he had to spend a sleepless night. Ivan then told him what was the respuesta.Naturalmente, she could not repeat it, because everyone would have known how Ivan had paid the Tonto.Conque the tsarevna was forced to say ". I do not know ' Immediately wedding was organized, celebrating with a feast cheerful. Already married, Ivan the Fool and tsarevna lived happily ever after, just living now.
The fox and the crow gritón	8355	57	Spanish	A crow stole some shepherds a piece of meat and retired to a árbol.Lo saw a fox, and wishing to seize the flesh began to flatter the raven, praising its elegant proportions and great beauty, also adding that he had not found no one better equipped him to be the king of birds, but it affected the fact that there had voz.El crow, to show the fox that he lacked the voice, dropped the meat to launch with strong pride screams. the fox, wasting no time, quickly picked up the meat and said - crow Friend, if you had besides vanity understanding, nothing really missing you to be the king of aves.Moraleja: when you flatter, is when more reason you take care of your property.
The fox and the cat	711	105	Spanish	It happened once the cat was found in a forest with the fox lady, and thinking: "It's ready, experienced and highly regarded in the world," she spoke to him kindly in these terms: - Good morning, my lady slut estimated. How's your honor? How will you in these difficult times The fox, filled with pride, contemptuously looked at the cat from head to toe, and spent a long time pondering whether it was worth answering; But in the end, said: - Oh, lamebigotes wretched, motley fool, starving, Catcha, what happened to your head? How dare you ask me if it happened right or wrong? What have you learned, let's see? How many arts know - I do not know more than answered the cat modestamente.- And what is this yours art? When asked the zorra.- dogs chase me, I climb a jump to a tree, and thus saved me from them.- And is that all you know? said the zorra-. Well domino over a hundred tricks, and I still have a bag full of them. I pity you; vente with me and teach you how to escape the perros.En that time a hunter was presented with four greyhounds. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree and sat in the cup, well hidden by the branches and follaje.- Open up the bag, lady bitch, open the bag! He shouted from above; but the dogs had already seized him, and not soltaban.- Oh !, bitch went on the cat lady, with your hundred tricks you have taken. Had you known climb like me, you would have saved my life!
The Fox and the Crane	3522	60	Spanish	A fox had befriended a crane. They were even gossips, because once they made boards parteras.Conque one day happened to invite the fox eating the crane. He went to her and said, 'My dear comadre, come eat with me, I beg you. You see how you treat! It was the crane to the invitation, and the fox served on a flat plate milk soup she had prepared. He puts the plate on the table saying, 'Here, comadre. Eat all you want. I have done misma.La grulla tried to catch something with its beak; but, of course !, he not tested or drop. Meanwhile, the fox was sipping soup tongue, until he ate it all. When he finished he said, 'You'll have to excuse me, dear godmother, but it's all you can ofrecer.-Thanks anyway, comadre. Now I invite you to ti.Al next day the fox was home from the crane. This had prepared okroshka, and served in a jug neck very tight, saying, Eat, gossip, eat, because it's all you can ofrecer.La fox began to around turns of the jug, to sniff, to lick by one side and the other ... As if nothing; could not taste even a drop: the head will not fit through the neck of the jarro.Mientras, crane ate it all, because the peak reached to the bottom. Then he said, 'Sorry, old friend, but I have nothing more to offer. The fox, who thought having eaten for a week, left very upset and went back to the same house was gone. Crane had paid him in his own moneda.Desde then, the fox and the crane are no longer friends.
The Fox and the Grapes	4353	59	Spanish	It is common voice, more than noon, fasting la Zorra was hunting. Halla a vine, remain looking high vine hanging fruit. Causábale thousand anxieties and congojasno reach the grapes with the claw, to show his teeth the high black grape clusters among green leaves. He looked, jumped and walked in probaduras; but it was impossible because of fijo.Entonces was when Zorra said, 'I want them to eat: "There are ripe." Why not show yourself impatient, if you are frustrated, Fabio, some attempt. Applies well the story, and say not ripe, freshly.
The heavenly wedding	1955	767	Spanish	A poor fellow farmer heard a day in church preaching to the priest: - Who wants to go to heaven, you must always follow the recto.El road boy stood therefore on the way, always forward, never twisting through mountains and valleys. In the end, he came to a big city and went to the church where the Divine Office was celebrated. Seeing that magnificence, thought our waiter who had come to heaven and sat, beaming with joy. After the function, when the clerk told him to retire, he negóse: - No, I'm not leaving. I am very happy to have come finally to the sky. It was the sacristan to the priest, to say that there was a boy who did not want to leave, because he thought he was in heaven in the church. He answered the priest: - If you think so, dejémoslo.Luego went to the lad and asked him if he wanted to work. He said the boy said yes, and I was used to work; I did not want was to leave heaven. Thus, he stayed in the iglesia.Al see people approaching the image of the Virgin with the Child Jesus in her arms, carved in wood, and knelt and prayed, thought, "This will be our Lord, "and he exclaimed: - Lord, and what are you skinny! They make sure you go hungry. I'll bring every day half my ración.Desde then wore every day to the image half of their food; and behold, the statue began eating those meats. Passed a couple of weeks, people noticed that the image grew and grew fat, from which all amazed. The pastor could not believe his eyes, and one day he was in the temple, spying on the boy. Then he saw how broke bread with the Virgin and how it cogía.Al it after a while, the boy fell ill and had to spend eight days in bed. A rising, his first care was to bring the food to the Mother of God. The priest followed him and heard him say: - Lord, do not be angry if you do not have brought anything these days; I've been sick and I could not levantarme.Y is the case that the image answered him - I've seen your good will, and she has sufficed me; Sunday invite you to bodas.El boy felt a great joy and communicated it to the priest, who asked him to inquire of the image if he would allow him to attend también.- No - replied the picture - but you. then the priest offered to prepare and give holy communion, to which the boy nodded. And on Sunday, as soon as he communed, he fell dead and celebrated their eternal wedding.
Pulgarcito raids	428	700	Spanish	A tailor had a son who had gone very small, no bigger than your thumb, so they called Tom Thumb. It was, however, very courageous, and said one day to his father: - Father, I have wanted to run the world, and I will hacerlo.- Well, my son - answered the man, and, taking a long darning needle well, and making a knot in the eye with melted wax: - Here a sword for the road - dijo.El you wanted to eat boy last seen in the house and went to the kitchen, hopping, to see what was cooking his mother farewell . But the dish was still cooking on fire. He asked the little: - Mother, what we have today to eat - See for yourself - said mujer.Pulgarcito jumped on the stove to take a look at the pot;? but both stretched neck, the steam from the pileup dragged and took it up the chimney. After flying a suspended while in the air, to fall back to the ground. Tom Thumb and he found himself alone in the wide world, and he found employment with a tailor; but the food does not Lady satisfacía.- patron - said Pulgarcito - as I better not bear to eat, will leave me, and tomorrow write with plaster on the door of this house, "Potatoes, many, meat, little Goodbye, king. potatoes. "- What do you want, grasshoppers? - Then said the angry patron - and, grabbing a rag, he started to lash him, somehow - but our tailor ran to hide under the thimble and, poking his head, stuck out his tongue at the woman. He raised it to catch thimble; but the man slipped away among the remnants, and the shaking her trying to find out, he hid at the juncture of the mesa.- Heh, heh, patroness! - he shouted from his refuge, sticking his head; and seeing that she made as if to hit him, he jumped into the drawer. In the end, the woman managed to catch it and threw it to the tailor street.The set off and reached a great forest, there he ran into a gang of bandits that they intended to steal the treasure of the King. A enanillo Seeing that, they thought: "A creature so small could go through the keyhole and serve as a crowbar." - Hey! - gritóle One -. Goliath, will you come with us to the royal treasure chamber? It will be easy to introduce it and we hit the dinero.Pulgarcito it was thought for a while; to the Cape, he agreed to go with the gang. He examined the door up and down, looking for a crack, and finally discovered a large enough to seep through it. He was about to do so when he saw one of the sentries stood guard at the door, and told his fellow: - Look how ugly spider. Aplastarla.-'ll Stop to the poor animal! - said the other -. No evil will have hecho.Con which, Pulgarcito could enter without mishap in the treasure chamber and opening the window under which the bandits waited, doubloons began to throw them one after another. Being so busy, he heard coming to the King, who wanted to inspect his camera and hid nimbly. Diose has the King of missing quite a few gold coins, but could not understand how they had stolen, as were intact and locks, and everything seemed to be in perfect order. A coming out, he said to the guards: - Beware! There is someone going behind my dinero.Y when Pulgarcito resumed work, they heard the sound of the gold pieces: clip-clap, clip-clap. A point rushed into the camera, sure nab the thief. But the little tailor, he heard them enter, lighter they jumped into a corner, pulling a coin and being perfectly concealed; ! And from his hiding place he mocked the guards shouting - I'm here The sentries ran to him; but before they arrived, our man had already moved, always under a coin, and he kept shouting: - I'm here and when men threw themselves to pick it up, Tom Thumb called them and from another corner: -! I'm here! And so it was mocking them, running from one end to the other chamber, until their pursuers, overcome fatigue. They gave up hunting and left. Then he ran to catch all the coins out the window, pulling the past with all his strength; and when they had finished, he also jumped on the same path. Thieves welcomed him with high praise: - You're a great hero! - they told them -. You want to be our captain? But Tom Thumb, after a moment's reflection, replied that wanted before running world. To divide the spoils asked the only one quarter, it could not carry his sword again más.Ciñéndose, he took leave of the bandits and drove way forward. He worked with several masters of their craft, but none felt comfortable and so entered into a hostelry servant. Ojeriza maids had him, because without them seeing him, he knew everything they did on the sly, and discovered to the owner what they stole dishes and the cellar. Then they said the maids: - Let's play him a bad pasada.Y conspired to make him a mischief. One day when one of the girls was cutting grass in the garden, watching Pulgarcito jumping through the plants, he picked it up with scythe with grass and tying it in a large handkerchief, the cheetah will silence was to throw it to cows, one of which, black and grandota, swallowed it without doing any harm. However, Pulgarcito did not like this new home, because it was very dark and not lit any light. When they milked the animal, he shouted: "Well, well, well, will it be soon bucketful?." But with the sound of falling milk not heard them. Then came the master in the stable and said: - Tomorrow we will kill this vaca.Entonces yes Pulgarcito was afraid and started shouting: - Get me out, I'm here in Master heard the voice but did not know where it came from!. -Where are you? - preguntó.- A dark - answered the prisoner; but the other did not understand what he meant and marchó.A the next morning killed the cow. Fortunately, to the cut and descuartizarla, Pulgarcito received no blow nor any court, although it ended up between the meat for sausages. To the get the butcher and put his hand to the work, gritóle the enanillo with the full force of his lungs: - Watch for the trinchar care to the carving, I'm in here but with the din of the sideboards, nobody heard!. What troubles had to pass the poor Pulgarcito! But as the need has legs, cuitado started jumping between the knives so lightly, he left without a scratch test. The only thing I could do was slip away, and, like it or not, had to resign themselves to passing between pieces of flesh, within a blood sausage. The prison was somewhat narrow, and, for dessert, which hung in the fireplace, so that ahumara. Time was very long and was supremely bored. In the end, the winter came, they let down the sausage to flatter him an outsider. When the landlady cut the sausage into slices, he took care to shrink and not put head, aware that no cercenasen neck. Finally, he saw an opportunity and gaining momentum, jumped to the exterior.No wanting to go in that house where drinks were so bad pass, Pulgarcito resumed his life globetrotting. However, freedom was short-lived. Being found in the wild, a fox, whom he met casually swallowed him a santiamén.- Hey, Mrs. Vixen! - gritóle Pulgarcito - I'm stuck in your gullet. ! Let me go, please - You're right - answered the fox -; but you're not a crumb for me; if you promise hens corral your father, soltaré.- Give thousand loves! - replied Pulgarcito -; todas.La guarantee you the fox let him go, and she took him home. When his father returned to see his little boy, he wanted gladly gave the fox all the chickens corral.- In compensation I bring a coin - Pulgarcito said unto him, offering him the room he had won in the course of their correrías.- Why they let the fox chickens poor merendase - sappy Go! Do not you think your father would all hens of the corral to keep his son?
The crumbs on the table	1803	2075	Spanish	A countryman one day said their pets, "Come to the dining room and enjoy, eat all the crumbs of bread on the table Mrs. left has to pay some visits.." Then the little dogs said: "No, no . Do not go. If the mistress gets to know, we will punish them. " - "She did not know anything about this," said the farmer. "Come, after all she never gives them any good." And the dogs, wagging their heads, said again: "Nopi, nopi not go'll leave that where it is.." But the peasant does not leave them alone, until at the end they were, they went up to the table and ate all the crumbs they could. But then the lady came and fluttered a small whip with great skill and punished severely. When they left the house sobbing, puppies told the farmer: "Uh, uh, uh you seen ...!?" The farmer laughed and said: "Hee hee hee And that was not what they expected ....?" And they had no other to run.
Princesses dancers	1263	306	Spanish	Once upon a time a king who had twelve daughters, each more beautiful. All slept together in one room, with beds lined up, and at night, at bedtime, King closed the door and ran the bolt. But in the morning, to reopen the chamber, warned that all shoes were damaged from dancing without anyone being able to clarify the mystery. In the end, the king sent a proclamation that whoever discovered where they were going to dance their daughters at night, you could choose a wife, and the death of the monarch, would inherit the throne; but with the proviso that who would offer and the end of three days and nights had not clarified the case, lose the vida.Al before long presented himself a prince, who declared himself willing to try the company. It was well received, and the evening came he was taken to an adjoining room to the bedroom of the princesses. They placed there the bed. He must find out where they were going to dance, and that they could not do it in secret or escape to another place, left open the room door. But as the prince thought it had lead in his eyes and fell asleep; and when he awoke in the morning, he found himself with the twelve had gone to the dance, because all had pierced the soles of shoes. The same was repeated the second night and the third, so the prince was beheaded without mercy. After him came many others willing to take luck, and all gave their lives in the company.In this, a poor soldier who, having received a wound, could not continue in service, he happened to pass by near the city where that king lived. Topóse with an old woman, who asked him where iba.- Not even I know - answered him and jokingly added -: Makes me want to find out where dancing shoes wear out the daughters of the King. So one day could rise to the trono.- Well is not that difficult - replied the old -. To do this, just do not drink the wine you serve at night and pretend you're asleep -. Then, giving a small layer, he added - When you wear it, and you'll be invisibly twelve follow those instructions muchachas.Con, the soldier took seriously the thing and, gaining courage, presented himself to the King as a suitor. Received him with the same attention to others and gave princely dresses. At bedtime, they led him to the anteroom usual, and, when he started to get into bed, came as princess to offer him a glass of wine. But he had tied a sponge under his chin and liquid pouring into it, not swallowed a drop. Then went to bed and after a while the, began to snore like deeply asleep. At the hearing, the princesses released laughter, and most cried - Here's another that could have saved the muerte.Se lifted. They opened cabinets, chests and drawers and took them gorgeous dresses; and while adorned themselves and preened in the mirror, they jumped for joy thinking of the younger baile.Sólo said - I do not know. You're very happy, and I, however, I feel a strange impression. I sense a desgracia.- You happen to us a fool - replied the largest -. You're always afraid. Forgot and how many princes have tried, in vain, to discover? This soldier did not even need to give narcotics. Would not have attracted very zopenco.Cuando all were ready went out to take a look at the lad; but he kept his eyes closed and remained motionless, so they thought themselves safe. Then most he approached his bed and gave him a few blows. Immediately, the furniture began to sink into the ground, and all passed through this opening, one after another, guided by the greater. The soldier, who had seen everything, without hesitation put his capita and fell behind the child. Halfway up the stairs he stepped on the dress, so the princess, frightened, slightly exclaimed: - What is that? Who pulls me skirt - Do not be silly! - said the Mayor -. You've probably caught in a gancho.Llegaron all down, being in a wonderful avenue of trees whose leaves, silver, glittered and glowed brightly. He thought the soldier: "It's a matter of give me a test," and broke a branch, producing a loud crack at the youngest quebrarla.La returned to exclaim: - Is something strange. You do not heard a creak But most replied: - There are shots of joy, for the speedy release of our príncipes.Llegaron then another avenue whose trees were gold, and finally a third, they were diamonds;? and each soldier a branch broken off, with great shock small; but most he insisted that shots were rejoicing. They continuing, soon found on the banks of a great river, where there were twelve little boats, and in each, dashing prince. They are waiting for the princesses, and each went to his boat, the soldier sitting on the menor.Dijo Prince: - I do not know why, but this boat is much heavier today than usual. I have to row with all my strength to make avanzar.- it must be the time - said the princess -. Today is embarrassing, and I feel deprimida.En the opposite shore arose by a magnificent, well-lit castle, from whose interior came a joyous music of trumpets and timpani. They entered, and each prince danced with his favorite. And the soldier danced, invisible, and when the youngest princess lifted a glass of wine, he drank, emptying it before it reached the lips of the girl, with consequent embarrassment of it; but most always he imposed silence. It lasted dance until three in the morning, at which time all shoes were bored and had to terminate it. The princes returned them to the opposite bank, and this time the soldier embarked with the greatest. On the shore they took leave of his companions, promising return to the siguiente.Al night reached the stairs, the soldier went ahead and got into his bed. When the twelve girls came weary, shuffling, he resumed his snoring, and they, on hearing them, Then they said to each other: -! Of this we find ourselves safe, Desvistiéronse, keeping their garments rich and leaving the battered shoes under the respective beds, went to bed. The next morning the soldier would not say anything, eager to participate again in the magnificent feast, which he attended the second and third night. Everything was running like the first time, lasting until full dance wear shoes. The third night, however, the soldier as a glass test was. Rang when bills to pay, the waiter took the three branches and the cup and presented to the King, while the twelve sisters heard the door behind what he said. A King asking: - Where have spoiled my daughters their shoes? - he said - Dancing With twelve princes in an underground palace and recounted how things had happened, bringing in test branches and then the King copa.Mandó compareciesen his daughters, and asked them if the soldier was telling the truth. At the seen them discovered, and nothing would continue to deny them, had to confess. Then the king said to the soldier which of them wanted by woman.- As I am no longer young, give me the most - contestó.El same day the wedding was celebrated, and King named him heir to the throne. As the princes were delighted for as many days as they had danced nights with the princesses.
The three spinners	130	501	Spanish	Once upon a lazy girl who did not want to spin. I could hoarse and his mother, there was no way to force. Until the good woman lost patience in such a way that he started slapping, and the girl began to mourn loudly. Happened to pass at that time the Queen, and hearing the cries, did stop the carriage, entered the house and asked the mother why she was beating her daughter that way, because her screams were heard from the street. Embarrassed woman of having to preach laziness of her daughter, the Queen replied: - I can not get her out of the distaff; all the time would be spinning; but I'm poor and I can not afford both then lino.Dijo Queen: - There is nothing that I like as much as spinning hearing; I love the buzz of lathes. Let your daughter come with me to the palace. I have linen in abundance and you can spin as guste.La mother nodded to this very happy, and the Queen took the girl. Arrivals to the palace, condújola three quarters upstairs, which were filled to the roof of Grand lino.- going to spin me this flax, 'he said, and when finished I will make my husband's eldest son. Nothing matters to me to be poor; a young industrious carries its own dote.La girl inside felt great sorrow, for he had no linen Hilara who, if he lived three hundred years and not do anything else from morning to noche.Al left alone, he couched to mourn and thus was three days without moving a hand. In the third day the Queen appeared, and extrañóse to seeing that nothing had done so; but the girl excused herself by saying that he could not yet start by giving him much grief being separated from her mother. Queen contented himself with this excuse, but said: - Tomorrow you have to start work. Again alone, girl, not knowing what to do or how to get out of trouble, looked out at his chagrin, to the window and saw three women approached: the first was one of the very wide and flat feet; the second a huge lower lip, which fell on the chin; and third, a finger abultadísimo thumb. The three stopped at the window and, looking up, they asked the girl what was wrong. She declared unto his distress, and women gave him their help: - If you avienes to invite us to the wedding, not be ashamed of us, call us and we feel bonuses to your table linen hilaremos for you all this on a santiamén.- With all my soul I promise replied the girl. Enter and you can start now mismo.Hizo go then to the three strange women, and in the first room cleared a space where they could instalarse.Inmediatamente put to work. The first strand pulling and spinning the wheel with his foot; the second, moistening the thread, the third twisted it, applying it against the table with his finger and thumb each blow fell to the ground a lot of the finest thread. Every time I came the Queen, the girl hid the spinners and showed him spinning flax; Queen admired, bursting into praise of the girl. When he was finished linen from the first room, they went to the second, then the third, and soon be ready all the work. Then the three women took leave, saying to the girl: - Do not forget your promise; It's for your bien.Cuando the maiden showed the Queen the empty rooms and great quantity of linen yarn, was set immediately for the wedding day. The groom was delighted to have such a clever and industrious wife, and did not stop ponderarla.- I have three cousins ​​said the girl, who owe large favors, and I will not forget them in the hour of my happiness. Let me, therefore, that invite to the wedding and feel our mesa.A which responded the Queen and her son: - Why do not we invite Thus, the feast day the three women were presented? gorgeously dressed, and the bride came out saying receive: - Welcome, dear premiums - Whew! She cried the boyfriend. Be careful that your relatives are ugly and turning to the foot of the huge plane, he asked: - How do you have this big pie - to rotate the around she said, rotating the torno.Pasó then the prince to the second: - Why do you hang both this lip - from time licking the strand said the woman, both licking the third- hebra.Y And how have the thumb as oblate - De? So twist the wire, 'she replied, twisting both hilo.Asustado cried the son of the Queen: - never touch my beautiful wife a distaff. And with this spinning nightmare it was over.
The three leaves of the snake	150	612	Spanish	Once he lived a poor man, who could no longer support his only son. Then said the - Father, you are much needed, and I am a burden to you. You'd better leave me to find a way to earn my father pan.Dióle his blessing and left him with deep tristeza.Sucedió that in those days the King held a war with a powerful empire. The young man enlisted in his army and went to war. Just come to the battlefield, combat locked. The danger was great, and many bullets rained down; the waiter looked down his comrades from all sides, and also succumbing general, others prepared to undertake the flight. He passed on then encouraged them by saying: - We will not allow our country to sink followed by others, he pounced to fight and defeated the enemy!. A King knowing that only he owed the victory, raised him above all, gave him great treasures and named the first of the reino.Tenía the monarch a beautiful daughter, but very capricious. He had vowed not to accept any husband and gentleman, who did not promise solemnly before, if she died, would be buried alive in the same grave: "If you really love me 'said the princess, what You want to live ?. " For her part, she undertook to do the same if she died before her husband. Until that time, the singular vote had chased away all suitors; but her beauty impressed to such an extent to the young man who, without thinking an instant, asked his FATHER You know the promise that you will do? He asked the KING: That must go down to the grave with her, if she dies before I replied the lad. So great is my love, I was not daunted by this time peligro.Consintió the King, and the wedding was celebrated with great solemnity and esplendor.Los newlyweds lived for a while happy and contented, until, one day, the young princess contracted serious illness, which knew no doctor to find a remedy. When he had died, her husband recalled the promise he had made. Horrified at having to be buried alive; But there was no escape. The King had placed sentries at every door, and it was useless to think of the horrible fate escape. On the day when the body of the princess was to be lowered into the royal crypt, the prince was led to it, and behind him the door closed stone and lodo.Junto to the coffin stood a table, and with her four candles, four loaves of bread and four bottles of wine. When he had consumed those victuals, he would die of hunger and sed.Dolorido and sad, every day just ate a piece of bread and a sip of wine; nevertheless saw death daily drawing nearer. Once I had the gaze on the wall, saw out of one corner of the crypt a snake gliding toward the corpse. Thinking about coming to devour him, he drew his sword and said: "As long as I'm alive, you will not touch !." And pedazos.Al split into three after a while came from the same corner another snake, who quickly retreated to seeing his dead companion and torn. But he returned a few moments, taking in the mouth three green leaves. Then it took the three segments of the snake and properly fitting them, applied to each wound one sheet. Immediately they were welded pieces; the animal began to stir, regained life, and retired with his partner. The leaves were on the ground, and the unfortunate prince, who had attended the prodigy, came perhaps the miraculous leaves that life had returned to the serpent, also have virtue on people. You he picked up the and applied a in the mouth of the deceased, and the remaining two in their eyes. And behold, it was hardly done, the blood began to circulate through the veins and restored to its ruddy face ashen color. He breathed the dead and, opening his eyes, said: - My God !, where am I - you with me, dear wife -respondióle Prince, and told him what had happened and how he had returned to the vida.Dióle then a some bread and wine, and when the princess had recovered some vigor, he raised her up and go to the door, where both began to hit and scream so loudly, that the guards heard them and ran to inform the King. He came down personally to the crypt and found healthy and full life partner. All greatly they rejoiced at the unexpected solution of the sad case. Keep them for me carefully and always carry them with you -: The young prince leaves three snake and handed his servant, telling saved. Who knows if someday we'd need! However, in A change had resurrected wife. It seemed as if his heart and did not feel any affection for her husband. After some time, he wanted to take a trip by sea to go to see his old father, and the two embarked husbands. And on the ship, she forgot her love and loyalty to her husband showed him when he saved her life, and began to feel a guilty inclination towards the driver who led them. And one day, when the young prince was sleeping, called the pilot and her husband taking his head and the other by the feet, threw him into the sea. Committed the crime, said the princess to the sea: - Let us now return home; We say that he died en route. I will extol and praise to my father in such terms, to marry you and make you heir to the reino.Pero the faithful servant, who had attended the scene, went down to the water a little boat without being noticed by anyone, and he He directed by dint of oars, to the place where his master fell, leaving the traitors go on their way. He pulled out of the water the body of the drowned, and with the help of the three miraculous leaves he carried and laid on his eyes and mouth, he fortunately the vida.Los two then rowed with all his might, day and night, and sailed so quickly in his little boat, which arrived in the presence of the King before the big ship. Amazed it to return alone to see them, asked them what had happened. A knowing the perversity of her daughter, she said: - I can not believe she has behaved so ill; soon the truth will come to light of day- and sending them both to a secret chamber, the detained her without anyone supiera.Poco after the boat arrived, and the wicked woman appeared before her father with an expression of sadness. He asked him: - Why come back alone? Where is your husband? - Oh, dear father! cried the princess, it has happened a great misfortune. During the trip my husband became suddenly ill and died and had it not been for the help they gave me the owner of the ship, I also would have been very bad. He was present at the event of his death, and can tell thee todo.Dijo King: - I will resurrect the dead-and, opening the room, he sent out the two hombres.Al see the woman her husband was as wound lightning and falling on his knees, begged forgiveness. But King said: - There is no forgiveness. He was willing to die with you and restored you to life; Instead, you will murdered while he slept, and now get paid that deserves your acción.Fue shipped along with his accomplice in a perforated vessel and taken to sea, where soon the two were swallowed by the waves.
The three languages	311	671	Spanish	Switzerland once lived an earl old man who had only one son, who was stupid and unable to learn anything. The father said to him: - Look, son, however much I try, can get nothing in the head. You'll have to leave home; you trust a famous teacher; to see if he is afortunado.El boy was sent to a foreign city, and spent a year with the maestro.Transcurrido that time, returned home, and his father asked: - What have you learned, my son - Father I have learned the barking of the perros.- God have mercy on us! said the father; Is that all you learned? I will send you to another city and another maestro.El boy was dispatched there, and was another year with another teacher. A returning again asked his father: - My son, what did you learn replied the boy: - Father, I have learned what they say pájaros.Enfadóse the count and said: - Woe! You have dissipated precious time and learned nothing. Are not you ashamed to appear in my presence? I will send you to a third master; but not this time learn anything from ti.El disown youth remained a whole year to care for the third teacher. and when, on returning home, he asked his father: - My son, what have you learned? - the boy answered: - Father, this year I learned the croaking of ranas.Fuera himself with anger, the father called all the servants and said - This man is no longer my son; I miss my home. ! Take him to the woods and give death the servants took him away; but when they would comply with the order to kill him, they felt compassion and released him. They hunted deer, tore the tongue and eyes, and presented to the father as proof obediencia.El boy walked some time wandering until he came to a castle, which asked for asylum by a night.- Well -díjole the Spanish-, if thou wilt spend the night in the old tower down there; but I warn you that there is danger of life, it is full of wild dogs, which bark and howl, and that occasionally you have to throw a man who devoren.Por that reason, the whole district was in sorrow and sadness, no one could help it. But the boy knew no fear and said - I'll go where are the dogs; just give me something to throw them. I will not nada.Como would not accept anything for himself, they gave him some food for the wild beasts and accompanied him to the tower. A coming into it, the dogs, instead of barking, amiably greeted him waving his tail and grouped around him; They ate what they gave them and did not touch a hair. The next morning, to general amazement, the young man presented himself healthy and undamaged to the lord of the castle, and said - I have revealed dogs in their language, why they live there and cause so much damage to the country. They are happy, and they have to keep a great treasure hidden beneath the tower. They will not have peace until this treasure has been removed; and I have also indicated the way to the hacerlo.Alegráronse all those hearing words and Castilian he offered to adopt by a son if he accomplished it successfully. He lowered the boy, and once was aware of how to proceed, it was not difficult out of the basement a chest full of gold. From that moment they ceased barking dogs, which disappeared, thus leaving the country free of the azote.Al after some time gave the young man to go on a pilgrimage to Rome. On the way he happened to pass along a marshy pond where frogs croak you croak. He gave ear, and to understand what they were saying, entróle great sadness and stood brooding and worried. At the reach Rome, the Pope had just died, and among the cardinals had grave doubts about who would be his successor. In the end they agreed to elect Pope on him in whom some divine and miraculous token. Just adopted this agreement when the boy entered the church, and suddenly two snow-white doves flew away and came to rest on his shoulders. Cardinals saw in that a sign of God, and asked the boy if he wanted to be Pope. He remained undecided, not knowing whether it was worth it; but the doves counseled him, and finally said yes. Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled what he heard from the frogs on the road and both had worried him, it would be pope. There was then celebrate Mass, which did not know a single word; but the two doves, who never left his shoulders, and said it all to the ear.
The three feathers	601	402	Spanish	Once upon a time a king who had three sons, of whom two were clever and wise, while the third spoke little and was somewhat simple, so they called him "Simpleton." Feeling old and weak King, he thought he should arrange for after his death, but did not know which of their children to bequeath the crown. Then he said to them: "Go, and one of you to bring me the most beautiful carpet shall be king to my death." And there were no disputes, brought them in front of the palace, threw three feathers into the air, he breathed on them and said, "You shall go feathers." He flew towards Levante; other to the west, and the third was to fall to the ground a short distance. So one brother went to the left; another, to the right, both laughing "Simpleton," which, following the third pens, had to stay in the place where he had caído.Sentóse the boy sadly on the ground, but soon found that side pen was a trap. The up and appeared a ladder; He fell for it and came to a door. He called and heard someone screaming inside, "Love green and tronada, wrinkled paw gizmo mujerque is useless: who's out there in the love act to see." The door opened and the prince found with a thick fat toad, surrounded by many smaller. He asked the fat man what he wanted, to which he replied the young man. "I'm looking for the most beautiful and exquisite tapestry of the world" The toad, addressing one of the small, he said. "Ama green and tronada, wrinkled paw, mujerque gizmo does not work at all: big box that'll bring me" was the young toad to seek the box; the fat man opened it, and pulled out a tapestry, so beautiful and delicate as tissue had no other across the surface of the Earth. He gave it to the prince. The boy thanked him and turned arriba.Los two other brothers considered foolish to small, they were convinced that achieve ever find anything of value. "No need to disturb us much," they said, and the first shepherdess found him off the rough kerchief to his back. Then they returned to the palace to present their findings to his father King. At the same time he came too "Simpleton" with its beautiful tapestry, and the see the King exclaimed admiringly: "If we must proceed with justice, the kingdom belongs to the child." But the two others let their father, telling him that dotey was unable to understand things; He could not be king in any way, and they begged him to propose them another try. Then he said the father, "shall inherit the kingdom of you to bring me the most beautiful ring," and seeing three to the outside, blew three feathers, designed to indicate the roads. Again the two largest left: one towards the east; another, towards the west, and again was to drop the pen next to the third floor trap. He dropped back underground stairway and presented to the fat toad, to tell him that needed the most beautiful ring in the world. The toad ordered him immediately bring the big box and pulling it out of her, gave the prince one, so beautiful, glittering rhinestones ring that no goldsmith the world would have been able to make it. The two eldest laughed "Simpleton," which sought to find the requested object; unhurriedly, they removed the nails from an old hoop car and took him to the King. But when the child was presented with his gold ring, the king had to repeat: "His is the kingdom." But the two did not stop pestering his father, until they managed to impose a third condition, according to which inherit the throne who bring the most beautiful maiden. He returned to take to the air three feathers, which took the same address antes.Nuevamente down "Simpleton" the stairs, looking for the large toad, and said, "Now I have to bring to the palace to the most beautiful woman of the world . " - "Caramba!" He replied the toad. "The most beautiful maiden! Do not have on hand, but will provide you with." And he gave a hollowed carrot, pulling like horses. six mice were. Asked him "Simpleton," sadly, "What do I do with this?" And the frog replied, "Do ride it to one of my little toads." Grabbing the boy a chance one of the circle, installed in carrot yellow. But he was hardly in it than it was transformed into a beautiful maiden; carrot, in a carriage, and the six mice into horses. She kissed the girl launched steeds and went towards the meeting of the King. His brothers came somewhat later. They had not taken the slightest trouble to seek a beautiful woman, but the first good-looking peasant took. A King seeing them, he exclaimed: "The kingdom will, in my death, to the youngest." But older again they stun the old man, shouting, "We can not allow" Simpleton "is king!" and they demanded that preference be given to the person whose woman was able to jump through a ring hung in the center of the room. Thinking, "Farmers' they will easily, because they are robust, but the delicate princess will kill you." He also agreed the old king. And behold jumped two tillers; but they were so heavy and clumsy, who fell and broke arms and legs. He jumped then to bring the beautiful little lady "Simpleton" and did so with the lightness of a gazelle, so and all resistance was useless. And "Simpleton" inherited the crown and space reigned for many years with prudence and wisdom.
What he makes the parent well done is	2526	1415	Spanish	I will now tell you a story I heard when I was very young, and every time I remember it seems prettier. With stories what it happens with certain people: embellishing as the years pass, and this is very alentador.Algunas times've come to the countryside and have seen a cottage with a thatched roof where they grow herbs and moss; on the top of the roof you can not miss a stork's nest. The walls are crooked; windows, low, and they can only open one. The oven stands out as a small bulging belly and elderberry leans over the hedge, near which there is a pond with a duck or a few ducks under the willow stumpy. Nor, missing mastiff barking every soul viviente.Pues in a house like the one I have described an old married couple lived a poor farmer with his wife. They not possess almost nothing, and yet they had a superfluous thing: a horse, which used to graze on the steep banks of the roads. The father sat to move to the city and the neighbors borrowed and paid with other services; Of course, it would have been more advantageous for them to sell the animal or exchange it for something which might be most benefit. But, why they could change? .- You'll know best what suits us said the woman. Just today is market day in the village. Go there with the horse and you get money for it, or make a good exchange. What you do, it is always well done. Go to the mercado.Le arranged the scarf around the neck, as this better she did, and also put a tie double loop, which suited him very well; smoothed his hat with the palm of her hand, he kissed her, and the man stood cheerfully mounted on the horse path that would sell or barter. "The old understands those things, thought the woman. Nobody will make him better." The sun was hot, and not a cloud in the sky blue. The road was dusty, encouraged by many individuals on their way to the market, by car, on horseback or on foot. The heat was intense, and the full extent of the path is not discovered even a speck of sombra.Nuestro friend met a countryman who was driving a cow, all comely that a cow can be. "Surely that it gives good milk Perhaps he thought it would be a good change.." - Hey you, the cow! -said-. What if we make a deal? I know that a horse is more expensive than a cow; but I do not care. A cow will be more useful. You want to change? - Very well, 'said the man of the cow; and they bartered the animales.Cerrado treatment; nothing prevented our farmer back home, since the purpose of the trip was fulfilled. But his first intention had been to go to the fair, and decided reached her, if only to take a look. This continued the man driving the cow. Walking light, and the animal also, so soon they reach an individual with a sheep. It was a good specimen, fat and good "toisón." "That sheep yes I like! thought the peasant. In our ribazos never missing grass, and could winter have it at home. I think it behooves us most maintain a sheep than a cow. "- Dude! ? He said to the other, would you like to change .The owner of the sheep did not repeat; They made the change, and the farmer went on his way, very happy with his sheep. But behold, coming down a path that crossed the road, he saw a man wearing a goose fat under the brazo.- Yikes! Go barley bring goose! -Told him-. How much fat and pen! It would not be wrong in our pond, tied a rope. Old could throw food scraps. How many times I heard him say: Oh, if we had a goose! For this is the occasion. You want to change? I will give the sheep for the goose and another encima.El thank you very much accepted, no more missing; They made the change, and the farmer kept the goose. It was near the city, and the road noise was increasing; It was an anthill of people and animals that filled the road and into the ditch. They reached the end of the potato field the portazguero. This had a chicken tied to not escape, frightened by the noise. It was a derrabada, and nice looking cross-eyed hen. "Cluc, Cluc," shouted. I do not know what she wanted to mean his crowing, the fact is that the farmer thought to see her: "It's the most beautiful chicken I've ever seen in my life; it's better than the Broody of the rector, I would like to have me A hen is. the easiest animals to breed, always finds a grain of wheat can be said to herself remains a good deal I would change it for the goose "- what if we change..? -preguntó.- Change? said the other. For me there is no objection and agreed to the proposal. The portazguero kept the goose, and the peasant, the truth is that gallina.La had used the time well on the trip to the city. Moreover, the heat raged, and the man was tired; a sip of brandy and a sandwich could use pearl. As found in front of the inn, he entered it at the precise moment when the waiter came, loaded with a sack full of rebosar.- What you got there? He asked campesino.- rotten apples replied the lad; a sackful for cerdos.- How beautiful apples! How old would enjoy if the saw! Last year the apple of the corral only gave an apple; He had to keep it, and was on the dresser until it rotted. This is a sign of prosperity, said the grandmother. What a prosperity would all this! I would like to this gusto.- How much you give me for them? man.- asked how much I give? I change -and the hen said and done, he handed the hen and received the apples. He entered the inn and went straight to the counter. The sack left it leaning against the stove, without noticing it was on. In the room there was a lot, treating horses and oxen, and including two British foreign people, which, as everyone knows, are so rich that their pockets were bursting with gold coins. And what they like is betting. Listen or not. "Chouf, chuf!" What was that noise coming from the stove? The apples were beginning to asarse.- What's going on? Soon spread the story of the horse that had been exchanged for a cow and descending gradually had become a sack of apples podridas.- wait to get home, you'll see how old you get handfuls' said the ingleses.- kisses give me that no fisticuffs said the peasant. Grandma will say: "What makes the father, is well done." - Do we do a bet? They -propusieron the Englishmen. I bet all the gold you want: tons ounces of gold, a hundred pounds, quintal.- With me happy fanega said the farmer. But I can only play a bushel of apples, and I and grandmother to boot. I think it's heaping measure. What do you think of it - As the Englishmen exclaimed. Shopping treatment hecho.Engancharon the innkeeper, they went up to him and the English peasant, without forgetting the sack of apples, and went their way. They soon reached the casita.- Good night, little mother - Good evening, Father - I made a good deal with the caballo.- Already what I said!; you you understand that! He said the woman, hugging, regardless of the sack or the forasteros.- I changed the horse by a vaca.- God be praised! The milk we will have! Finally meet again in butter and cheese table. Good business - Yes, but then I changed the cow for a oveja.- Ah! This is even better! She cried the woman. You always think of everything. Grass for a sheep have to spare. We will not miss now and pecorino milk or wool socks, and even nightgowns. All that the cow does not give it; lose hair. You're a pearl of marido.- But that changed after the sheep by a oca.- So we have a goose for St. Martin, padrecito. You just think of me likes! What an idea you had! We will tie the goose outside on the grass, and What I fatten up San Martin - is that I changed the goose for a hen continued the man.- A chicken? This one really is a good deal! She cried the woman. The hen will lay eggs and hatch, chicks and we all henhouse. It's what I wanted most - Yes, but I exchanged the fowl for a sack of apples podridas.- Come to give you a kiss! He said the woman, beside himself pleased. Thank you, my husband! You want me to tell you what happened to me? As soon as you had gone, I started thinking about what food could prepare for return; I thought that it would be best leek pancake. The eggs had them, but I lacked the leeks. I went then to house the teacher. I know of some who have leeks, but you know what it's avaricious women. I asked him to lend me a few. "Lend? 'I replied. We have nothing in the garden, not a bad rotten apple. Neither can lend you an apple." But now I can lend her ten, what I say! a whole sack. What fun, little father! -. And he gave another beso.- Magnificent 'said the Englishmen. Always down and always happy! This is not paid with money -. And they paid a hundredweight of gold to the peasant, receiving kisses instead of puñadas.Sí, sir, always wins when the woman does not tire of declaring that the parent understands everything, and what he does, well done está.Ésta is the story I heard as a child. Now You know it too, and do not forget: what the parent does, is well done.
The four clever brothers	1223	653	Spanish	Once upon a poor man who had four children. When they were older, he called and said: - My children, it's about you leave that for these worlds, because I have nothing to give you. Id to other countries, learn a trade and open yourselves earnestly camino.Dispusiéronse the four to leave and, after saying goodbye to his father, departed together. At the end of some time walking aimlessly they reached a crossroads, of departing roads in four directions. And said Major: - Here we parted. Within four years, on this same day and place, we will reconvene. Meanwhile, that each seek their fortune lado.Marcharon each in one direction. The first he met a man who asked him where he was and what his Purpose.- want to learn a trade - answered the muchacho.- Come with me. You will learn to be a thief - answered the desconocido.- No - she replied the young man - this is not an honorable profession. Fear not, It always ends clapper horca.- Oh why! I only teach to appropriate what no one else could get, and so that there is rastro.El boy was persuaded, and to the side of the man learned to be a perfect thief, so clever, that when he had taken with an object , she fell hopelessly in their hands.The second brother found another guy who asked the same question: what aprender.- still did not want to know - respondió.- in this case, come with me and be astrologer. There is no better job, because nothing that you will oculte.Gustóle the idea to the young, and became an accomplished astrologer. At the end of his apprenticeship, he said goodbye to his teacher, and he gave him a telescope and said: - With this you can see what is happening on earth and in heaven. Nothing will hide your mirada.Al third brother adiestrólo a hunter, teaching him all the tricks and resources of his art, with such exploitation by the disciple, who came made a montero accomplished. At the leave, the teacher gave her a gun and said: - Where you put your eye, you will go beyond the bullet; you will miss the puntería.Finalmente ever, the youngest brother also met a passerby who asked for his Purposes.- Would not you like to be tailor? - dijo.- you do not know - he answered the boy -. That of spending hours with her legs crossed, from morning to night, and be continually driving the needle and iron, not seduce me, much menos.- Do not say it! - cried the man -. You speak of what you saw; but me learn a different, decent, productive, and very honorable art incluso.Dejóse persuade the boy, he went to the tailor and thoroughly learned his profession. When fired, finished learning, his employer gave him a needle, saying - With her sewing as you can come to hand, even as hard as steel; and will remain so well put together, it will not be the costura.Cuando and had passed four years agreed, the brothers met again in the same place where they had separated, and, after hugging and kissing, returned to her parents .- Very good! - he exclaimed the father, happy -. Another time the wind brings you to me? Them his wanderings and they told him what each had learned. Sat together under a tree that stood in front of the house, the father said I'm going to try you. I want to see what you are capable -. And, looking up, said to the second son at the top of this tree, between two branches, there is a nest of finches. Tell me how many eggs contiene.Cogió the astrologer his telescope and directing it to the nest, he replied: - Cinco.Entonces the father turned to the mayor: - Go get the eggs without noticing the bird that is skillful thief climbed to the incubando.El tree and the bird without noticing anything or were moving from the nest, removed the body from under the five eggs and dropped to his father. It took them the old, he placed one on each edge of the table, and the fifth in the middle, and told the hunter: - Single shot you leaving two the huevos.El five boy shotgun burst into the face, shot and split in half five eggs a shot. Apparently used a powder able to turn around the esquina.- now up to you - the father said to the younger son -. You are going to sew the eggs, chicks and even inside, so that the effects will not see the tailor of the disparo.Sacó her needle and proceeded to sew as his father asked. When he was done, the thief returned to the nest eggs, placing them under the bird that hatched without him noticing it. And a few days later born with a small red strip around the neck, where sew the sastre.- Okay - said the old man to his children -. I have to felicitaras for your success. Have used the time, learning useful things, and would not know which of the four give preference. This will be presented as a chance to apply your artes.Poco time later there was great commotion in the country, because a dragon had kidnapped the daughter of the King. He spent ruminating day and night, and so, sent a proclamation that whoever rescued marry her. Then they said the brothers - Here's a chance to distinguish ourselves - and together they proposed to release from the princesa.- soon know where he is - said the astrologer, and looking through his telescope, he said -: I see it; It is far from here, on a rock in the middle of the sea. Beside him is a dragon that guarda.Presentóse to the King, the apprentice must give a boat for him and his brothers and all four went to sea, bound for the rock. To reach it saw the daughter of the King, with the dragon asleep in her lap. Hunter said: - I can not shoot, it would also kill the princesa.- I'm going to intervene - said the thief, and, gliding to the place, llevóse the maid so lightly and agility, the monster did not realize anything and he he snored. We thrilled, ran to board again and set sail without delay. But the dragon, that awakening had not found the princess, stormed out in pursuit, gliding through the air with terrifying snort. When and it hovered over the ship and was about to rush over him, pointing the hunter with shotgun, fired a bullet that pierced his heart. He was killed the monster; but it was so huge that, the collapse of the ship, destroyed it completely. The castaways were able to hold on to a draw and were floating on the surface of the waves, in apuradísima situation. But the tailor, without thinking twice, taking his marvelous needle, sewed tables hastily with a few stitches and, from them, caught all parts of the boat, sewing them so perfectly that, a little while, the ship again found seaworthy, and the brothers could arrive happily to his patria.El King felt an immense joy to the back to see his daughter, and said to the four brothers - One of you will receive it for his wife. Decide who is to live ser.Suscitóse then a dispute between them, since each claiming their rights. The astrologer said: - If I had not discovered the princess, nothing would have served your arts. Therefore it belongs to me.The thief observed: - What would have served discover, if I had not brought out from the clutches of the dragon? Mine is, pues.Y the hunter: - The Princess and you had all been destroyed by the monster. My bullet delivered you out of his clutches. Accordingly, it is me who corresponde.Y the tailor, in turn: - And if I, with my art, I would not have recomposed the boat, all would have died by drowning. It is therefore mía.Intervino then the King: - You all have equal rights; but as the princess may not be everyone will not be none. Instead, I give each one a part of the kingdom in compensación.Satisfizo offering the brothers, who said: - It's better this than being born disputes between us.And each received a quarter of the kingdom, and all lived happy with his old father for as long as it pleased God.
The Twelve Apostles	1905	766	Spanish	Three hundred years before the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, he lived a mother who had twelve children. And it was so poor and was much needed, did not know how to continue to keep. He prayed every day to God for the grace of their children encontrasen on Earth when it came to the promised Messiah. As more misery, the mother was sending one after another, for the world to earn a living. The eldest was named Pedro. He left and the end of a long day, came to a large forest. He was looking for the exit, but only managed to get lost more and more. And so hungry, I could hardly hold it up. In the end, the weakness forced him to lie, convinced he would die, when suddenly, he was presented with a child, gleaming, beautiful and kind as an angel. The small patted to draw the attention of Peter, who, looking up, raped her. Then said the child: - What are you doing there so sad - Oh! - Pedro answered -. I'm running world to earn my bread and catch a glimpse of the promised Messiah, as this is my greatest deseo.- Come, your wish will be realized - said the boy -. And he took Peter by the hand, led him to a large cave that was between some rocks. A coming into it, it was an ember gold, silver and crystal, and in the center, were twelve aligned cots. then the angel said: - Lie down in the first and get some sleep; mecer.Hízolo'll Peter and the angel sang and waved until he was asleep. And while he slept, the second brother came also accompanied by his guardian angel, who waved and slept in turn, singing the lullaby; and so on all the others, in turn, until the twelve were asleep in the twelve golden cradles. And they slept for three hundred years until the night he came to the world the Redeemer. Then they woke up and lived with him on Earth. They were the twelve apostles.
The twelve huntsmen	636	884	Spanish	Once lived a prince who had a fiancée whom he was very much in love. Finding himself at his side, happy and content, he came the news that the King, his father was terminally ill and wanted to see him one last time before giving his soul. Then the young man said to his beloved: - must leave and leave; Here I give you a ring as a souvenir. When I am king, I will find you and take you to palacio.Montó on horseback and went to see his father; to arriving at her bed, King was at the gates of death. Said thus: - beloved Son, I wanted to see you before I die. Promise me you will marry according to my will-and he named a certain princess, destined him for a wife. The young man was so distraught that without remembering anything, exclaimed: - Yes, my father, as I will want you and the King closed his eyes and murió.Ya proclaimed king's son and ended the period of mourning, had to fulfill the promise he made to his father. He sent them to request the hand of the princess, which was granted. To the knowing his former fiancee, grieved him so that infidelity of her boyfriend, who was on the verge of dying. Then said his father - daughter dear, why are you so sad? Tell me what you want and tendrás.Permaneció girl thoughtful for a moment, then replied: - My father, I had eleven girls are exactly the same that I face, figure and talla.Y King said: - If possible, your wish will be fulfilled-and ordered inquiries to be made throughout the kingdom, until eleven identical maidens found her daughter in face, figure and estatura.Al reach the palace of the princess, it ordered twelve dresses confeccionasen hunter, all the same, and she and eleven girls put them. then he took leave of his father and horse riding all, dirigiéronse to the court of her former boyfriend, whom he loved. He asked there if needed huntsmen, and asked the King that the twelve Tomase his service. Viola King without recognizing it, but they were so all bets and good-looking, who accepted the offer, and the twelve maidens became the twelve huntsmen of the Rey.Pero it was a lion, animal prodigy, who knew all things hidden and secret ; and one night he told the king: - think you have twelve huntsmen, right? - Yes answered the king, they are twelve huntsmen. Lion continued: - You're wrong; There are twelve maidens. And the king replied: - Not true. How do you test - Oh! He said the animal-, all you have to do scatter peas in his antechamber. Men walk with firm step, and when pisen peas will not ever moves even one; Instead, the women go to little steps, hop around and drag their feet, so they will roll all guisantes.Parecióle good advice to the King, and sent peas spread by the suelo.Pero a servant of the King, who was addicted to huntsmen, and she heard evidence that they were going to submit, went to them and told them what ocurría.- the lion King want to show that girls are -Les dijo.Diole thank the princess and her companions said: - Make yourselves strength and pisad firm on guisantes.Cuando, the next morning, the king sent for his presence at twelve huntsmen on through these anteroom where they were scattered peas, they did so with step so firm, that neither He moved from one place or rolled on the ground. Once had retired, the King said to the lion: - You lied to me; hombres.Y walk like the lion replied: - They knew they would be tested and strength were made. Send for the antechamber twelve spinning wheels; You will see how to rejoice at seeing them, which would not make a good hombre.Parecióle to the King's advice, and commanded to put the spinning wheels in the vestíbulo.Pero the servant friend of the huntsmen hastened to reveal the trap that they tended, and the princess told her companions, to the being alone with them: - force yourselves and do not you turn to look at the tornos.A the morning, when the King summoned the twelve huntsmen, all crossed the threshold without making a case hilar.Y winches King repeated the lion: - you lied to me; They are men, for they have not even looked at the tornos.A what the lion replied: - They knew you were going to try and have done fuerza.Pero King refused to continue giving credit to the león.Los twelve huntsmen always accompanied the king in their hunts, and the monarch every day more aficionaba them. Happened that, being a day of hunting, came the news that the King's fiancee was about to arrive. At the hearing it the true bride, she felt such shame, giving heart sank, fell to the ground senseless. King thinking that an accident had happened to his montero preferred ran to his aid and took the glove. A seeing on the ring finger one day give his fiancee, looked at his face and recognized her. Thrilled, he kissed her and opening her eyes, she said: - You are mine and I am yours, and nobody in the world can change this hecho.Y thereupon sent an emissary with orders to beg another princess who returned to his country, since he already had a wife, and who has found the old key did not need a new one. Then the wedding, and the lion regained the favor of the King, because, after all, had told the truth.
The twelve brothers	80	451	Spanish	Once upon a time a king and a queen who lived in great peace and contentment with his twelve children, all boys. One day, King told his wife: - If the child has to have a child now must die twelve elders, that the inheritance is greater and that the kingdom to ella.Y, so He set up twelve coffins and fill wood chips, also placing in each pad. Then had them taken in a closed room, and gave the key to the Queen, with orders not to tell anyone a word of all I ello.Pero mother spent her sad and tearful days until his youngest son, who never he was separated from his side and that he had named Benjamin, as in the Bible, he said, to the end: - Mother, why are you so sad - Oh, my son! -respondióle her, I can not decírtelo.Pero small and not left idle, and so one day she opened the door of the room and showed him the twelve coffins full of chips, saying: - My Precious Benjamin, your father had these coffins made for you and your eleven brothers; for if I bring to the world a child, all of you will die and you will be buried in them.And as he did that revelation bitter tears, he wanted the son comforted her and said: - Do not cry, dear mother; and we find the way out of trouble. Look, we marcharemos.Respondió her then: - Go to the forest with your eleven brothers, and that one of you is always on call, perched on top of the tallest tree and looking at the tower of the palace. If a child is born, I will put up a white flag, and then you can return all; but if it's a girl, I'll put a red flag. Flee in this case as fast as you can, and God help and save you. I get up every night to pray for you: in winter, a fire that will warm you are not missing; and in summer, to not suffer too calor.Después to bless their children, they left them in the woods. Turn standing guard, one of them climbed to the top of the tallest oak, staring at the tower. After eleven days the turn came to Benjamin, who saw hoisted a flag. Oh! It was not white but red as blood, and warned them that they should die. A I hear the brothers, said angry: - What we have to die from a girl! We swear revenge. When we find a girl, her red blood shall flow. Adentráronse in the jungle, and in the thickest part of it, where only light came on, found a haunted house and uninhabited: - We will live here, they said. You, Benjamin, you are the youngest and weakest, you'll stay at home and take care of her, while the others went looking comida.Y they went to the forest to hunt hares, roe deer, birds, popcorn and all that was good to eat. Benjamin had everything, which she cooked and prepared him to satisfy the hunger of the brothers. They lived together ten years and the truth is that time were not made largo.Entretanto had grown the girl who gave birth to the Queen; It was beautiful, very good heart, and had a gold star in the middle of the forehead. One day in the palace were cast, was among twelve shirts clothes man and asked his mother: - Whose are these twelve shirts? Because my father could use pequeñas.Le Queen replied with a heavy heart: - My little daughter, are your twelve hermanos.- And where are my twelve brothers said the girl. Nobody ever told me about them: The Queen then said: - Where are, only God knows. They shall wander through the vast world. And, taking her daughter to the locked room, he opened the door and showed him the twelve coffins full of chips and corresponding pads: - These -díjole- coffins were destined for your brothers, but they fled to the forest before you were born -and she told him everything that happened. then he told the girl: - Do not cry, my dear mother, I will go in search of my hermanos.Y taking the twelve shirts set off, into the thick bosque.Anduvo all day, and dusk came to the haunted house . At the entering it found a young boy, who asked him: - Where do you come from and what matters here? -maravillado of her beauty, of his royal dresses and star shining in his frente.- am the daughter of the King, 'she replied, and am seeking my twelve brothers; and I'm willing to walk under the blue sky, until the encuentre.Mostróle at the same time the twelve shirts, which Benjamin knew it was his hermana.- I am Benjamin, your brother Menor- said. The girl began to mourn for joy, like Benjamin, and hugged and kissed with great fondness. Then the boy said: - Hermanita mine, remains an obstacle. We have agreed that every girl who die in our hands we find, as a girl because we had to leave our reino.A what she replied: - I will willingly die, if so I can save my hermanos.- No not replied Benjamín, you will not die; thyself beneath this tub until they reach the remaining eleven; I'll talk to them and thus convenceré.Hízolo niña.Ya nightfall, returned from hunting others and they sat at the table. As they ate Benjamin asked: - What's New To which his brother replied: - Do not know nothing - they said them.- Yea, have been in the woods and know nothing, and instead? I've stayed at home, I know more than you? As I said the chiquillo.- pidieron.- tell us about 'I Am I promise not to kill the first girl we meet - Yes cried All-, the forgive; but tell us and what sepas.- Then Benjamin said: - Our sister is here-and, raising Cuba, left under it the princess with her royal dresses and golden star on the forehead, prettier and more delicate than Ever How they are all pleased and how he took to his neck, kissing her with all tenderness! the girl stayed home with Benjamin to help with household chores, while the other eleven took to the woods deer hunting, birds and popcorn to fill the pantry . Benjamin and sister cared for stewing what traían.Ella would look for firewood, and edible herbs, and took care to always put the pot at home in time to return to the other encontrasen the food ready. Ocupábase also in cleaning the house and washing clothes of the little beds, so they were all neat and whitest time. Hallábanse brothers thrilled with it, and so they all lived in great unity and harmony. Here one day the two children prepared a tasty meal, and when all were assembled, held a veritable feast; They ate and drank, happier than a pascuas.Pero happened enchanted cottage had a little garden, in which grew twelve lily flowers, which are also called "students." The girl, wanting to give to his brothers, twelve cut flowers, to give one each for the meal. But at the very moment that she plucked the boys they became so many ravens, and flew away over the forest, at the same time that the house and garden are also vanished. The poor girl was alone in the middle of dark forest, and coming back to look around, he found himself with an old woman who stood beside him and said: - My daughter. What have you done? Why you touched the twelve white flowers? They were your brothers, and have now been converted into ravens forever. To which he replied the girl, crying: - Is there, then, no way to save them - not said the old woman?. There is only one in the world, but it is so difficult you can not liberate your brothers should spend as dumb for seven years without speaking a word or laugh. A single word that pronunciases, but missing only one hour of the seven years, and all your sacrifice would have been useless: that word kill your hermanos.Díjose then the princess in her heart: "I'm sure it will redeem my brothers . " And he sought a high tree, climbed it and there was spinning, without a word or laugh nunca.Sucedió, however, that entered the forest a King, who was hunting. She wore a large greyhound, which ran to the tree that served as home to the princess and started jumping around, barking incessantly. In approaching the King and see the beautiful girl with the star on his forehead, I was so captivated by her beauty that asked her to be his wife. She did not answer him in words, only made a sign with his head slightly so. Then he climbed the King to the tree, fell to the girl, mounted his horse and took her to the palace. The wedding was solemnized with great solemnity and rejoicing, but the bride neither spoke nor smiled once. At the end of a few years to live happily with each other, the mother of the king, wicked woman if any, started slander the young queen, saying to his son: - it is a vulgar beggar that you've brought home; who knows what evil villainy will be scheming in secret. If he is dumb and can not speak, he could even laugh; but who never laughs not clean the conciencia.Al first the King would not lend ears; but he insisted both old and accused many evils which, in the end, the King was persuaded and sentenced her to muerte.Encendieron in court a pira, where the queen was scorched die. From a high window, King watched the execution with tearful eyes, because he still loved her despite everything. And behold, when it was already tied to the pole and the flames began to lick his clothes, rang the second last of the seven years of his penitencia.Oyóse then a great rush of wings in the air, and twelve ravens came, who declined to perching on the floor. they had not played well, they became the twelve brothers, redeemed by the sacrifice of the princess. They hastened to disperse the pyre and put out the flames, untied her sister and hugged and kissed tiernamente.Y since it could now open my mouth and speak, she told the King the reason for his silence and why he never laughed. King was glad much to the convinced he was innocent, and the two lived together and very happy until his death. Wicked mother in law had to appear before a court and was convicted. Put into a barrel filled with boiling oil and venomous snakes, found in it a gruesome death.
The two hikers	1013	613	Spanish	The valleys and mountains never encounter, but men, especially good with the bad. This happened once with a tailor and a shoemaker who had gone out into the world. The tailor was a tiny and friendly fellow, always cheerful and in good spirits. He saw the shoemaker, which came from the opposite direction, and he gathered up his office for the package he was carrying, welcomed him with a mocking ditty coming, "Cose sewing, pull the twine, dale Recio sole dura.ponle fish behind and ahead. "But the shoemaker was a man who could not stand jokes and scrunching his face as if he had swallowed vinegar, he made a move to catch the other by the neck. The tailor laughed and, holding out his wineskin, he said - was not to disturb him. Come on, baby, that dissolves cobbler came bilis.El steepened elbow, and the storm on his face began to subside. Returning the boot to the tailor, he said - I've had a good talk to your boot. There is talk of much drinking, but little of the very thirsty. What do you think if we stay together - there is no problem for me - answered the tailor - so we go to a big city where we lack not work.- was precisely my intention - said the shoemaker. - In a nest there is nothing to gain, and in the field, people prefer to go descalza.Y, so they went on their way together always putting one foot in front of the other, as the weasel by nieve.Tiempo wealth; but it is something to chew on, now that was wrong. Whenever they came to a city, they were each one by hand to greet the masters of their respective trades. At the tailor, for his cheerful temper and rosy cheeks, everyone welcomed favorably and regaled, and sometimes even was lucky enough to catch a kiss daughter of the pattern behind the door. At the reconvened with the shoemaker, his backpack was always the most crowded. The other received it with his face Jeremiah, and decíale, wincing: - Just lucky rogues But the tailor would laugh and sing, and his companion started with what he had collected!. As sound heard two dogs fat in your pocket, He lacked time to spend them in the tavern; pure happy, drummed her fingers on the table, clinking the. It could be said that "easy to win .. easy to spend." They had enough time traveling together, when they arrived one day at a huge forest through which passed the road from the capital of the kingdom. You had to choose between two paths: one that ran in seven days, and the other in only two; but they did not know what was the shortest. They sat under an oak tree to discuss the situation and consider how many days should be bread. Shoemaker said: - It is always better to err on the side rather than less; I'll take bread seven days.- How? - she replied the tailor. - Go like a donkey loaded with bread for seven days, and can even become a peek? I trust God and not worry. Take the money in your pocket is as good in winter as in summer; but the bread will dry in this heat, and also enmohecerá. Why make the long sleeve arm? Why should we not take the short way? Bread for two days, and already bien.Y, so everyone bought the bread that he thought, and went into the forest, good for Dios.La forest was quiet as a church; not was not a breath of wind; neither the sound of a brook or the chirping of a bird was heard; and the tangle of thick foliage or did not enter a sunbeam. The shoemaker walked wordlessly, weighed down under the weight of the bread on his back; Sweat poured down the face sullen and gloomy. Instead, the tailor moved cheerful, jumping up and down, whistling through a rolled sheet as a flute or singing ditties, and, meanwhile, was thinking. "Our Lord must be pleased to see me so happy" So they followed the things for two days; but when, in the third, he saw the tailor who did not reach the end of the forest and had eaten all their provision of bread, cayósele the soul to toe. He wasted no mood, however, trusting in God and in his good fortune. That night the hungry lay down under a tree, and the next morning woke up hungrier still. So he passed the fourth day; and when the shoemaker, sitting on a fallen log, began to eat their reserves, the other had to be content with him. A Asking a piece of bread, his companion laughed mockingly and said - You've always been cheerful; it is also desirable to know what it is to be sad. A birds singing at dawn, eats the kite by the night.The a word, he was harder than a rock. The morning of the fifth day, the poor tailor and had no strength to get up, and such was his weakness, he could barely utter a word; He had pale cheeks, and eyes bloodshot. Then said the shoemaker: - I'll give you a piece of bread today; but, instead, will draw the eye derecho.El you tailor unhappy, anxious to save life, he had no choice but to come to terms; cried for the last time with both eyes, and then ofrecióse to the stone-hearted shoemaker, who with a sharp knife, cut out his right eye. then Vinole to tailor the memory it used to tell his mother when he was eating candy in the pantry: "You have to eat what you can, and have to suffer what is owed." Once finished the bread that had just paid so dearly, he rose again and, forgetting his misfortune, he tried to console himself with the idea that with one eye also fix. But the sixth day he returned to torment hunger, and felt himself lose heart. At dusk he collapsed at the foot of a tree, and the morning of the seventh day, he could no longer sit up and felt death in her throat. Then said the shoemaker: - I'll show compassion and give you another piece of bread, but not free; in exchange for the bread you out the eye queda.Reconoció then you tailor the way of their behavior and asking God's forgiveness, he said to his companion: - Do what you want. I will suffer what is necessary. But he considers that God our Lord judges when you least think, and it will come the time when you will have to answer the evil deed with me without having to commit deserved. In prosperous days as I handed you had. To practice my craft needed a stitch following the other; once lost sight and can not sew, I will have no recourse but to beg my bread. All I ask is that when you are blind, do not leave me here, where he died of hambre.El shoemaker, who had banished God from his heart, took the knife and emptied his left eye. Then gave him a piece of bread and, putting a stick in his hand, he let the tailor will siguiera.Al sunset, came out of the woods. In a field opposite the gallows stood. Shoemaker led to her blind tailor and left him there, he followed his way. Exhausted by fatigue, pain and hunger, the poor man fell asleep and did not wake up all night. At the crack of dawn, he awoke without knowing where he was. Of the gibbet they hung the bodies of two poor sinners, and the head of each had posed a jackdaw. And behold, the two executed engaged in the following dialogue: - Candles, brother? - asked one.- Yes - replied ANOTHER: Well in this case I'll tell you one thing - he went first; - and it is the dew tonight has befallen us, from the gallows, gives sight to wash with it. If they knew the blind regain sight many who now believe imposible.Al the tailor heard this, he took out his handkerchief and pressed it on the grass, which was wet with dew; and washed with him the empty sockets. At the moment he fulfilled what he had said Hangman: a new pair of fresh and healthy eyes welled up in the empty sockets of the wanderer. In the little time he saw the sun rising from behind the mountains and the plains, the great city stood with its magnificent gates and hundred towers, topped by crosses of gold, which shone a great distance. He could distinguish each of the leaves of the trees, and birds passed in rapid flight, and mosquitoes dancing in the air. Sacóse pocket of a sewing needle, and checking that could thread it as surely as before, his heart leapt for joy in his chest. Kneeling down, gave thanks to God for the great grace and prayed the morning prayer, remembering to entrust to our Lord the souls of poor sinners hanging there, the wind was bumping into each other, which bell clappers. then charging the herd back and forgetting the penalties incurred, the route resumed silbando.Lo first singing and he encountered was a brown horse jumping freely around the field. Grabbing him by the hair, she wanted to ride horse to enter the city. But the animal begged him not to deprive him of his liberty: - I'm still too young - he said. - Up to a tailor as light as you would break my spine. Let me run until it is over grown. May come a day when you can run all you want pagártelo.- Well - said the tailor. - Well I see that you are also a loca.Y head with his staff gave him a tap on the back, so the animal had a pair of jumps of joy with the hind legs and walked off to a brisk trot, jumping fences and moats. But the tailor had not eaten since the day before. "It is true that the sun fills my eyes - it was said - but now I need bread fill my mouth first thing to find and is only mildly edible, she was charged.." Soon he saw a stork, who was very seriously for prado.- Stop! - he cried the tailor grabbing her by a pata.- not know if you're good to eat, but my hunger will not let me choose. I have no choice but to cut off your head and asarte.- Do not do it - said the stork - because I am a sacred bird, whom no damages and that provides great benefits to humans. If you respect my life, maybe someday I can recompensártelo.- Well, go, go away, leggy! - cried the tailor; and the stork, rising with hanging legs flew peacefully. "What I do now - preguntóse the tailor;? -. My hunger increases at times, and my stomach more and more empty first thing that crosses my path is lost." And, almost at the same moment, he saw a pair of ducks that were swimming in a charca.- You come as fallen from the sky - he said, and grabbing one of them, he set out to wring his neck; and, behold, an old duck which was wedged between the reeds, began to squawk loudly, and going swimming with beak open wide, he begged and pleaded to be pity on his hijos.- Do not you think - he said - in grief that your mother would if you saw someone had to eat - Calm - said the kindly tailor; - Stay with your children - and again take to the water which had taken. At the turn he found himself facing an old medium hollow tree and saw many wild bees entering the trunk and out of him.- A to receive the reward of my good deed - he said - this honey will comfort me -. But he left the queen, threatening, and said: - If you touch my people and we destroy the nest, our stings are nailed to your body like ten thousand red needles. But if you leave us alone and go your way, one of these days you will pay a good servicio.Vio the tailor that either on that side could solve their hunger. "Three empty plates - said to himself, - and the fourth with nothing, bad food is this." Arrastróse to the city on an empty stomach, and arrived just as the noon hour, a covered soon prepared at the inn and could sit at the table right away. And satisfied his hunger, he said. "Now, to work" He went around the city in search of a pattern, and quickly found a good job. As he was skilled at his craft, soon he acquired great reputation; everyone wanted to wear suits tailor made for the stranger. His prestige grew at times. "I can not go further in my art - he said - and yet, every day I better things go." In the end, the king appointed him tailor Corte.Pero see how things go in the world. On the same day the palace was named Shoemaker his former traveling companion. A seeing it to the tailor and check that his eyes had recovered and with them up, his face darkened. "I have to prepare a trap before he can take revenge," he thought. But who digs a trench to another, usually fall into it. One evening, finished the day's work, presented himself to the King and said: - Lord King, the tailor is an insolent; has boasted that it would be able to recover the gold crown was lost most holy time.- Long ago I would - said the King, and sending the tailor appear before him the next morning, he said he had to bring the crown or leave the city forever. "Dear me - he thought the tailor;! -. Only one rogue promises more than it needs Since the King is determined to require me what anyone can do, the better not wait until tomorrow, but leave town tonight." And he made his herd and set off. But when he reached the door felt sorrow at the thought that he had to give up his fortune and leave that city that had gone so well. A arriving next to the pond where he had made friends with the ducks, found himself with old whose children spare his life, he was on the shore preening with its beak. Reconocióle the bird and asked why so walked cabizbajo.- Do not miss them when you know the reason - answered the tailor - and told him sucedido.- If not more than that - he said - we can fix it. The crown fell to the water and lying on the bottom; in a jiffy the we will draw; You, meanwhile, stretch out your handkerchief in orilla.Y, along with his twelve ducklings plunged, only to reappear five minutes on the surface with the crown on the wings, surrounded by twelve small that swimming around him helped hold the peaks. So they came to earth and placed the crown on the handkerchief. You can not imagine what that splendid jewel, which, under the rays of the sun, sparkled like a hundred thousand rubies. He tied the tailor handkerchief by four corners and took her to the King, who delighted in prize hung a gold chain on his neck sastre.Al see the shoemaker that his ploy had failed, devised another and said to the king: - Lord the tailor has returned to insolent. It boasts that could play in wax around the royal palace, exterior and interior, along with all the things that encierra.Llamó the King to the tailor and ordered him to reproduce it in wax the royal palace with everything locked, exactly, both in the inside as on the outside; warning that failure to do so, or if missing only a nail in the wall, it would be locked up for the rest of his life in an underground dungeon. He thought the tailor: "It gets increasingly difficult, this does not hold anyone," and, throwing back the herd, marchóse second time. Which was arrived to the hollow shaft, he sat to rest, sad and sulky. They flew bees and the queen asked her if she had numbed her neck, as she saw his head as torcida.- Oh, no! - answered the tailor - is another thing that hurts me - and told him that the King had demanded. They stood bees buzzing among themselves and then said the queen: - Return home, and tomorrow at this time returns with a large handkerchief; bien.Mientras everything will be back to the city, the bees flew to the royal palace and, entering through the windows, they were ferreting every corner and taking note of all the details. Then back to the hive, they built a reproduction in wax of the building, with a speed that can not be imagined. At night he was ready, and when the tailor was presented the next morning, saw there stood the magnificent palace without him missing a nail on the wall or a tile of the roof; It was also very neat, white as snow and smelling of honey. Envolviólo the tailor carefully in his handkerchief and took him to the King, who did not know how to express his admiration. Put that wonder in the most spacious room palace, and gave it to the tailor a big house piedra.Pero the shoemaker, stubborn as stubborn, went to the King for the third time and said: - Lord, have reached the ears of the tailor in the palace courtyard no way to make water flow; He says it is capable of outputting a fountain in the center of the courtyard, as tall as a man and as the limpid water cristal.Mandó the tailor King arose, and said: - If, as you promised, not tomorrow springs in my yard a large stream of water, the executioner will send you right there cabeza.El cut the poor tailor did not think a long time, and hastened to leave the city; and since this time it was to save life, tears rolled down his cheeks. I walk so overcome by sadness, man came skipping the foal that once let loose and, grown, was at that time a beautiful steed bayo.- Has the time come - told - that I can pay you your good deed. I know what happens to you, and you will soon remedy. Ride me; I now carry two as tú.Recobró tailor tempers, and jumped up on the back of the animal, undertook this galloping towards the city and, entering it, he did not stop until the courtyard of the palace. Once there, she took three full turns around with the speed of lightning, and the third, fell dead. At the same time he was heard a cracking sound terrible, and flying through the air a piece of land in the center of the courtyard, elevóse running water to the height of a man on horseback; and limpid water was like glass, and the rays of the sun danced in their drops. To view the King could not suppress a cry of admiration and out to the patio, embraced the tailor in the presence of all Corte.Pero happiness did not last long. King had several daughters, each more beautiful, but no male. Shoemaker mean going for the fourth time to the Sovereign, said: - Lord, the tailor no dismounts from his arrogance. Today it has boasted that if he pleased, would bring him to the King a son flying through the aires.Otra once summoned the monarch to the tailor, and spoke as follows: - If within nine days are able to give me a son, you marry my oldest daughter "really, the reward is great - thought the man - and worth trying to get it;. but cherries hanging very high, and if I get to pick them run the risk of break a branch and me headfirst. " He went home, instalóse cross-legged on his desk and stood to reflect on the case legs. "For this really no solution !," - he said at the end -. I will leave, here you can not live in peace "Lio again his bundle and left the city but he reached a meadow, behold, he saw his old friend the stork, who was walking philosophically.. From time to time stopped to look at a frog, who had just swallowed the zancuda man came to saludarlo.- I see. - he said -. you wear the knapsack on his back Why abandon the city Contole the tailor what the King had demanded, what? he could not keep, and lamented his bad suerte.- Bah !, so do not worry - said stork. - I'll get you out of trouble many centuries ago that led to the city to newborn children. ; I will not cost much draw from the source to a prince Return home and sleep quietly within eight days you show up at the royal palace acudiré.El tailor went home and on the appointed day presented himself at the palace to him.... Before long the stork came flying and knocked on the window, opened it the tailor, and leggy friend walked cautiously forward stalked across the pavement polished marble. He is carrying in its beak a beautiful child like an angel, who stretched the hands to the Queen. Depositólo in her lap, and Queen kissed and caressed, beside himself with joy. Before resuming the flight, stork, sliding down the travel bag, it also gave the Sovereign. Dragees and cornets containing sugared almonds, which were distributed among the princesses. A most did not give him anything; but, instead, received by the sastrecillo.- cheerful husband makes me the same effect - it said - that if I had dropped the jackpot lottery. Reason had my mother saying, as usual, "With trust in God and luck, everything can be achieved." The shoemaker drew up shoes with which the tailor danced the wedding day, and then was ordered to leave the city. The forest path led him to the gallows, where he lay down to rest, exhausted by rage, anger and heat of the day. At the going to sleep, down two rooks perched on the heads of the executed and put out his eyes. He entered the woods running like crazy, and probably died of hunger and thirst, since no one ever came to know of his whereabouts.
The two brothers	100	450	Spanish	The brother took his sister's hand and spoke as follows: - Since mother died we have had good days; stepmother beats us every day, and if we approach it kicks us. We have nothing crusts of stale bread left over, and even the dog under the table, passes it better than us, because occasionally they throw a good bite. God help us! If you see our mother! You know what? Come with me, running world.And were walking all day through meadows, fields and scree, and when it started to rain, said the sister: - It's God and our hearts weep together evening came to a large forest, as wearied because of the pain, hunger and the long journey that, sitting in the hollow of a tree, soon stay dormidos.A the next morning, waking up, the sun was high in the sky and its rays they gave full in the tree. brother then said: - Sis, I'm thirsty; if I knew a fuentecilla would go to drink. I think I hear the murmur of una.Y getting up and grabbing the girl by the hand, they went in search of the source. But the wicked stepmother was a witch, and had not gone overlooked the escape of children. Sneaked after them, as only a sorceress knows how, he had bewitched all sources of the forest. A get them the edge of one stream flowing smoothly between the stones, the brother was going to drink. But the sister heard a voice that is rumored: "Whoever drinks from me will become a tiger, who drinks from me will become a tiger." Making it the sister cried - Do not drink, little brother, I beg you; ! If you do you will become tiger and me in pieces The brother endured thirst and drank, saying - wait for the next fuente.Cuando reached the second sister also heard muttering: "Whoever drinks from me will be transformed wolf, who drink me will be transformed into a wolf "Then the sister cried: - Do not drink, little brother, I beg you;. ! If you do you will become a wolf and eat me up The boy gave up drink, saying - I will wait until next spring; but she'll drink, tell you what you say, because I have a thirst irresistible.Cuando came to the third brook the sister heard, rumored, said: "Whoever drinks from me will become Corzo, who drinks from me will become Roe deer." And again the girl exclaimed: - Brother, I beg you, do not drink, because if you do you will become roe deer and run away from me But the brother had knelt and by the fountain and began to drink!. And behold, as the first drops touched his lips, was turned into a little sister corzo.La she began to mourn at the sight of his brother bewitched, and, meanwhile, also roe deer crying, lying sadly beside the girl. At the end it said: - Calm down, my cute gazelle; ! And never forsake you, untied her golden leagues, circled her neck roe deer; then she rushes and wove a ripped very soft cord. He tied her to the animal and kept going, getting deeper into the bosque.Anduvieron hours and so came to a little house; The girl looked in, and seeing it was deserted, he thought. "We might as well live here" With leaves and moss arranged a soft bed for the roe deer, and every morning went out to collect roots, fruits and nuts; for animal brought tender grass, he would eat from his hand, playing happy about his sister. At dusk, when the sister was tired, she had said her prayers, she laid her head on the back of a gazelle; It was his pillow, and gently fell asleep there. Too bad the brother had not kept its human form, because it would have been very dichosa.Algún a life long had since lived alone in the jungle, when behold, one day the king of the country held a great hunt. Sounded in the forest huntsmen's horns, the barking of the hounds and hunters joyous cries, and the gazelle hear them, she wanted to go to verlo.- Little sister said, let me go hunting I can not hold back any longer! And both insisted strongly that, in the end, she left him 'I recomendó- partir.- But again as night falls. I close the door to keep out those so rude hunters. And so you can meet, you will call, and say, "Sister, let me !." If you do not tell, do not abriré.Marchóse roe deer jumping. How good was free !. King and his companions saw the beautiful animal and rushed in pursuit; but they failed to catch him; for a moment believed it was his own, but roe deer slipped into the brush and disappeared. In the dark he returned to the house and called the puerta.- Little sister, let me in! The little door was opened, he entered he jumped and he removed all night sleeping in a tug on your fluffy lecho.A the next morning the hunt began anew, and no sooner he heard roe deer horn and "ho, ho!" Hunters, entróle great distress and said: - sister, let me, I want to leave The sister opened the door, reminding her: - You must return to the dark and repeat the words enseñé.Cuando you the King and his hunters saw again a gazelle from the golden collar again, they chased him, but the animal was too fast for them. The chase lasted all day, and so, towards evening, managed to surround him, and one of the huntsmen slightly wounded him in the leg, so he had to escape limping and barely able to run. A hunter followed him to the house and heard him shouting - Sis, let me saw then how the door opened and closed again immediately. The hunter took note and ran to tell the king what he had heard and seen; what the King said: - Tomorrow we will hunt again But the sister had a big scare to see that her fawn was wounded. Le stanched the blood, he applied some herbs and said: - Go to bed, dear roe deer, until you curado.Pero the wound was so slight that morning and had no trace of it; so once again echoing the din of the hunt, he said: - I can not resist; I must go. They do not catch me so easily sister, crying, remonstrated: -'ll kill you, and I will remain alone in the woods, abandoned by the world. Why, you do not loose - Then I'll die here despite the corzo- he said. When I hear the hunting horn I feel as if my legs were solas.La sister, unable to resist his entreaties, opened the door with a heavy heart, and the animal rushed into the forest, completely healthy and happy. At the view King told his hunters: - Acosadlo until evening, but nobody will make any daño.Cuando and the sun as it was, the king called the hunter and ledijo: - Now come and show me the little house in the woods . In arriving at the door, he called with these words: - Sister dear, let me open, and the king came, meeting face to face with a girl as beautiful as ever see another like it!. The maiden shrieked at seeing that the visitor was not the roe deer, but a man wearing a gold crown on his head. King, however, looked affectionately and, holding out his hand, said, - you go with me to the palace and be my wife? - Oh yeah! He replied the girl. But the fawn must come too; abandonarlo.- not want to remain with you while you live, and nothing will lack the King nodded. He entered this roe deer, and sister back to tie the rope of rushes and seizing Cape hand, they left the house of the forest.The King rode the beautiful girl on his horse and took her to the palace, where a little weddings were celebrated with great magnificence. The sister became Queen, and for some time they lived together happily; roe deer, tended and cherished, frolicked happily in the garden of the palace. Meanwhile, the evil stepmother, who had been the cause of children fleeing from home, was convinced that the sister had been devoured by wild beasts of the jungle, and brother, transformed into deer killed by hunters. At the hearing that they were happy and went so well, envy and resentment again stirred in his heart without leaving a moment of calm, and thought of nothing but the means to do again unhappy both hermanitos.La witch had a one-eyed daughter and ugly as night, continually reproaches made him and said: - Be queen! To me I should have touched this way, and not her.- Calm down Witch 'I replied, and reassuringly, said: - I know what I have to do, when it's hora.Transcurrido a while, the Queen gave light a beautiful child. Encountering the King of hunting, hag, taking the figure of the maid entered the room where the queen was lying and said: - Come, the bath is ready; It will relieve you and will give you strength. Quick, before it cools His daughter was with her, and between the two led to the Queen weak to the bathroom and got into the tub!; They closed the door and fled, after turning on the fourth a hellish fire, in a few moments drowned the beautiful young Reina.Realizada his misdeed, the old put a coif and her daughter lay in bed Queen. Prestóle also figure and appearance of it; all he could not return was the lost eye; so, so that the King would not notice the defect, told to remain lying on the side that was one-eyed. At dusk, return to the sovereign and learned that a son was born, was glad with all my heart and wanted to get closer to the bed of his wife to see how she was. But the old woman hurried to tell him - not for the world! Do not descorráis curtains; Queen can not see the light and needs rest! And the king withdrew, unaware that in his bed lay a false reina.Pero behold at midnight, when everyone was asleep, the nurse, who watched alone by cradle in the child's room, saw the door open and entered the real queen, who, bringing the self of the cradle, he picked her up and gave her suck. Mullóle pillow and then, after putting him down again, clothed him with the quilt. Nor he did not forget the roebuck, then, going to the corner where he lay, stroked her back. Done, he came out of the room with all stealth, and the next morning, the nurse asked the guards whether anyone had entered the palace at night; but they replied: - No, we have not seen nadie.La scene was repeated for many nights without the Queen never speak a single word. And while the nurse saw her every time she did not dare to tell nadie.Después a while, the Queen, breaking his silence, began to speak in his nightly visits, saying, "What my son does What does? ?. I'll come Corzo two nights, and no longer "The nanny did not answer; but when he had gone ran to inform the king everything that happened. King said: - My God, what does this mean?!. The next night will stay with me to ensure the niño.Y, to the dark, he entered the room of the little prince. The Queen appeared at midnight and said, "What my son does What does my Corzo'll come another night, and never again?." And after caring for the child as usual, disappeared again. King dared not speak to him; but also he went to watch the next night. And the Queen said: "What my son does What does my Corzo come this time, and never again?." The King, unable to control himself, he said: 'You can not be more than my dear wife! To which she replied: - Yes, I am your dear wife. And at that moment, by the mercy of God, he came to life, being fresh, rosy and healthy as before. King then told her the crime committed by the evil witch and her daughter, and the King ordered that both appear before a court. By this judgment, the daughter was taken to the woods, where they destroyed the beasts, while the witch, condemned to the stake, atoned for his crimes with a miserable death and cruel. And get the reduced to ashes, roe deer, transformed again, he regained his human figure, which the brother and brother lived happily together until the end of his days.
The two brothers	571	567	Spanish	There were once two brothers, rich one, and the other poor. The rich man had the office of goldsmith and was hard-hearted man. The poor man made a living making brooms, and was good and honorable. He had two children, twins and alike as two drops of water. The two children went occasionally to the house of the rich, where sometimes ate leftovers mesa.Sucedió the poor brother, being one day in the forest, where he had gone to pick up dry branches, saw a all golden bird, and as beautiful as ever see another like it. He picked up a stone and threw it, but only dropped a pen, and the animal escaped flying. Man picked up the pen and took his brother, who said: - It is pure gold-and paid his precio.Al next day he seated man a birch branches for a cut. And behold the tree flew the same bird, and man examining the place from where he had taken flight, he found a nest, and in it, an egg, which was gold. He picked up the egg and brought it to his brother, who again said: - It is pure gold-and paid the price. But he added: I would like entero.Volvió the poor bird to the forest, and saw again the bird perched on the tree. The felled by a stone and took his brother, who paid for her a bunch of GOLD.- Now I have to live, thought the man and went to his goldsmith very satisfecho.El house, which was intelligent and cunning, he knew very well what kind of bird it was. He called his wife and said: - ASAME this golden bird, and put very careful not to throw anything away, because I want to eat it I whole I solo.El bird was not like the others, but of a kind very wonderful: who ate his heart and his liver every morning would find a gold coin under his pillow. Woman conveniently meted the bird and skewered on the spit. But behold, while a fire, a time when women left the kitchen to attend to another task, entered the two sons of the poor broom and stood next to the grill, gave him a few laps few. And seeing that fell into the pan two pieces of the bird, said one: - We will eat these bits, because I have very hungry; no one will notice it -. And they ate one each. At that time the housekeeper came in, and seeing munching something, he asked: - What you eat - Two pieces that fell from the bird -respondieron.- They are the heart and liver! exclaimed frightened women; and that her husband will miss them and be angry, hastily he killed a chicken, ripped the heart and liver and stuffed into the bird. When he was already prepared the dish, sirviólo to the goldsmith, which merendó the whole, leaving nothing. But the next morning, raising the pillow to find the gold coin, did not appear nada.Los two children, meanwhile, were ignorant of the fate that had fallen to them. A getting up in the morning, they heard the clang of something falling to the ground, and the pick, saw that there were two gold coins. Lleváronlas his father, who exclaimed admiringly: - What was it that But seeing that the next day and all subsequent repeated the case, went to tell his brother?. He immediately understood what had happened, and that children had eaten the heart and liver of the bird; and because he was envious and hardhearted man, wanting revenge, the father said: - Your children have a pact with the devil. Do not take gold or let them stay longer in your house, because the devil has power over them and can bring your own pérdida.El father feared the devil, and although it broke his heart, took the twins to the forest and él.Los abandoned children wandering lost in the woods, looking for the way home; but not only they did not find him, but increasingly lost. Finally, they came upon a hunter, who asked: - Who are you, young - are the children of the poor escobero -respondieron them, and then explained that his father had driven from his home because every morning there was a gold coin below the respective almohadas.- Here! exclaimed the hunter, there is nothing wrong with it, provided that preserve you know good and do not give yourselves to laziness -. The good man, in love of children and not having own none, he took them home, diciéndoles-: I will be your father and I criaré.Y both learned the art of hunting, while his adoptive father was keeping gold coins found at each rising, in case they might need them someday. When they were grown, brought them one day the forest and said - going to do your test shot today, so you can emancipated and give the title of cazadores.Encamináronse together to paranza, where they remained long time stalking; but no parts were presented. Hunter looked up at the sky and saw a flock of wild ducks flying in a triangle, he said, then one of the boys: - Break down one of each extremo.Hízolo the boy, and so passed his test shot . A little while the drew near a second flock, featuring the form of two; the hunter sent to the other also tearing down one of each end, what the guy did with equal success. adoptive father then said: - I Now Pronounce emancipated; and teachers are cazadores.Internáronse then the two brothers in the woods and celebrating Council took a decision. A sit at the dinner table, told his protector: - will not touch food or take us to the smallest morsel mouth until you otorguéis us the grace we want pediros.- What is then? he asked. And they said - We have finished our learning; now we have to see the world; Give us permission to marcharnos.Replicó old, joyful: - So brave hunters speak; I ask what was my desire. Go away, you will have suerte.Y dined and drank happily. When the designated day for departure arrived, the adoptive father gave everyone a good gun and a dog, and every few gold coins wanted to take. Acompañólos then for some distance, and the firing them, they still gave a knife gleaming, saying - If ever you separate, clavad this knife into a tree where your paths separate. Thus each, when you return, you will know what has been the fate of the other; as the side to which he went, if he is dead, it appears full of rust; but while alive, the blade will brillante.Siguieron walk the two brothers until they reached a forest, so great that in a day could not leave it. Passed, then there night after eating the provisions that were in the backpack; They went without also finding the way out, and, as they remained nothing to eat one said: - We have to catch something if you do not want to starve-and, carrying his shotgun, he glanced around. Seeing that ran past a hare old, he pointed the gun, but the animal cried. "Dear hunter, not acortes my days, and in return I'll give you two of my offspring" and jumping into the bushes, appeared once with two leverets; but the animals seemed so happy and were so playful, hunters could not bring himself to kill them. They kept them therefore with them, and the two leverets followed meekly. Soon a fox appeared, and they set out to hunt; but the animal they shouted: "Dear hunter, not acortes my days, and in return I'll give you two of my young." And they brought two skunks that the hunters had not heart to kill; let them go in the company of leverets, and together they went on their way. A little while the wolf came out of the underbrush, and the shotgun hunters faced him; but the wolf shouted: "Dear hunter, not acortes my days, and in return I'll give you two of my young." The hunters gathered the cubs with other animals and continued walking. Until they discovered a bear not no feeling of wanting to die, he shouted at them in turn: ". Dear hunter, not acortes my days, and in return I'll give you two of my offspring" The two cubs started to increase entourage formed and eight animals. Who would say that he came to the end? Nothing less than a lion, shaking his mane. But the hunters, undaunted, pointed their weapons, and then the beast said also: ". Dear hunter, not acortes my days, and in return I'll give you two of my offspring" And when he had given her puppies, it turned out that hunters had two lions, two bears, two wolves, foxes, and two hares two, all of whom followed them and served. But in the meantime, hunger raging, so the foxes said: - Let's see, you, you are clever, procuradnos something to eat; bien.Y know this answered them: - Not far from here there is a people who have taken more than a chicken; will teach the camino.Llegaron to the people, they bought food for them and for animals and continued their route. The foxes knew the heart the region because it had many farmhouses with fowls, and could lead the cazadores.Después have missed a time unable to find any placement for the two together, they said: - This can not continue; no choice but to separarse.Repartiéronse animals, so that everyone remain a lion, a bear, a wolf, a fox and a hare, then parted, vowing brotherly affection to death, and nailed on a tree the knife he had given his adoptive father. That done, one headed east, and the other towards lower Poniente.El reached Cape little to a city, all of it covered with black crape. Alojóse in a hostelry, and asked the owner if he could also support their animals. The host led to a stable that had a hole in the wall, whereby the hare slipped, to return to a cabbage, and then the fox, a chicken licked, and then a cock. But the wolf, the bear and the lion, being more corpulent, they could not go, so the landlord led to a meadow where a cow was lying on the grass, and they realized in a jiffy . And fed their animals, the hunter asked the waiter why he was so enlutada the city. To which the man replied: - Why should die tomorrow the only daughter of our KING: Are you therefore deathly ill? asked the cazador.- not explained the host, he is fresh and healthy, and yet, must morir.- How understand this? He asked the forastero.- Hidden in the Woods stands a high mountain, where dwells a dragon. The monster threatens to devastate the whole country, if not every year delivers a virgin maiden. They have already been culled all the nation, and only is the daughter of the King, so, inevitably, must be delivered, and this is mañana.Dijo verify the young man: - Why not kill the dragon - Oh! He replied the host, many knights tried, and all lost their lives in the company. King has promised to give his daughter to wife and to name heir of the kingdom who ends the monstruo.El Hunter said nothing more; but the next morning he called his animals and set them climb the mountain of the dragon. At the top stood a small church, whose altar there were three chalices filled and the inscription: "who the content of chalices drink, will become the strongest man on Earth and will be able to handle the sword that lies buried in the doorway. " The hunter did not drink, but went outside and looked for the sword; but he was unable to move your site. He went back into the chapel and drained the contents of the vessels; at the time he acquired the strength to lift the weapon and even to swing with the greatest ligereza.Llegada the time the maiden was to be delivered to the dragon, took the mountain road, to accompany the King, Marshal and courtiers . The princess saw from afar the hunter at the summit and, thinking it was the dragon that awaited her, was reluctant to rise, but at the end, had to resign because it would otherwise have been destroyed the entire city. The King and his entourage returned to the palace plunged into deep sadness; only quarterback he had to stay to witness from afar what Princess ocurriera.Cuando reached the summit of the mountain, instead of the dragon met the young hunter, who infused spirits, saying he was there to save her, and introduced in the chapel, locking her inside. He came soon after, with a crash, the seven-headed dragon. At the sight of the hunter, and said, surprised: - What have you to do in this mountain To which the boy replied: - I came to fight contigo.- Many knights have left here life replied the monster; I will not be hard to kill you-and he began to fire fired for his seven jaws. That would fire burning in the dry grass and drowned the young man had not come running, their animals, which stomped the fire extinguished. And the dragon was hurled against the hunter, but he, brandishing his sword with such force that was whistling air, a blow will cut off three heads. With what fury the beast stood, spewing flames you against your enemy and getting ready to annihilate him! But the other, a second mandoble, cut three heads. The monster, almost exhausted, fell to the ground; but, gathering his last strength, even embistióle for the third time; Then the young man cut off his tail. He shot down and the monster hunter called his animals, which ran out of tear him apart. After the battle, the hunter opened the church door and found the princess lying on the floor meaningless because of the anguish and horror he suffered during combat. He drew it out and when he regained consciousness and opened his eyes, showed him the dismembered dragon and explained that he was free and redeemed. Was glad she greatly: - Now you're my husband dearly beloved, 'he said, because my father promised me to him who kills the dragón.Y, immediately afterwards, untying her necklace of coral, which he distributed to his animals to reward them by giving the lion brochecillo gold. The handkerchief was embroidered his name handed it to the hunter, who, after cutting the tongues of the seven heads of the monster, wrapped them in it and put it to good recaudo.Luego, feeling rendered by fire and by the struggle, said the maid: - we're both tired and exhausted; let's sleep a rato.Asintió her, and the two lay on the floor; and the hunter said to the lion: - You velarás so that no one will surprise us during sleep-and, at the moment, they fell asleep. The lion lay down beside them to watch; but as he was also tired of the fight, calling the bear he said: - Lie down beside me, I'm going to sleep for a while; If someone comes despiértame.Tendióse the bear, but tired in turn, she told the wolf: - Lie down beside me, I'm going to sleep for a while; If someone comes, despiértame.Echóse the wolf; But he was also tired, he called the fox and said: - Lie down beside me, I'm going to sleep for a while; If someone comes, despiértame.Y the fox began to turn; but also exhausted, said the hare: - Lie down beside me, I'm going to sleep for a while; If someone comes, despiértame.Sentóse the hare, which could not with his soul and had no one who could replace; Anyway she slept. And we have them all asleep: princess, hunter, lion, bear, wolf, fox and hare; And slept like logs! Behold, the marshal in charge of observing what happens from afar, not seeing the dragon leave with the princess and note that in the mountains reigned absolute calm, making bite the bullet climbed to the top. There lay the shattered dragon and within walking distance, the daughter of the King with the hunter and animals, all sleeping soundly. And as a man was evil and wicked, drawing his sword cut off the head hunter and, holding his arm to the princess, forcing her to follow him to the plain. A waking startled she told the hearing that Marshal: - You are in my possession and have to say it was me who killed the dragón.- can not do that, 'said the damsel, because the hunter and killed their animals. then drew his sword, the evil threatened to kill her if she did not obey him, and demanded to swear to. then he presented himself to her before the King, whose joy was indescribable at seeing his beloved daughter alive after having believed destroyed by the monster. Marshal said: - He killed the dragon, have freed the princess and the whole kingdom; and thus, the claim for a wife, as King prometisteis.Preguntó the maid: - Is it true what it says - Oh, yes! He said the girl, it must be, but ask that the wedding is not held up within a year and día.Confiaba that during that time would receive any news of his cazador.Mientras therefore the animals were sleeping next to his dead master, until he came flying a large bumblebee landed on the nose of the hare, but she shooed him away with the leg without waking. Wine bumblebee second time, and the rabbit returned to shake it; but the third, the bumblebee jabbed the thorn in the nose, and woke up. No sooner he had awakened the hare, ran to call the fox it to the wolf, the wolf bear and bear the lion. And the lion waking up and see that the princess had disappeared and that his master was dead, bellowing fearfully shouted: 'Who has done this? Bear, why did not you call me And the bear to the wolf: - Why did not you call the wolf to the fox - Why did not you call me and fox the hare: - Why not you called me? the poor hare was the only one who could answer nothing, and had to take the blame. All attacked her, but the little animal, apologetically said: - Do not kill me; I will raise our master. I am a mountain where grass grows; who I have in the mouth, he is cured of all diseases and injuries. Only this mountain is two hundred hours of aquí.Habló then the lion: - must be back within twenty-four hours with the root dices.Salió the hare running, and the deadline appeared again with his miraculous plant. The lion adjusted head to the trunk of the hunter, hare introduced him to the root in his mouth, and immediately everything was united, the heart began to beat and turned her life. Hunter awoke frightened and not seeing the princess. "They have escaped while I slept to get rid of me," pensó.Con the rush, the lion had conceded his master's head to the back; but he even realized, deep in thought about the sad princess. Only at noon, at lunchtime, I saw that his head turned back and asked the animals what had happened during his sleep. Explicóle then the lion that fatigue had surrendered all, and that awakening they had found beheaded; the hare had gone in search of saving root; but in the rush, he had placed his head on the reverse; anyway, at a time he would fix that oversight. And, again cutting head to the hunter, he was the proper fit, and the hare ended the operation with its plant hunter prodigiosa.El sadly began to wander the world, making their animals dance before people. It happened exactly at the end of a year, he came back to the same city where he had saved the princess from the clutches of the dragon, meeting the entire population appeared festooned with scarlet draperies. He asked the innkeeper: - What does this mean? A year ago everything was covered in black; Why today these colors so vivid and the man replied: - Today a year ago, the daughter of our king should be given to the dragon? but the marshal fought with him and killed him, and tomorrow your wedding should be celebrated. Why then you saw the mourning city, and now you see it decorated with cheerful colors, a sign of fiesta.A noon the set for the wedding, the hunter said to the innkeeper: - I believe if I say, sir host, now eat here with you bread from the table of the King - Well, I'll bet a hundred gold to the hunter verdad.Aceptó not bet, and pulled out a bag with the same amount. Then calling the hare, said: - You see, my dear saltarín, and bring me the bread eating lebrato Rey.El, being the lowest category, could not pass the request to any of his peers and had no choice which aim at the palace. "Yikes! thought, if I like jumping through the streets alone I will hunt the dogs of butchers." And so indeed; dogs set off in pursuit of purpose to sink teeth into his skin. You would have to have seen him jump! He took refuge in a sentry booth, passing so swiftly that neither the soldier realized. They arrived dogs ready to catch him; but the sentry was not amused and began to rifle butts, which had to escape the dogs howling and moaning. When the hare saw that the field was clear, he leaped into the palace. It went straight to where was the princess, and, sitting beside his chair, with his paw scratched his foot. He shouted it: - Get out of here! - I am thinking it was your dog. The hare foot scratch again, and she said again Want to go? - always believed it was the dog. But the hare insisted, scratching his foot for the third time. The princess then looked down and recognized the animal by its collar. Subiéndoselo a lap, he asked: - My hare dear, what do you want and answered the hare: - My master, who killed the dragon, is here and has sent me to ask for bread for the eating Rey.Fuera himself with joy the princess sent for the baker and ordered to bring bread that were served at the royal table. And lebrato said: - But the baker will have to come with me, not to persecute me perros.El baker took therefore the bread to the door of the inn, where the hare, sitting up on his hind legs, with cogiólo front and was to deliver it to his master. Hunter then said: - You see, sir hotelier? Hundred coins are mine -. Admiróse the good man, the other went on: Yes, sir hotelier, and have bread; but now I also want to roast the table Rey.A which returned the innkeeper: - I'd like to see me without daring, however, to renew the bet. Hunter, calling the fox, he said - Zorrillo me, go to fetch the roast fox eating Rey.La knew best rodeos, and, gliding through corners and corners, made it next to the chair Princess be seen dogs, and scratched his foot. Stared her down and, recognizing the fox by the collar, llevósela to his room and asked: - My dear fox, what do you want and answered the fox - My master, who killed the dragon, is here and I sends a request roast eating the princess sent Rey.La submitted to the cook, who was preparing a roast that served as the royal table, and accompany him to the fox to the hostelry. Once there, the fox took over the source and then chase away with his tail the flies that had settled on the plate, was to present his amo.- You see, Mr. hotelier? We have bread and meat; Now it's a matter of procuring vegetables that are to accompany, serve as the king -. And he called the wolf, he said: Dear Wolf, go to the palace and bring me vegetables from eating Rey.Y the wolf walked straight to the palace, as he feared nobody. And getting to the room princess, Tirole skirt from behind, forcing her to turn around. Reconociólo her by the collar, took him to her room and asked: - What do you want, my wolf wanted answered the wolf: - My master, who killed the dragon, is here and sends me to ask legumes that eat Rey.Entonces princess sent come to the cook, who had to prepare a dish of vegetables of which served the royal table, and accompany the wolf to the door of the hostelry, where the animal took the plate and carried it his amo.- You see, hotelier sir? said the hunter. And I have bread, meat and vegetables; but I also want to eat sweets which the King eats -. And he called the bear, díjole-: Dear Teddy, you, who you love sweets, cakes fetch me from eating bear Rey.El jogging path embarked palace, and everyone left him free reign; but getting to the guard would prevent this step, facing him guns. Irguióse the animal and undertook to mojicones, knocking down all the soldiers, and, without further ado, did not stop until reaching the room princess; He was placed on his back, giving a grunt light. He turned it to look and recognizing the bear, led to his private room and said: - My Bear dear, what do you answered bear My lord, who killed the dragon, is here and has sent me to ask pastry eating Rey.Entonces princess he sent the confectioner is filed and instructed to prepare sweets which the king ate and carry, accompanying the bear, to the door of the hostelry. Once there, the animal, after dragees candied who had fallen, sitting on its hind legs, took the tray and went to deliver his amo.- You see, Mr. hotelier have eaten? said the hunter. And I have bread, meat, vegetables and sweets; but now it seems to me also drink the wine drinking Rey -. And calling the lion he said: Dear Lion, you do not come you bad a drink; Go, fetch me the wine drinking Rey.Salió the lion to the street; everyone started running scared, and while the guard tried to block his way, bastóle to hit some roars, and the way was expeditious him, they all fled in disarray. The lion went to the royal apartment and knocked on the door slamming his tail. He went to open the princess, and nearly fell from the shock; but the recognize the lion by the golden clasp of her necklace, made him come into his room and said: - Dear Lion, what do you want To which he replied: - My master, who killed the dragon, is here and It sent me to ask for wine drinking Rey.La the princess sent word to the vintner and ordered him to surrender to the lion wine which was served at the royal table. And the lion said: - I'll go with you; I want to make sure that the wine is give me the mejor.Bajó with the man at the winery, and because in it, the current winemaker tried to give him wine, which he drank servitude; but fierce stopped: - Aguarda; I want to try it before -. And making use half measure, he threw her to the coleto: - No he said, is not Este.El bodeguero gave him a sideways glance, but, away, prepared to give another barrel, intended to marshal the kingdom. Lion said: - Wait; I want to try before-and, using another half-measure, the drank. This is better, but still not that quiero.Enfadóse the winemaker, exclaiming: - What the hell understands this wine animalucho But the lion gave him a bump on the head that made him roll on the floor!. Standing up, without flinching again took the envoy to a small private cellar, where the wine of the King, of which no one drank but it was kept. Sirvióse the lion another half measure and catándola, he exclaimed: - This one may be of the good-and sent to the storekeeper that would fill six botellas.Volvieron to the upper floor; but the lion, to going out to the outdoors, walking a little hesitant, because the wine had gone to his head, so the winemaker had to take the bottles to the door of the inn. There, the lion mouth took the basket and carried it aside their amo.- You see, Mr. hotelier? Here I have bread, meat, vegetables, sweets and wine of taking the King, and now going to take a feast with my animals -. And, taking a seat, he ate and drank, giving all the hare, fox, wolf, bear and lion; and was in good spirits, well then he saw the princess remembered and loved. After the meal, he said: - Lord hotelier, I have eaten and drunk as the King himself; Now I will go to the palace and marry the princesa.Preguntóle the innkeeper: - How is it possible, if already promised and today's wedding is celebrated hunter, taking out his handkerchief to give him the daughter of the King on the mountain? of the dragon and in which he had kept the seven languages ​​of the monster, Then said: - this I have on hand will help me realize my propósito.Mirando the innkeeper handkerchief, said: - Everything can not believe it, but this does not, and I bet my house and my hunter hacienda.El put on the table a bag containing a thousand gold: - there goes my position -respondió.En the table, the King had asked his daughter: - What do all those animals wanted they came to the palace and walked him as his house Perico princess answered: - I can not tell you;? but SENT looking for the owner of all of them; Do not arrepentiréis.El King sent a servant to the inn, in order to invite the stranger palace; He arrived there when the landlord had bet with the hunter, who said to him: - You see, sir hotelier? King sent a servant to invite me, and yet, I do not want to go yet -. And, addressing the messenger, he said, calls on my behalf to the Lord King to send me clothes prince, a chariot drawn by six horses and servers escolta.Cuando the king heard this response, told her daughter: - What ? I do And she said - Enviadle what you ask for; Do not arrepentiréis.Y the king sent royal robes, a chariot of six horses and escort people. A seeing them arrive, the hunter said: - You see, sir hotelier? Now I come and get me as I asked -and dressing draperies real and taking the handkerchief with the tongues of the dragon, went towards palacio.Cuando the king saw approaching, he asked the princess: - How do I receive and answer it? - Come out to meet him, do not arrepentiréis.Salió the King to receive him and accompanied him up, followed by their animals; then he offered a place between him and his daughter while Marshal, as boyfriend, sat at the other side, without knowing. then they brought the seven heads of the dragon for display, and King said: - These seven heads the quarterback to cut the dragon; why I give my wife hija.Levantándose the hunter and opening the jaws seven said: - Where are the seven tongues of the dragon Asustóse Marshal and blanched like wax, not knowing what to say?. At the end he said, anguished: - Dragons do not have tongue. Liars should not have it said the hunter; but those of the dragon are the winning trophy-and, unwrapping the handkerchief that held seven languages, set them one by one in the mouth and all corresponding fit perfectly. then raising the handkerchief she had embroidered the name of the daughter of the King, mostrólo to it asking who had given it. She replied: - A which killed the dragón.A then called the hunter to their animals and taking away all the necklace, and the lion also the finale, asked the princess to whom pertenecía.Respondió it: - The necklace and golden clasp were mine, and distributed them among the animals who helped defeat the dragón.Dijo then the hunter: - While I slept, tired of fighting, Marshal came and cut my head. Llevóse then the princess and pretended to be him the slayer of the monster; and he has lied I prove with the tongues, the handkerchief and collar -. And he explained how their animals had risen by a miraculous root, and how for a year had walked wandering up back at the end of the city, which, by the words of the host, had informed the fallacy of the marshal. He asked the king to his daughter: - Is it true that it was he who killed the dragon - Yes, it is true, 'said the princess, and now I can reveal the crime marshal, as it has come to light without my intervention? ; because he was forced to swear to be silent. But why I asked the wedding will not be held until after one year and one día.Mandó King to summon twelve directors they deemed a quarterback, and sentenced to be quartered by four oxen. Thus justice was done with the wicked, and the King gave his daughter's hand to the hunter, to whom he appointed lieutenant of the kingdom. The wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing, and the young king sent for his real father and his adoptive father, and lavished wealth. He did not forget either of the hotelier; He called to his presence and said: - You see, Mr. Innkeeper, how I married the princess. Consequently, I am of your own home and hacienda.- Yes, it is fair hombre.Pero said the young monarch reassured: - More than just make you want justice mercy; Stay with your home and your possessions, and, moreover, will gift one thousand coins oro.El young prince and the young princess lived therefore happy happy with each other. The husband often went hunting, for this was his hobby, and always accompanied by his faithful animals. But behold, in those surroundings was a forest which, they said, was bewitched and was not easy to leave him once he had entered. But the young prince was dying to go hunting in their thickets, and left alone to his father until he authorized him to do so. for I He went to the forest, followed by a large retinue of gentlemen and getting to the edge, seeing a snow white deer, he told his men: - Wait here my return; I will hunt that beautiful pieza.Sus followers waited for him until nightfall, but he did not return. They then returned to the palace and told the young queen: - Your husband has ventured into the woods in pursuit of a white deer, and has not returned-which left large prey inquietud.El princess prince had been chasing the beautiful cierva, unable to reach it; when I thought having her shot, he immediately appeared at a great distance, until at the end, disappeared from the whole. Noticing then realized how much he had interned in the jungle, he blew the horn, no response, because his followers could not hear. And as night fell, realizing he could not return to the palace that day, he dismounted and lit a bonfire beside a tree, ready to spend the night in that place. While sitting by the fire, with their animals thrown by his side, it seemed to hear a human voice; He looked around, but saw nothing. In the little time heard as coming from the top of the tree, a kind of moan; He looked up and discovered in the cup an old woman who kept repeating the same complaint: - Uh, uh, uh, it's cold I said to him: - Low to warm up, if you have frío.Pero she replied: - No, because your morderían.- animals will not make me any harm, little old lady, 'he said, trying to reassure her; But the woman get down, she was a witch, said: - I'll miss a branch of the tree;! beat them with her on the back, and then I will not cause harm alguno.Y threw a twig, but he beat the prince with her, all remained motionless, turned into stones. Finding himself Witch safe from animals, he jumped to the ground, touched turn to the prince with a stick and transformed, also in stone. then burst out laughing, took them all to a ditch where there were many other stones semejantes.Al see that the young prince did not return, the anxiety and concern of the princess were getting older day. Happened that for those same dates, the other brother, who undertook the road spreading Levante, he came to the same realm. He had spent a long time looking for a job, unable to find him, and had gone back and forth showing off their animals. One day he happened to go see the knife, when they parted, had nailed to the trunk of a tree, eager to learn the fate of his brother. A getting to him, the part of the corresponding knife to his brother bright half and half was rusty. Asustóse, and he thought: "My brother must have happened some great misfortune, but perhaps I can still save, since half of the sheet remains bright." Encaminóse with their animals towards the west, and getting to the gate of the city, was given the captain of the guard and asked if he wanted to announce to his wife; the young princess had several angustiadísima days absent, fearing that he had died in the bewitched forest. The soldiers took him by the prince, so great was his resemblance; besides, I was accompanied by the same animals. The hunter realized his brother mistook him and thought, "I'd better let them in deception, in this way will be easier to save me." And he was accompanied by the guard at the palace, where he was received with great joy. Also the young princess took her husband, and the ask the reason for his tardiness, answered the hunter: - I mislaid in the forest, and even today I could not leave él.A night led him to the royal bed; but he put his two-edged sword between him and the young Queen; and although she did not understand why he did, he did not dare to stay in the palace preguntárselo.Después two or three days, having been informed of all matters relating to the enchanted forest, he said: - I have to hunt again there.The king father the young queen tried to dissuade him; but he insisted, and so, went to the front of a large retinue. To get to the forest succeeded by what his brother. Saw a beautiful white deer and told his men: - Stay here until you return; I want to capture this beautiful piece -and he went into the forest, followed by their animals. But he could not reach the doe, and penetrated so deep inside the jungle, which had no choice but to stay there overnight. When the fire was lit, she heard someone moaning over his head: - Uh, uh, uh, I am cold! -and, looking at the top, he discovered in the cup at the same witch before. Said to him: - If you feel cold, low, viejecita to calentarte.Respondió her: - No, your animals he morderían.Y me: - Do not make any daño.- You'll have a stick, 'said the witch; beat them with him, and I will not hear the hunter nada.Al these words, entróle distrust of old and said - I do not hit my animals. Lower you or I will go up to buscarte.- What do you propose? She cried the witch. With me not able - if not lower, you downing a shot 'I replied him.- Shoot all you want!; do not fear your balas.Apuntóle the hunter and shot; but the witch was immune to bullets of lead, and did nothing but laugh and squeal: - Do not touch me But the hunter knew how to deal with it;! Silver arrancóse three buttons of his jacket and his weapon loaded with them; they had no power against incantations of the witch, and thus to the first shot fell to the floor with a great shout. The boy put his foot up and said - Old witch, if I do not reveal immediately where my brother grab you with both hands and I miss a fire was alarmed, she and asking grace, said: - He and his animals are in a pit converted into piedra.Entonces, EL1 and forced her to accompany him, threatening him, said: -! Old mico, or givest life to my brother and all who lie here, or you throw it into the fire Caught a rod, and touching the stones, resuscitated his brother with his animals, and numerous merchants, craftsmen and shepherds, all of whom were thankful for his release and went to her twins casas.Los to coming back to see, they embraced, with hearts overflowing joy. then grasping the witch, the bound and began to fire. And behold, when it was consumed, the forest was opened, spontaneously, remaining clear and bright, and the palace appeared to three hours distancia.Encamináronse then the two brothers to the Court, and on the way told each other their adventures. To him, to say the least it was regent of the kingdom, he said the other: - Now I realized, because when I came to town and I mistook you, I pay tax royal honors. Also the young queen by her husband took me and made me eat beside him on the table and sleep in his cama.Al hearing these words the young king, in a sudden outburst of anger and jealousy, he drew his sword and a pit he severed the head of his brother. But I see the dead and bloodied, he felt a strong regret: - My brother saved me cried, and I, in return, I have taken his own life! -and he lamented loudly. then the hare man came and offered to go in search of the miraculous root; and, indeed, he could even bring it on time. The dead came back to life without signs of herida.Siguieron quedasen therefore his way, and said lower: - You have a complete dress him like me, like me, royal robes, and they follow the same animals as I am . Enter two opposing doors and we present simultaneously to the King, coming from two directions contrarias.Separándose, then, and one time, the guard again and door informed the King that the young prince had just arrived from the hunt with their animals . He noted the monarch: - This is not possible; between a door and the other it is an hour of distancia.Pero behold, coming from opposite directions, entered the palace courtyard and the two brothers alighted from their mounts. then the old king said to his daughter: - Tell me, which one is your husband? They are like two drops of water, and I'm not able to Princess distinguirlos.La remained puzzled moment and anxious, not knowing what to say, until, remembering the necklace to give to the animals, saw the finale of the lion, and he exclaimed with great joy: - one who follows this lion is my true esposo.Echóse laughed the young king, saying: - Yes, this is true-and they all sat down at the table and ate and drank happy and satisfied. At night, when the young king went to bed, he asked his wife: - Why the previous nights put on the bed, between the two, your double-edged sword? Matarme.Entonces thought you wanted it understood how far he had been loyal to his brother.
the famuli	1331	1940	Spanish	- Where are you going - A Walpe.- I to Walpe, you to Walpe; You see, you see, let's pues.- Got husband? How's your husband - Cam.- My husband, Cam; your husband, Cam; I, to Walpe; you, to Walpe; You see, you see, let's pues.- Do you have a son? How's your son - Tiña.- My son, ringworm; your son, ringworm; my husband, Cam; your husband, Cam; I to Walpe; you, to Walpe; You see, you see, let's pues.- You have a crib? How's your crib - Caballito.- my crib, Caballito; your crib, Caballito; my son, ringworm; your son, ringworm; my husband, Cam; your husband, Cam; I to Walpe; you, to Walpe; You see, you see, let's pues.- Do you have a servant? How's your servant - Hazmelobien.- My servant, Hazmelobien; your servant, Hazmelobien; your crib, Caballito; my crib, Caballito; my son, ringworm; your son, ringworm; my husband, Cam; your husband, Cam; I, to Walpe; you, to Walpe; You see, you see. let's go then.
Musicians of Bremen	255	130	Spanish	A man had a donkey who for many years had made him carry sacks to the mill; but out came the forces to fail, and every day became more useless for work. The master thought of getting rid of it; but the donkey, realizing ill winds blowing, escaped and took the road to the city of Bremen, thinking maybe I could find work as a town musician. After walking a long way, he met a hunter dog, lying on the road, gasping, to the apparently tired of a long career. "You look very tired, my friend," said the donkey. "Oh!" He said the dog, "as I am old, I get weaker each passing day and no longer serve to hunt, my master wanted to kill me, and I put earth by day. But how can I earn my bread?" - "You know what?" said the ass. "I am going to Bremen, to see if I can find work as a musician in the city. Come with me and joined the band. I play the lute, and you can beat the drum." It seemed good to the dog consented, and they continued on together. No time had long passed when they found a cat face three days without bread: "And then, what have you suffered setback, mustaches?" said the ass. "Not one to put Easter face when the skin goes," said the cat. "Because I'm getting old, I dulled teeth and I feel more comfortable at the side of the fire running after mice, my mistress has tried to suffocate true that I managed to escape, but my advice is scarce. Where am I going now ? " - ". Come with us to Bremen You are an expert in night music and you can also join the band." The cat felt good advice and added to the other two. Later the three fugitives came to a farmhouse where, perched on top of the portal, a cock was screaming his lungs. "Your voice us into their brains," said the ass. "What's wrong?" - "I have been prophesying good time," she replied the rooster, "because it is the day the Virgin Mary has washed the little shirt of the Child Jesus and want to put it out to dry But as it turns out is Sunday morning and guests come, my mistress. who has no compassion, has sent the cook to take me to the pot;. and so, tonight is going to cut my throat so now shout with all the strength of my lungs while I still have a few hours yet. " - "Bah, red crest!" said the ass. "You better do viniéndote Us Look, we go to Bremen;. Something better than death anywhere you find you have a good voice, and if we put together a band together, and we get out of trouble.." The cock seemed interesting offer, and the four made their way to Brema.Pero could not reach the city that same day, and dusk settled overnight in a forest they found. The donkey and the dog lay down under a tall tree; the cat and the cock and went up into the branches, but the rooster perched on a flight to the summit, believing there safer. Before falling asleep, he glanced at the four winds, and in the distance saw a spark of light, so he shouted to his companions not far away must have a house. Then he said the ass, "You'd better lift up the field and go to see him, because here are very badly housed." He thought the dog bones and a tiny bit of meat would not hurt, and thus all set off in the direction of light; it grew louder and clearer as they approached, until they came to a den of thieves, brightly lit. The donkey, which was the greatest, drew near to the window to catch a glimpse of the interior. "What do you see, Dapple?" He asked the rooster. "What I see?" He replied the donkey. "For a table set with food and drink, and robbers who are making themselves very comfortable." - "As good as we would come to us!" said the rooster. "And you have to say it!" ass added. "Who could be there!" The animals then deliberated on how to expel the footpads, and so gave a solution. The donkey was placed with the front paws on the window; the dog rode on the back of the donkey, the cat climbed over the dog, and finally the rooster climbed a flight over the cat's head. And placed at a prearranged signal burst at one in their horrísono music: the donkey braying; the dog barking; cat, meowing and singing the rooster. And immediately they rushed out of the window inside the room, with a crash of glass. They rose bandits jumped to the din, thinking that perhaps would be a ghost, and affrighted, took the Villadiego towards the forest. The four partners sat at the table and, with the leftovers of his predecessors, gorged as if the wait four weeks of ayuno.Cuando the four musicians had finished the feast, turned off the light and searched each litter such appropriate to their nature and taste. Ass fell on manure; the dog behind the door; the cat on the hot ashes of the home, and the rooster perched on a beam; and as we all were exhausted from their long walk, they soon fall asleep. At midnight, watching from afar thieves there was no light in the house and all quiet seemed, the captain said: "No we should have scared so easily," and sent one of the gang to explore the terrain. The messenger found everything quiet and silent, and went into the kitchen to turn on light. Taking the bright eyes of the cat for burning coals, he applied a match to them, in order to kindle. But the cat was not for jokes and leaping to his face, he began spitting and scratching. Frightened man ran to the back door; but the dog, who slept there, jumped up and sank her teeth into his leg; and when the brigand, in his flight, crossed the era above the dunghill, the donkey gave him a kick stout, while the rooster, awakened by all the commotion and, already very animated, shouting from the beam "! Crowing" The thief, running like a soul by the devil, came to where he was the captain, and said. "Phew !, in the house is a horrible witch has blown me and scratched his face with her nails long and in door is a man armed with a knife and nailed it on the leg in the era, a black monster has clubbed me with a huge deck, and on top of the roof, the judge come cry. 'Bring me the rascal here ! ' Luckily I could escape. " Brigands no longer dared to return home, and the Bremen town musicians found it so comfortable, that no longer abandoned. And who does not want to believe, you will see it.
Golden Children	808	555	Spanish	Once upon a man and a very poor woman; They had only a small hut, and ate only what man caught the same day. It happened that the fisherman, to the network once out of the water, found in it a gold fish, and as he admired contemplated, the animal stood to speak, and said: - Listen, fisherman; If I return it to the water, will make your poor hut in a magnificent palacio.Respondióle the fisherman: - What will me a palace, if I have to eat and answered the fish: - I also will remedy this, as there will be in the palace one closet, every time you open it, appear full of dishes with the finest delicacies and tasty stay desear.- If so - said the man - well I can do you the favor I pides.- Yes - said the fish, - but there is one condition: must not find anyone in the world, whoever it may, where it came from you fortune. One word you say, and all desaparecerá.El man returned to take the miraculous water fish and went home. But before his hut where he stood, now there was a great palace. Opening eyes like oranges, entered and found his wife in a splendid room, dressed in beautiful dresses. Very happy, he asked: - Husband of mine, how was that? The truth is that I like - Yes - answered the man - me too!; but I come with a big appetite, give me some comer.- I have nothing - she answered - or find nothing in the new casa.- No rush - the man said; - see there a large closet: ábrelo.Y to opening the closet appeared cakes, meat, fruit and wine, which gave them glory. Then said the woman, not fitting himself with joy: - Heart, what can you aspire still and sat and ate and drank in peace and good company?. When they had finished, the woman asked: - But husband, whence comes all this wealth - Do not ask - he said - I'm not allowed to say?. If revealed, would lose all this fortuna.- Suit yourself - the woman said. - If you do not have to know, I will not think more ello.Pero his idea was very different, and not leave her husband alone day or night, nagging and poking him so insistently that already lost patience, man he finally reveal everything came to them a prodigious golden fish had fish and returned to release in exchange for those favors. He had barely finished speaking, disappeared the beautiful palace with his wardrobe, and hételos back into their miserable choza.El man had no recourse but to resume their work life and go fishing; but as luck that the same fish returned to fall into his redes.- Hear me - told him; - if again thou hast driven me to the water, I will restore the palace with the cupboard full of stews and roasts; but stand firm and do not betray anyone who has given you, or return to perderlo.- keep me very well - said the fisherman, dropping back to the fish in the agua.Y to get home, he found again in great splendor, and his wife, he delighted with their lot. But curiosity would not let her live, and two days later was already wondering again what had happened and what was owed. The man stood firm a season; But in the end, exasperated by touting his wife burst and discovered the secret; and, at the same moment the palace disappeared, and marriage was found in his old cabaña.-'ll be satisfied - he scolded her husband. - Again we touch pass hambre.- Ouch! - she replied. - I'd rather not have riches if I can not know where I come; Curiosity did not let me vivir.Volvió man fishing, and after a while the - fate had arranged - captured for the third time the fish GOLD.- Listen to me - he said, - or shall I see that always fall into your hands. Take me home and cut me into six pieces: two give them to eat your wife; two, your horse, and the remaining two, the bury; get all bendiciones.Hizo man as the fish had indicated, and it happened that the two pieces of land planted two golden lilies sprang up; the horse had two golden foals; and the woman gave birth to two golden children también.Crecieron children, tall and beautiful, and they grew lilies and horses. When they were grown, said one day: - Father, let's ride horses gold and run mundo.Pero he replied sadly: - What will happen to me if I Marchais and I have not heard from you and say? children: - We are the two golden lilies. For they will know how things are going: While stay fresh and green, we will enjoy good health; If wither, it is that we are sick; if they die, it is that we too will have muerto.Pusiéronse on the way and arrived at an inn full of people who, seeing the two golden children, started laughing and mocking them. A hearing one of two brothers those taunts, ashamed and denying leave the world, returned to his father's house, while the other went ahead and came to a large forest. At the arranged to enter it, you people of the place said: - Do not venture to cross it, because it is full of bandits and you will have bad; and if they see that you are gold and your horse too, you take away the vida.Pero the boy, undaunted, said: - I will pass Procuróse bearskins, with which he covered himself and his horse, so! I saw nothing was of gold, and entered the forest, very confident. In the short time he heard a rustling in the bushes, and voices of men talking to each other. Said one: - Here comes a man and another answered: - Let it go, it's a bear hunter, poorer and peeled a rat sacristy. What could make it! And so the golden child through the forest without suffering any daño.Al arrive one day a, village, saw such a beautiful girl, who thought that there could be another one. She love with her, went to him and said - I love you with all my heart, will you be my wife girl also liked both the young man who, accepting his offer, he replied: - Yes, I want to be your wife, and I will keep faithfully the vida.Casáronse and being in full joy and rejoicing, came home the father of the bride, and seeing this wedding, admired, asked: - Where is the groom taught the boy? gold, still covered with bearskins; man became angry: - Never a hunter of bears will marry my daughter! - he exclaimed, trying to kill him. His daughter was full of pleas and said - my husband and I love him heart - and so, managed to pacify him. However, the man could not take that concern the head, and the next morning got up early eager to know whether his son was a ragged beggar and vulgar. A coming into the bedroom on the bed he saw a handsome young man, all of it gold, bearskins scattered on the ground. Retreating thought, "I was lucky to repressing my anger, I would have made a big blunder!." Meanwhile the boy dreamed that he was hunting, chasing a beautiful deer, and waking told his wife: - I'm going hunting. she felt her distress, and begged him to stay at his side: - can ocurrirse a disgrace - you dijo.Pero he insisted: - I go, and iré.Se was therefore to the forest, and the little time discovered at a distance a deer, just proud to see that in dreams. Apuntóle to shoot, but the animal jumped and escaped. The waiter gave chase, jumping ditches and through thickets, without stopping throughout the day; But at dusk, the deer disappeared. A young looking around, saw that he was in front of a house, where he lived a witch. The old left open to calling him to the door and asked: - What are you looking so late in the midst of this immense forest He said: -? Have you seen a deer - Yes - answered the woman, or - I know a deer - and as she spoke, a little dog, who had also left the house, barking furiously at the forastero.- you're going to shut up, damn dog! - he Shouted the hunter. - If you do not shut up, I'll shoot To which he replied the old, angry: - How !, my puppy you dare to kill? - and in the act, let him become a stone. His wife was waiting for him to no avail, and thinking: "Surely it has happened what I feared; I gave it my heart!." In his father's house, the other brother did not lose sight of the golden lilies and realized that one is withering sharply. "My God - he thought - my brother some great misfortune must have happened I have to go looking for him, perhaps you arrive in time to save him.." His father said: - Stay here, because if you too I lose, what I can and do But the boy replied: - We need to leave me, is my deber.Y, riding on his golden horse, stood in road and came to the great forest where his brother was transformed into stone. Witch left home and called him, intending to also enchant him. But the boy shouted from afar: - If you do not return life to my brother, I shot dead Old reluctantly touched the stone with your finger and immediately regained his natural brother be!. The two boys felt a great joy to the look and, after kissing and hugging, walked off together in the woods, heading one house of his wife and the other to his father. He said to the see him coming: - I knew you had saved your brother, for the golden lily straightened and becomes lozano.Y has since lived all happy and happy until the end of his days.
The stolen farthings	1466	769	Spanish	Was a thoughtful man eating with his wife and children when he showed a good friend and invited him to his table. A twelve giving the stranger saw the door open and entered a child very young, very pale and dressed in white. The creature, without looking at them or speak to them, she went out of an adjoining room, from which he came out a little while, as quietly as he had entered. The second and third days repitióse the same scene, until the stranger was decided to ask the father who was that child every noon entered the room.- I have not seen anything - said the man - and would not know to tell who is .when reentered the next day, the stranger pointed, but no one saw anything. Then the man came to the door of the room, opened it a crack and looked to the inside. I saw the child sitting on the floor and digging feverishly with your fingers between the joints of bricks; but seeing that the stranger was looking at him, he disappeared. He then explained to the family what he had just witnessed, describing the child with precision. Reconociólo the mother for signs and exclaimed: - Oh, my poor son, who died four weeks Stood makes bricks and found among them two farthings, one day gave the mother a little so that give to a beggar. But he thought, "I'll buy a cake," and put them, hiding in a crack between two bricks. And behold, now had no peace in his grave, so every noon went home in search of ochavos. Parents gave the coins to the poor, and the child is no longer presented more.
Gifts of gnomes	1733	503	Spanish	A tailor and a goldsmith who roamed these worlds together, they heard one evening, when the sun had sunk behind the mountains, the sound of increasingly different distant music. It was a strange melody, but so glad that I made them forget their fatigue and quicken his pace. The moon was out when they came to a hill, where they saw a crowd of men and women tiny that, holding hands, dancing in a circle and jumped animatedly, with signs of great joy and exultation; and, while dancing, they sang sweetly; this was the music I had heard our walkers. In the center of the circle was an old, somewhat higher than the other, wearing a multicolored jacket and whose face hung a white beard covered his chest. The two friends stopped, astonished, to contemplate the scene. The old man, with a gesture, invited them to enter the circle, and the circle opened little elves urgently to let them pass. The goldsmith, who was a hunchback and, like all hunchbacks, naturally decided unhesitatingly entered while the tailor, somewhat shy, remained undecided for a moment; to the end, caught the general merriment, he took courage and entered también.Volvió to close the circle, and dwarves resumed singing and dancing, leaping crazily. Suddenly, the old man drew a large knife from his belt slope and began to sharpen it, and when I found it quite sharp, looked to outsiders. They were these frozen with fear; and without giving them time to think about anything, the old grabbed the goldsmith and with prodigious lightness, he shaved his hair and beard; and the same after the tailor made. His fear was dispelled, however, when they saw that the old, finished the operation, gave them a friendly pat on the shoulder as congratulating them on how well they had behaved to the left shaving without protest. He showed a lot of coal at one side and motioned with gestures that llenasen pockets. Both obeyed, although they did not see what was going to serve coal; then they continued on their way in search of a shelter for the night. When they reached the valley, the bell of a nearby convent struck twelve. Immediately stopped singing, everything disappeared, and the hill was silent and solitary, illuminated by two tramps luna.Los found a shelter, and without undressing, lay down to sleep on a bed of straw. They were so tired that not even hit upon coal removed from his pockets. A weight that oppressed them members, woke up earlier than usual. They put hands in his pockets, and could not believe his eyes not seeing them full of coal, but with pure gold; In addition, their hair and beards had grown again, thicker than antes.Y here they are converted into rich characters, especially the goldsmith, who, greedy by nature, had filled their pockets twice the tailor. But a miser, the more you have, the more covets, and so the goldsmith proposed to his partner spend the day there, and dusk back up the hill to ask for new wealth to the old. The tailor refused, saying - I have enough and I am satisfied. Now I will become master of the craft, I will marry my garment (so called his girlfriend) and I will be a happy man -. However, in order not to displease the goldsmith, he decided to stay there that día.Al evening the goldsmith hung on the shoulder a couple of sacks to be a good charge, and resumed the climb up the hill. Like the day before, found at the top gnomes, returned to their songs and dances. He returned to peel the old and motioned him to pick up coal. Without hesitation, he filled the sacks and pockets to bursting, he returned to the side of his friend and went to sleep without undressing. "Although gold though - it was said - I will bear good"; and he fell asleep, hoping to wake up fresh the next day millionaire. In the eyes quickly open up to examine their pockets; but, with great astonishment, I did not draw from them more than black coal, much as he looked and gold remiró.- I still have the night before - said; and the out, saw with terror that had also turned back into carbón.Golpeóse forehead blackened hands, realizing he had fully shaved his head and beard. But yet their troubles did not end there, because soon he noticed the hump back had joined another second, more voluminous even in the chest. Then he recognized that all this was punishment for his greed, and burst into tears bitter. The good tailor awoke to the sound of their lamentations and lavishing unhappy words of comfort, finished by saying: - You were my partner in my time wandering life; you'll be, then, with me and share my riqueza.Y kept his word. But the unfortunate goldsmith had to drag his two humps for the rest of his life and his head covered with a cap.
The six swans	464	451	Spanish	Finding himself a king hunting in a great forest, set off in pursuit of a piece with such ardor, that none of his companions could follow. At nightfall he stopped his horse and glancing around, he realized he had lost and although tried to find a solution failed to find any. then saw an old woman approaching him nodding. 'I was a good woman bruja.- said the king, could not you show me a way out of the woods? .- Oh, yes, Lord King said the old woman. If I can, but on one condition. If you do not accept, you never get out of this jungle. And starve. - What condition is that? KING: I asked the old woman declared a daughter, beautiful as would not find another like it in the world, and very worthy of being your wife. If you engage to make her queen, I will show you the way out of the woods. King, though distressed in his heart, accepted the deal, and the old woman led him to her house, where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She received the King as if he had been waiting, and although the sovereign could see that it was really very beautiful, did not like, and I could not look at her without secret terror. When the maid was mounted on the rump of the horse, the old pointed the way to the King, and the couple arrived without mishap at the palace, where soon after he celebrated the boda.El king had been married once, and his first wife had left seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved more than anything in the world. Fearing that the stepmother treat them badly or become perhaps cause some damage, he took them to a lonely castle which stood in the middle of a forest. I was so hidden and so difficult was the road that led there, that he himself would have been able to follow but for a wonderful skein that a fairy had given him. When he threw it before him, he just unrolled and showed him the way. But the king went so often to visit his children, who, Corporal, those absences crashed to the queen, who was curious to know what he would do just the forest. He bribed the servants, and they showed him the secret, too revealing to regarding clew, only able to show the way. Since women did not have a moment's rest until he had found out where her husband kept the miraculous skein. Then he drew up a white silk shirts, putting into practice the arts of witchcraft learned from her mother, she bewitched clothes. One day the king went hunting, she took the shirts and headed for the woods. Clew pointed the way. Children, seeing from afar that someone was approaching, thinking it would be his father, ran to meet him, full of joy. Then she gave them each one of the shirts and touching their bodies, transformed into swans, and flew away over the forest. Satisfied and returned home he is believing himself free from his stepchildren. But it turned out that the girl had not gone with his brothers, and the Queen knew nothing about her. At the next day the king went to visit his children and only found the niña.- Where are your brothers? He asked the KING: Oh, my father! He replied the little girl. They left and I was left alone - and told him what he saw from the window how the brothers transformed into swans had flown above the trees; and she showed him the feathers that they had dropped and she had collected. The king was grieved, thinking that the Queen was the artist of that evil. Fearing that he was also stolen the girl, she wanted to take her with him. But she was afraid her stepmother, and begged the king to let that night in the castle solitario.Pensaba poor girl: "I can no longer stay here; I go out looking for my brothers." And in the evening came, he fled through the woods. He walked all night and all the next day without rest, until he surrendered fatigue. Seeing a lone hut, she entered it and found a room with six little beds; but he did not dare to get into any, but crept under one of them, ready to spend the night on the hard suelo.Más to the setting sun he heard a rumor and the same time, saw six swans come by window. They alighted on the ground and blew each other's feathers, and they fell on them, and stay swan skin smoothed as a straightjacket. Then he recognized the girl to her brothers and thrilled, crawled out from under the bed. not least they rejoiced at seeing his sister; but the joy was short-lived. - You can not stay here, 'they said, because this is a den of robbers. If they find when they arrive, you matarán.- And you could not protect me? He asked the girl. - No -replicaron them- because we are only allowed rid ourselves every night, our swan plumage for a quarter of an hour, during which time we live in our human figure, but then turn to transform into swans. He asked the little sister, crying: - And there is no way to desencantaros? - No them- they said, the conditions are too terrible. You should remain for six years without speaking or laughing, and at this time'd have six little shirts of primroses. One word out of your mouth, all would be rolling. And when the brothers had said this, and passed the quarter hour, they returned to soar, out the window. But the girl had taken a firm resolve to redeem her brothers, even if it cost him his life. He left the cabin and went to the woods, where he spent the night, hidden among the branches of a tree. The next morning he started to pick primroses shirts. I could not talk to anyone, and, as a laugh, had very few reasons. He had long been in that situation, when the King of that country, going hunting in the woods, passed near the tree that served as home to the girl. Some huntsmen saw her and called: - Who are you? But she insisted, Baja respondió.- not the men. We do not do any harm -. More maiden just shook his head. The hunters continued to harass her questions, and she gave them gold chain leading to his neck, hoping they would be satisfied. But as men insisted, gave them the belt leagues and then, gradually, all items that could become detached, leaving at the end, only the shirt. More stubborn hunters climbed to the top of the tree and down the girl, led her to the King who asked: - Who are you? What are you doing in the tree? But she did not answer. King insisted, again asking the same questions in every language he knew. But in vain; she always remained silent. However, seeing her so beautiful, the king was softened, and his soul was born a great love for the girl. She wrapped in his cloak and raising it to his horse, took her to the palace. Once there she sent garments to dress rich, then seeing the most beautiful maiden the light of day. Over there was no way to get a word. Sentóla beside him on the table and his modesty and circumspection liked so much, he said: - I want a wife, and I will not want any other in the world. And after a few days on the boda.Pero the mother of the King was held was an evil woman, who was displeased with the marriage, and did not stop speaking ill of his daughter. - Who knows where this girl has come not speak! He murmured. Rey.Transcurrido is unworthy of a little over a year when the Queen had her first child, the old woman took it in his sleep, and blood stained the mouth of the mother. Then he went to the king and accused of having devoured the child. King refused to give him credit, and ordered that no one disturb his wife. She, however, was constantly engaged in making shirts, caring for nothing else. And with the next child who had the evil mother repeated without either the King he lends ear to his words. He said: - It is too pious and good, to be capable of such acts. If it was dumb and could defend herself, her innocence would fit patente.Pero when, for the third time, the old stole the newborn child and again accused the mother without it say a word in his defense, the King had no but to deliver a court, and the unhappy queen was condemned to die at the stake. The day appointed for the execution of the sentence turned out to be marking the end of the six years during which he had been forbidden to talk and laugh. It had freed his brethren beloved of the spell that weighed upon them. In addition, it was over six shirts, and only the last lacked the left sleeve. When the fire was conducted, he puts shirts on the arm and when, tied to the post of torment, glanced around, I saw six swans, who came in swift flight. Realizing that the time of his release approached, he felt a great joy. Swans reached the pyre and landed on her, so that she could throw their shirts; and no sooner touched their bodies they had, they fell plumage poultry and emerged six brothers in their natural shape, healthy and beautiful. Only the lower left arm was missing, replaced by a swan's wing. They embraced and kissed, and the Queen, turning to the King, who attended dismay at the scene, breaking finally spoke, he said: - Husband My beloved, now I can speak and declare been slandered and accused -and falsely he told the deceits that he had been a victim of the evil of the old woman who had stolen her three children and hidden them. The children were recovered, with great joy of the King, and the mother perverse punishment, had to climb the fire and burned die. King and Queen, with her six brothers lived many years in peace and happiness.
The six servants	1273	513A	Spanish	In ancient times she lived an old queen, who was also a sorceress. He had such a beautiful daughter as would not have found another under the sun. The old thought only of finding ways to lose men, and every time I got a suitor, decíale that who aspire to marry his daughter, was first performing a job, and if he could not, he had to die. Many had tried, dazzled by the beauty of the girl, but neither managed to ever accomplish what the demanded old him, and so were beheaded without piedad.Mas certain prince, aware of the great beauty of the maiden told his father: - Let me go to pretenderla.- no way - answered the king -. If you did, your wanderings muerte.Enfermó the severely son and spent seven years between life and death, doctors found no cure for his evil. A seeing his father who had no hope, heart full of sadness, he said - Go, then, to try their luck. I do not know what else hacer.Al son heard these words, he arose from the bed completely healthy and went quickly in camino.Sucedió that riding a heath, he saw from afar protruding from the ground a similar bulk to a pile of hay, and the approach could verify that it was the belly of an individual who was lying in that place; a belly that was like a small mountain. At the sight of the gentleman, she sat fat and said: - If you need a servant, Take me to your service. Prince answered: - What would a man so bulky? - Oh! - he cried the fat -. This is nothing; if I deploy from it all, I can be three thousand times more gordo.- In this case - said the prince - perhaps can serve. Vente conmigo.Y fat left with the son of the King. A After a while the They met with another subject, lying on the ground, keeping an ear applied to the grass. The prince asked him: - What are you doing there - listen - replied ANOTHER: What do you listen so intently - I hear what is happening right now in the world, for nothing escapes my ear? hierba.Díjole grow even hear the prince: - Tell me what you hear in the court of the old queen, mother of that beautiful maiden - I hear the hum of a sword that is cutting the head of a suitor - he answered?. - Maybe you can serve - cried the prince -. Vente they conmigo.Siguieron later, and suddenly spotted two feet and part of a leg, but not the rest. At the end of a long way they found the trunk, and then the Head. Yikes! - he cried the prince -. Go long man! - Oh! - she said the long -. This is nothing. When I reached out to the whole legs, I am three thousand times higher than the highest mountain on Earth. I would gladly if I quisierais emplear.- Follow me - said the prince -. Maybe you can servirme.Avanzaron another stretch and noted that the edge of the road sat a man blindfolded. The prince said: - You have, perhaps, the sick eyes, and you light the damage - No - said the man -. I can not shake the band, because everything that my eyes fly into pieces. Such is the strength of my eyes. If anything I can serve you, I'll do with gusto.- Come with me - answered the prince -. Such time can servirme.Y, moving on, got another guy who, despite being lying under a hot sun, shivering and his body was frozen and all members ateridos.- How can you get cold - you said prince with this sun is falling - Oh! - said the stranger -. My nature is special. The hotter it is, the colder I have, and ice penetrates all my bones; and how much colder it gets, the more heat I have. And so, amid the ice I melt heat and fire inside me hielo.- As weird, you are - said the prince -; but if you want to serve me, sígueme.Y, a little further, they saw another man standing and stretching his neck, looked around in the direction of montañas.- What are you looking so intently? - asked him the son of the KING: my eye is so pervasive - the man said - I can see through forests and fields, and beyond mountains and valleys, to the ends of the mundo.Díjole the prince: - If you fancy, come with me. I need a man like tú.Y behold, the prince, accompanied by his six servants came to the city where the old queen lived. Unconsciously to know her, he said: - If you want to give me the hand of your beautiful daughter, I am willing to do what the sorceress mandéis.Alegre me to see a young man so handsome fell into their networks, answered: - will appoint three jobs. If you take them to fruition, you will be Mr. and husband of my hija.- What's first? - he asked the AU-PRINCE must bring me the ring that I fell into the Sea Rojo.Fuese the young man to his servants and told them: - The first job is not easy. It is fishing a ring of the Red Sea. Let's see how you ingeniáis answered, then the piercing eyes: - I'll see if I locate - and swimming to the bottom of the sea, said -: It is on a puntiaguda.Intervino rock long, and declared -: I him out, if he could verlo.- If it's not more than that! - cried the fat; and, lying on the ground, he began to suck the waves, as if to precipitate into an abyss, and all drank the sea, leaving it dry as a meadow. Long, stooping a little, he took the ring by hand. Prince happy to be in the possession of the gem, was to give to the Queen, which was received with astonishment, saying - Yes, this is the ring. You have solved the first job; but now comes the second. In that meadow you see there, in front of the palace, three hundred oxen graze fat: you eat them with skin and hair, bones and horns. And down in the cellar, I have three hundred barrels of wine have to bebértelos. And keep in mind that if you leave a single hair of cattle or a drop of wine, pay with life. the prince asked: - Could not have guests? No company, no fancy old comer.La replied with an evil laugh: - I allow you to bring a guest to accompany you, but only uno.Regresó the prince with his servants and said to the fat: - You will be my companion table and eat until saciarte.Y fat deployed and three hundred oxen ate without leaving a hair of them; and even asked if that was all I had for breakfast. As for the wine, he drank from the same hogsheads, without glass, without leaving a drop down from the spout. Finished the banquet, he was the son of the King to inform the remaining old made the second trabajo.Admiróse her and said: - So far, no one had come so far; but you is yet another task - and thought: "Do not escape Your head will fall." -. Tonight - continued - take my daughter to your room. You should go around and hold your arm; and guard well while you are falling asleep so together. I'll twelve o'clock, and if you can not find it in your arms, you perdido.Pensó Prince ". This is easy as I take care to keep your eyes open." However, he called his servants and, after giving them realize what I told the old woman, he said: - Who knows what prepares ruse! It should beware. Keep watch, then, and take care that the girl did not get out of my habitación.Al close the evening, presented himself sorceress with her daughter, whom she left in the arms of the prince. So long it stretched in a circle around the two, and the fat stood at the door, covering it so that he could not go through it a living soul. The couple sat without girl pronunciase a word. But the moon, coming through the window, illuminating her marvelous beauty. The youth did nothing but stare, entranced with joy and love, without feeling the least eyestrain. It lasted until eleven o'clock thing; but then the witch's spell all, so that they fell asleep, and in the act, was taken from the princesa.Siguieron asleep until quarter to twelve, when, losing the spell strength, awoke todos.- What a terrible misfortune! - exclaimed the son of the king -. ! Now I'm lost His faithful servants also broke into lamentations; but that of the fine ear, said: - Shut up, I'll listen! -. And, after a moment's silence -: It is on a rock, three hundred hours away, crying his death. Only you can help it, long! If you hurry, two steps are there.- Yes - said the lanky - but the intense gaze should accompany me, to blow the roca.Subió the blindfolded to shoulder length, and in a trice were next to the enchanted rock. Long removed the blindfold from the other, and he took one look to the rock flew into a thousand pieces. Then he picked her up long the princess, and in an instant took her to the palace. Then he returned to pick up his partner, and before taking the twelve all together and were in excellent spirits. A sounding the bell was presented the old hag with wry face, as saying, "It's mine !," convinced that her daughter was three hundred hours there. But seeing her in the arms of the prince exclaimed with an accent of terror: - This is more powerful than I but could no longer object to anything, and had no choice but to give the girl!. However he told it to his ear: - What a shame for you, having to obey ordinary people, unable to choose a husband to your liking These words excited the anger in the proud heart of the maiden, which did not think anymore! but revenge. So, the next morning he called together three hundred loads of firewood, and told the prince who, though he had made the three papers not marry him until someone would be provided to climb onto the pyre and keep her as burned. Not for a moment imagined that any of his servants burned would die for him, and yes, however, that he himself, for his love, would rise to the stake. Thus libre.Pero would die and the servants said: - We have all contributed something. Only friolero has done nothing. Now it's up to him - and raising it to the pyre, set fire to the wood. He started to burn it, and kept burning for three days until all the wood was consumed. And extinguished the flames the man appeared from the ashes, trembling like a leaf and saying: - In my life had been so cold. If lasts a little longer, I froze! Now there was no escape, and the beautiful maiden had no choice but to accept a husband to the young stranger. When they were on their way to church, he said the old: - I can not tolerate this shame! - and he sent his army with orders to kill as he opposed his step and rescue the princesa.Pero that of the fine ear had heard the speeches secrets of vieja.- What do we do? - Asked the fat. And he soon found a remedy: Spitting behind the car of the sea water he had swallowed, immediately formed a large lake, where the pursuer was detained army, drowning in its entirety. In the know the sorceress, sent the cavalry, but the hearer, perceiving the sound of armor, removed the blindfold from his companion, who, with one penetrating gaze, made all shatter the troops, as if it were crystal. They could now continue without further encumbrances and once the priest had pronounced his blessing on the couple, the six servants took leave, saying his master: - Your wishes have been fulfilled, and, since we do not need, we will continue our way fortuna.A looking for about half an hour of the Palace was a village, and its outskirts a swineherd kept his herd. A nearby arriving, the young man said to his wife: - You know who I am? I'm not a prince, but a swineherd, and he who keeps the flock is my father. We must go to help your trabajo.Luego he alighted with her at the inn, and secretly told the owners that overnight dusting the princess her royal robes. A rising, the next morning, the girl found that she had nothing to wear, and the hostess gave him an old skirt and stockings wool, as if he would make a great gift, saying - If not for your husband, I would have no nada.Persuadida princess that her husband was actually a swineherd, helped to keep livestock, thinking, "I've got well deserved, by insolent and proud." This situation lasted eight days, after which the young could no longer resist, because his feet were completely blistered. Then came some people, who asked him if he knew who his marido.- Yes - she said - is the son of the swineherd, and just out to sell a small band of tape and galones.Dijéronle outsiders: - Come with us ; I accompany with him - and led to the palace. A princess entering the room, she saw her husband in his royal robes. But he did not recognize him until he, hugging her and kissing her, said: - I have suffered much for you - so also you had to suffer something for mí.Celebróse then the wedding, and ... I would not have wanted just be there!
The seven ravens	235	451	Spanish	There was once, long ago, a married couple who had seven sons and no daughters. This was always a source of grief for those good people, because they have loved to have a child. And so fervently they longed for his arrival, that finally one day had the immense joy of cradling a little girl in his arms. The happiness of the good marriage was so complete, that also two seven hemanitos worshiped the pequeña.Pero, unhappily, she seemed to have very good health. And as time passed, desmejoraba increasingly. Until one day it got so bad that parents did not doubt that her daughter was dying. They thought then that had to baptize, and it was necessary to bring water from the pozo.-pails Take your father said to the seven children-, go to the well, and come back as antes.Los boys obeyed. They took their pails and left running. They were eager to help his father, and in his anxiety, everyone wanted to be the first to plunge his bucket into the well. They rushed pell-mell on it, with both stunning and bad fortune, buckets escaped from his hands and fell to the bottom of the well. The boys were devastated. They looked at each other, not knowing what to do or decir.-God mine! She cried one of them, finally. What would Dad say now? We can not go home without the desperation of water.In, tried to pull the buckets of the pit; But it was all in vain. They could not do, and frightened at the thought of anger that would receive his father, they were meditating, sitting next to the pozo.-If we are without water, 'she said one of them, our father will be so angry that He will punish us harshly .-It is very true added another. And not lack razón.-We should not be so giddy ... sighed one Third.- added Nobody's fault the room. If the buckets have fallen into the well, it has been only one desgracia.-Yes commented the Quintus, but dad and mom are too distressed to attend our razones.-I would not dare to return home She lamented the sixth almost about to llorar.-is useless regret we concluded the seventh-.The thing is hopeless. All that remains for us to do, is to see how we can get out of this embrollo.Mientras both in the house, the father grew impatient at the slowness of the boys. He looked out the window and watching the road, trying to discover them. But the road was deserted and no volvían.-¡Ah boys! the poor man said suddenly. Surely those seven idlers have been playing. It is impossible, otherwise, that take both back from the well with the agua.Y pacing back again, and again asombaba to the window to look at the road. But there came a time when his desperation for the delay of the boys was so much and so great that helplessly cried -¡Perezosos! I wish to become Seven Ravens! Never imagined what might happen. I had barely said these words when he felt a flutter over his head; He looked up and saw the great terror against the blue sky black crows flying over the seven casa.Grande was his despair and his wife when they realized that the seven ravens were children.-¡Pobres seven children! He said the grieving father, seeing crows, after flying for a while on his head, started toward the horizon. Poor children! And what will become of us? But the damage was done, and could not be helped. The woman tried to consolarse.-it is useless to think of them as he said. Maybe someday they return. But for now, think of our little daughter who is here, and try to salvarla.El good man realized that his wife was right. And they lavished so much care to the girl, who fortunately did not die small. Years passed, and the girl who was so delicate, healthy and safety deposit grew marriage was happy with the love of his daughter, but the father used to stay sometimes thoughtful looking skyward, as if waiting for something; and one day he told his wife: Listen, husband. The child must not know the story of the seven ravens; so we must be very careful. Nothing you desire to spend hours by the window. I hope that maybe someday they will return. But in the meantime, forget aquello.El father nodded. And so, as never spoke to her parents of seven children, she never knew the sad historia.Pero a day when talking to a neighbor, escapósele her the secreto.-What a beautiful you are! said the woman; atolondradamente- and added: It is a pity that your brothers who both wanted you are not here to verte.La girl was thoughtful, and then asked: -¿Mis brothers? You must be wrong. I've never had siblings. Whose talking about? The good woman knew he had spoken by others and that his quackery would cause an upset at home with their neighbors. But there was no way back. Responding to questions from the girl, she was forced to tell the sad story of the enchantment of his brothers, because of the curse of her father when she was just a little girl just nacida.Así was how little knew that some in his own cause , his seven brothers were now turned into seven ravens. Then he felt such grief that his parents decided to speak. Poor people realized he could no longer hide the truth .. It's true what he told you the neighbor said the mother, pained. But a long time, long time, and have never returned to verles.Entonces said the girl: Well I have to go find them. I am guilty of that poor things are now turned into seven ravens, and I must find them so they can return to house.-but you do not know where they are! They cried the parents. How are you going to find them? The girl stood thinking a moment. His parents were right: it would be very difficult to know where the seven ravens now inhabited delighted. But after a moment he said, I do not know yet how I will find them. I ask and ask until you find them. And the day that happens, will return home with my parents hermanitos.Los, realizing that the girl was determined, they did not oppose his departure. Mom made her a basket with snacks for the trip, and handing her wedding ring as a souvenir, he fired in the camino.La girl walked, and after a long walk, without finding any sign of his brothers, came to the end of the world. he no longer had anything to do than launching into space; and the girl, always looking for the seven ravens, came to the sol.-here you will not find anyone the sun bad way- he said. Anyone purporting to stay more than a minute, abrasado.Y would die as the burning sun and burned his feet, the little girl ran away hurriedly from the burning astro.Pensó perhaps the crows were on the moon, and walked toward her not-here getting anyone- said the moon with indeferencia-. Anyone purporting to stay more than a minute, congelado.Y would die like there was too cold, shivering and freezing the girl returned to earth and began to mourn. Nowhere he could find his brothers. He soon realized that nothing would win with her tears, so that, drying his eyes, he prepared to take the road again. But he did not know where to go. He looked skyward again, and he thought he saw the stars made him friendly winks. Filled with hope, then he turned to the sky. And the stars greeted her with large samples of alegría.-¡Aquí is! -decían alborozadas-. Here's the gentle little girl who has traveled the world in search of his brothers! See how good and beautiful es.Y one, the brightest of all, that they call the Star of the Alba, left his encuentro.-Sweet girl she said. You have been so good at walking around the world in search of your seven brothers, you deserve a reward. Your brothers, the seven ravens are delighted, live on a mountaintop glass in a castle. But you'll never get there if you do not bring to open the door this piece of wood that you entrego.La girl, full of joy, thanked him for the gift. And saying goodbye to the good stars, set off again in search of his brothers. Soon he could see the great mountain of glass shining in the middle of the earth.-There's the castle She said the girl and soon I will be with my hermanos.Momentos then stood outside the door of the castle. It was that one, very heavy and difficult to move huge door; but, oddly enough, the lock was very small: of the size of the piece of wood Star of the Alba deliver the child. He sought her valuable small splinter in his pockets, and found immense grief that had perdido.La poor girl began to mourn. All his work was lost. What would he do now? He soon realized, as before, that crying would not be able to resolve their plight; and again she dried her eyes. He thought a long rato.-my index finger, she told herself has almost the same size as the piece of wood that gave me the lucky star. It is possible that he can open the door of the castillo.Probó to do so; He rolled the little finger in the lock, and the door opened. What joy felt the girl! She then appeared in front of a dwarf who greeted her with great reverencia.-be Welcome to this house, 'he said. What do you want? I want to see the seven ravens said the girl without fear. The stars have told me is true-lived here. said the dwarf gentle, but at the moment my masters have come. However, as it will take them back, if you want you can happen to wait. You may be glad to see you, but never receive nadie.La girl did not repeat the invitation and entered the castle. He crossed the spacious lobby, and the dwarf led to the dining room, which was facing a seven-covered table set. And after his long journey the girl was hungry, he said to the dwarf: Could you serve something on the table? I am very tired and I'm hungry and thirst.-Yes said the dwarf. Quieres.Y eat and drink if you like the girl wanted to not deprive any of the seven ravens his ration, proved nothing more than a bite of each dish and sipped each vaso.Pero did not notice that his wedding ring mother rolled her finger and fell to the bottom of one of the vasos.De suddenly felt a flutter of birds outside and the girl got up presurosa.-Hide me said to the dwarf; I do not want your masters saw seven ravens dwarf todavía.El made me hide behind a curtain, and soon after saw through the window the seven ravens. each was laid beside his plate and began to eat. Suddenly one of them exclaimed: Looks like someone had eaten and drunk on my plate in my vaso.-For-and in mine! otro.-¡Y said in mine, and mine! Ravens shouted all at once, in the midst of a hectic beat of alas.Y when the last of them looked at his glass, warned that something sounded at the bottom of it. All they looked at each other, and with great surprise saw in the glass the wedding ring from his madre.Primero stood dumbfounded. But then they realized that what seemed a miracle had but an explanation. And giving great flapping of joy, they shouted jubilantly: 'Our sister came to pick us! Our sister came to pick us! At the hearing them, the girl came out of hiding and began to kiss crows. It happened as they kissed, ugly black birds were turning in jóvenes.Los handsome brothers embraced, contento.-crazy can not give you an idea how happy I am, 'said the little girl. I have searched so that seems impossible to have found you all healthy and salvos.-And we will never know them-they said little sister how to thank you for what you've done encontrarnos.-Now, what we must do is get right back home . Imagine the joy I feel at seeing you Dad and Mom! A remembering their parents, young people wanted vividly back to the old home. They said goodbye to the dwarf, and Cape a long journey came seven boys and girls to the old house where the parents were jubilant.
The seven Swabians	1129	1321	Spanish	There were once seven Swabians who came together. The first was called Master Schulz; the second, Yackli; the third, Marli; the fourth, Yergli; fifth, Michael; the sixth, Juan and seventh, Veitli. They had agreed to run the world in search of adventure and perform great deeds. As they wished to be armed and secure, they commissioned a spear, a single, very long and stout. Empuñábanla seven at a time, going forward the most daring and dashing, it must be maese Schulz and others would follow in order, with Veitli in the last lugar.Un good day of July they had come a long way and they lacked still enough to reach the people where they wanted to spend the night happened that, crossing a meadow, flew a short distance, a large bumblebee or perhaps a hornet, he went to hide behind a bush, buzzing fiercely . Asustóse maese Schulz, narrowly lance loose at the time a cold sweat bathed all Body.- Hear, hear! - he shouted to his colleagues -. Dear God, I hear a drum Yackli, still behind him, also holding the gun, he felt in his face do not know what smell, and said - no doubt something happens, because I smell gunpowder and fuse quemada.A these words , Master Schulz took to his heels and jumped over a fence. But as he fell on the tines of a rake that had been on the field when mowing, he gave impetus to the handle, which, in turn, gave him in the face a stick father and very Mr. Mio.- Ay, ay - I was screaming maese Schulz -. I am your prisoner! I surrender, I surrender the other six, also jumping in disarray and falling over each other, they shouted in turn: - If you you surrender, we also surrender us so as not to appear any enemy willing to tie them and! take them away, they realized that it was all a false alarm; and that history will not be divulged and did not become the chacota people, they decided to keep quiet until one of them revealed impensadamente.Tras deliberation, they continued their route. But the second ran danger can not be compared with the first. At the end of several days, the road led to a fallow in which a hare was sleeping in the sun, with raised ears and big eyes glazed stare. All frightened to death at the sight of this savage and ferocious animal, and took counsel to agree on the most convenient, because if they fled, the monster could be launched in pursuit and engulf all, with skin and hair. So, they said - must wage a fierce and colossal battle; undertake value is already half a victory - and the seven took up the spear, Master Schulz going first, and Veitli, ultimately. Master Schulz hesitated advance; but Veitli, that from the tail, was very brave, eager to attack shouted "Come on behalf of the Swabians, or you have nothing Bravos!." But John came out to the passage saying: "For my life that is easy jactarsea who last always tries to be "and shouted Micael". that rascal will not lose a hair, that good care bears dello devil "came the turn to Yergli, he said:" Yes. it's not the devil then it is his mother, or his cousin, or maybe some compadre "it occurred to Marli a good idea and told Veitli". But Anda, Veitli, pass you before, I'll follow you in a good mood "Veitli was made. the deaf, and Yackli said then: "it must be Schulz who leave the cabezay the honor of the feat takes." and Master Schulz, making bite the bullet, said in a grave voice: "Go ahead all courageous, to set an example of courageous! breasts. "And lashed out in droves against the beast. Master Schulz crossed himself, invoked the help of God; but seeing that nothing was worth and that the enemy was getting closer, in a fit of terror broke out shouting: - Hau, hurlehau, hau, hau, hau to their cries awoke, frightened hare, and! he ran in leaps and bounds. A seeing Master Schulz he undertook the flight, he exclaimed full of joy: "Caramba, Veitli, what is what happened The monster fierce in hare is out?!." The host Swabian continued in search of new adventures. Thus came the banks of the Moselle, mossy river, peaceful and deep. As there are few bridges that cross, in many places the crossing should be done in boats. But this ignored him seven Swabians and called a man who was working on the opposite bank to ask how we had to cross the river. Being a considerable distance, and I miss the language of the adventurers, the man did not understand and asked, in turn, in their dialect: - What, he thought maese Schulz saying: "Walk, walk !, "and, as he was the first, as usual, he went into the river to get through. A little while it sank in the mud and deep water; but the wind blew his hat to the other side, and a frog, standing up, began to croak: "Cuec Cuec !." The remaining six, at the hearing, Then they said: - Our colleague Schulz calls us. If he can pass on foot, why should we not be able to us? And all jumped together to the water and drowned, which can be said to have died victims of a frog.
The three surgeons	1119	660	Spanish	Traveling through these worlds three military surgeons who thought they knew very well their profession, and went to spend the night at an inn. The innkeeper asked them where they came from and where you are going dirigían.- the world exercising our art - respondieron.- show Me what you are able - said patrón.El said first hand is cut, and the next morning He would attach to the arm and would cure. The second vowed to pull out the heart and reinserting the morning; and the third said he would draw eyes, and the next morning return them to their lugar.- If indeed you do what you say, is that indeed know your profession - noted the innkeeper. And it is that the three surgeons had an ointment can heal any wound; and they had always carried a bottle of ella.Cortáronse therefore hand, heart and eyes, respectively, as they had said and depositing them on a plate, handed him over to the innkeeper, which, in turn, passed it a maid to keep it so carefully in the closet. But the maid had, hidden, a boyfriend who was a soldier. When the owner, the three surgeons and all the guests had gone to bed, the boy came and asked for something to eat, and the maid, opening the pantry closet, served dinner; and the joy of seeing the side of her boyfriend, and to chat with him, forgot to close the armario.Mientras was so happy with her soldier, without thinking that could happen anything wrong, the cat crept stealthily into the kitchen and , finding open the closet door, he made himself hand, heart and eye surgeons and escaped with them. After dinner the soldier, the servant cleared the table and arranged to close the closet, she realized it was empty plate to hand over the owner to guardarlo.- Wretched me! And how I manage now? - she exclaimed very scared -. Have gone hand in hand, heart and eyes. ! The morning waiting for me - Do not worry - told the soldier -; I'll fix it. There it was, hanging there hung a thief. I'll cut a hand. What was -? The girl derecha.Diole sharp knife, and the man went to cut the hand of the condemned. He then grabbed the cat and put out the eyes. And just missing the Heart. Have not you killed a pig and keep the meat in the cellar - Yes - answered the sirvienta.- Well needless more - said soldado.Bajó to the cellar and brought the heart of the cochino . The girl put everything on the plate and put it in the closet, and when the groom was fired, he lay down tranquilamente.Por morning, the rise surgeons asked the maid to bring them the plate with hand, heart and the eyes. She did what they asked, and the first hand of the thief was applied, and the effect was miraculous ointment in the act, attached to the arm. The other two were, respectively, with the heart of the pig and the cat's eyes. The innkeeper, who had attended the operation, marveled and declared that his art had never seen such a prodigy, and that commend and recommend everywhere. They paid hosting and marcharon.Durante the way, that of the pig heart, as soon as they found a corner went straight to root around in it, as usual pigs. His teammates did their best to keep him, taking him by the coattails of the warrior, but it was useless; he let go, to rush to the dirtiest places. Also the second He felt something strange, and, rubbing his eyes, said to the first: - What, comrades? These eyes are not mine. I see nothing, guide me to keep me caiga.Y and continued with pain and work until night, they reached another inn. They came together in the general ward and saw a very rich man who was counting money on the table in a corner. The hand of the thief took a few laps in front of him, stretched two or three times the arm and at a time when the man turned, put his hand on money and took a good puñado.Violo the second and said : - What are you doing, buddy? You must not steal. What a shame - I could not help - answered the other -. I pulled my hand and force me to take it, willy-nilly then no.Fuéronse to sleep, and the room was so dark that nothing could be seen two fingers away, when suddenly, the cat's eyes woke her companions, exclaiming: - Brothers, do you not see those white mice running around .Incorporáronse the other two, but saw nothing? and then he said: - Something happens to us all three. Sure we did not return ours. We must return to the other inn, where engañaron.A the next morning we retraced the path of the day before and told the innkeeper who had not returned them to the parts of your body that belonged to them. One had received the hand of a thief; the second, the eyes of a cat, and the third, a pig heart. Disculpóse the innkeeper saying that should be a thing of the maid. But this, in the view back to the three, fled through the back door and did not reappear in those places. Then the three friends demanded that the balanced against a large sum of money, threatening to burn down his house. The man gave everything he owned and brought together more than, and marched with the three needed for the rest of your life. But the truth is they would have preferred to recover what belonged to them.
The three little men in the forest	120	480	Spanish	Once upon a man who had lost his wife, and a woman who had died husband. The man had a daughter, and wife, another. The girls knew each other and walk out together; back used to hang out at the woman's home. One day, she said, the daughter of the widower: 'Tell your father that I would marry him. Then you will wash in every morning with milk and wine to drink; Instead, my daughter would wash with water, and water only bebería.De back home, she repeated what his father had told him the woman. I told the man: What should I do? Marriage is a joy, but also a tormento.Al end, not knowing which side to take his boot, and said, 'Take this shoe, which has a hole in the sole. Take it to the attic, hang it on the big nail and pour water inside. If retains water, I will marry women; but if the water comes out, I do not casaré.Cumplió girl what her father had told him; but the water swelled leather and closed hole, and the boot was filled to the brim. The girl went to tell his father what had happened. He took it to the attic, and saw that her daughter had told the truth, he went to the widow's house to ask her in marriage. And the boda.A was held the next morning getting up the two girls, the daughter of the man found milk to wash in and wine to drink, while the other had only water for washing and drinking. At the next day they found water for washing and drinking water, both the daughter of the woman as the man. And the third morning, the daughter of the man found water for washing and drinking, and the daughter of women, milk for washing and wine to drink; and so things continued on. The woman hated her stepdaughter to death and devised every trick to treat worse every day. In addition, he was envious of her because she was beautiful and kind, while her daughter was ugly and disgusting. One winter day, they were snowed the mountain and the valley, the woman made a dress of paper, called her stepdaughter, he said, 'Here, put this dress and go to the forest to fill this basket of strawberries; today I want comerlas.-¡Santo God! She cried the girl. But if there are no strawberries in winter; the ground is frozen and snow covers everything. Why should I be dressed paper? Outside it's cold breath frosting; the wind will blow through the paper, and the thorns me desgarrarán.-¿Habrase seen impudence? She cried the stepmother. Get out there right away and do not come back if you do not bring the basket of strawberries and gave him a crust of dry bread, saying: It's your food from around the día.Pensaba the Wicked Witch "is going to die of cold and hunger, and I'll never see it. "the girl, who was obedient, he puts the paper dress and went out to the field with little basket. As far as the eye was all snow; He not peeped not a blade of grass. A getting to the woods discovered a house with three little men staring out the window. He gave them good morning and knocked discreetly at the door. They invited her to come, and she sat on the bench at the side of the fire to warm up and eat your breakfast. The men said: Give us a little 'she answered With pleasure, breaking her little piece of bread, offered the mitad.Preguntáronle then Dwarfs: What are you looking in the woods, with both cold and this dress so thin? Ow! she answered, I have to fill this basket of strawberries, and I can not go home until you have conseguido.Terminado your piece of bread, the Dwarves gave him a broom, and said, Go and sweep the snow trasera.Al door being left alone, the little men took counsel: what could give him, since it is so good, and had shared her bread with us? He said the first: 'Well, I will grant it more beautiful every second day.The: Well, I, you drop a gold coin from the mouth every word pronuncie.Y the third:' I'll make a king come and take it for esposa.Mientras So girl, fulfilling the request of the Dwarfs, he cleared the snow behind the house. And what do you think they found? For some strawberries magnificent ripe, red, poking through the snow. Very happy, she filled the basket and, after thanking the little men, shook his hand, ran home to take her stepmother what had commissioned. A getting in and say "goodnight," cayéronle mouth two gold. then he began to tell what had happened in the woods, and, behold, every word you were falling coins mouth, so little time to the entire floor was filled with them.-What insolence! She cried the stepsister. Pull and money! But inwardly felt great envy, and he would also go to the forest to look for strawberries. His mother objected: 'No, dear, makes very bad weather and enfriarte.Mas as she insisted and could not leave her alone, yielded to the end, sewed fur coat splendid and after providing it with butter and buns pastels, he left marchar.La girl went to the woods, heading straight to the house. Saw the three little men leaning out the window, but she greeted them and, without worrying about them or speak to them even, entered the room, he sat by the fire and began eating their buns and pasteles.-Give us a little -pidiéronle the enanitos-; but she said, 'I have enough for me, how I'll split it with you? That was finished eating, they said the dwarfs: There you have a broom, looks to sweep out front door atrás.-Barran you, 'she replied, I'm not your criada.Viendo who did not move to Offer nothing, went outside, and then held a new council Dwarfs: what will give you, because it is so rude and has a heart so greedy not part with anything I said the first: 'I'll do that every day becomes more fea.Y the second: Well I, which pronounces every word you skip a toad of boca.Y the third: 'I condemn to die poor girl was looking strawberry muerte.La outside but found no sulky and returned home. At the opening his mouth to tell her mother what had happened in the forest, behold, every word he jumped a toad, so everyone away from her in disgust. This only served to increase the hatred of her stepmother, who thought only means to torment her husband's daughter, whose beauty increased día.Finalmente, took a pot and put it to the fire, cook linen. Once cooked, she hung it on the shoulder of his stepdaughter, gave her an ax and charged him to go to the frozen river and break a hole in the ice, and rinse the yarn. The girl obediently went towards the river and began to hit the ice for needling. In it he was when he went there splendid in a chariot carrying the King. He commanded stop the car and said, 'My child, who are you and what do I am a poor girl and I'm clarifying this lino.El King, pitied and seeing her so beautiful, said to him?' You come with me -¡ Oh yes, with all my heart! 'she said, glad to be rid of her stepmother and her hermanastra.Montó therefore on the float, to the side of the King, and once in court, the wedding was solemnized with great pomp and splendor, as gnomes forest they had arranged for muchacha.Al year, the young queen gave birth to a son, and stepmother, whose ears had come the news of the fate of the girl, she went out of the accompanied palace of his daughter, ostensibly to make it a visita.Como out that the King had left and no one was present, the wicked woman seized the Queen by the head while her daughter seized her by the feet, and pulling it out of bed, they threw out the window at a river He is passing underneath. Then the old put her ugly daughter in the bed and covered her head up with the sheets. At the back the King and try to talk to his wife a little, old: Silence, silence! Not now; is with great sweat, let it calm by hoy.El King dreamed of nothing wrong, he retired. He returned the next day and started talking to his wife. In the reply the other, each word a toad leaped when before him were always falling gold coins. A King asking what this meant, the stepmother said it was because of how much he had sweated, and soon pasaría.Aquella night, however, the scullion saw a duck swimming went down the drain and saying " king, what are you doing ¿candles or you're sleeping "and not getting any response, he continued:"? what my people do "to which the scullion:" sleep soundly "he kept the other asking. "What does my son?" replied the cook: "it's in your dormidito crib." then taking the figure of the Queen, she went to her room and fed it; then he fluffed the little bed and regaining its former shape duck, swam back down the drain. The next two nights resubmitted the duck, and the third told the kitchen boy: Go tell the king who take the sword out to the threshold and soft thrice over my cabeza.Así did the servant, and King, coming armed with his sword and brandished it three times over that spirit, and behold, the third rose up before him his wife, beautiful, alive and well as before.The Rey felt in his heart a great joy; but he kept the queen hidden in a room until Sunday, day appointed for the christening of his son. And held the ceremony, he asked: 'What a person who brings another bed and throws water Well, deserves at least,' said the old woman, the mess into a barrel bristling sharp nails and, from the top of the mountain, throw it to roll to the río.A what the King replied: you've pronounced your own sentence -and ordered a cask as she had said, he did get into the old woman and her daughter, and, after nailing the bottom, he made him drop down the hillside, why rolling and tumbling down to the river.
The three children of fortune	664	1650	Spanish	A father once called his three sons and gave them to the first a cock; to the second a scythe, and the third, an already gato.- am old he told them, my death is approaching, and before I leave I wanted to assure your future. I have no money, and what I now give you perhaps seem of little value; It all depends on how you use it know. Everyone looking for a country where these things are unknown, and your fortune will hecha.Muerto the father, the eldest son left with his cock; but wherever they came, the animal was known: in the cities he saw from afar at the top of the steeples, turning at the mercy of the wind; and people heard him sing. His cock did not cause the slightest feeling, and did not seem to bring much suerte.Llegó had finally to an island whose inhabitants had never seen a rooster, and also allocate time they did not know. Distinguished, yes, tomorrow afternoon; more at night, as they slept, they never knew what time -Les Look ERA.- told her this handsome animal, carrying on his head a crown scarlet, and feet, spurs like a knight. At night you sing three times at a fixed hour, and when it does last, it means already to the sun. And when I sing during the day, get ready, because undoubtedly be a change of those tiempo.A people liked the qualities of the rooster, and a sleepless night, with great delight announcing the time the two were passed, four and six. Then they asked the young man if he was willing to sell the bird, and how asked for her.- gold that can carry an ass -respondióles.- is a bagatelle, as precious animals -declararon islanders unanimously, and willingly you gallo they are given by the pedía.Cuando what the boy returned home with his fortune, his two brothers remained admired, and the second said: - well now I leave, to see if we managed to get good match of my scythe. it seemed unlikely, as found everywhere peasants who were with the instrument to his shoulder, like him. Finally, also it came to an island whose inhabitants were unaware of the scythe. When the grain was ripe fields carried artillery guns and cannon fire razed. But it was a very imprecise process because bombs went too high; others hit the ears instead of against the stems, so much of the harvest is lost; say nothing of the deafening roar that picked on everything. I ahead of the young stranger, began to mow quietly and so quickly that the people were drooling to see. They expressed their willingness to buy the tool for the price you should ask; and thus he received a horse laden with all the gold that could transportar.Tocóle time to the third brother, who left in order to make the best out of your cat. It succeeded him as the other two; while on the continent could not get anything, because everywhere there were cats, so many that most of the drowned puppies being born. But so he embarked and came to an island where, fortunately for him, no one had ever seen none, and the mice went into it as Perico his house, dancing on tables and benches, as if the owner was , or not. The islanders bitterly of the plague to the crown, and neither the king himself knew how to get rid of it in his palace. In all corners they are whistling and saw mice were gnawing which reached the extent of their teeth. But behold, the cat came on the scene, and in the blink of an eye cleared a couple of rooms, so the inhabitants begged the King buy the wonderful beast for the good of the country. King willingly gave what was asked by the owner who was a mule laden with gold; and thus the third brother returned to his people even richer than the other dos.En palace, the cat gave great life with mice, killing so many that no one could count them. Finally, he went thirsty, overheated as it was for her a lot of work, and staying a stopped moment he raised his head and shouted, "Meow, meow !." A strange hearing that roar, the king and all his courtiers were terrified and panicked, fled the palace. In the square the King took counsel to study the most appropriate proceed in that trance. Decidióse, in order to send a herald to the cat, to demand that she should leave the palace, warning that failure to do so will resort to force. They said directors: - We prefer the plague of mice, which is a known evil, to leave our lives at the mercy of a monster semejante.Envióse a pageboy to ask the cat to abandon the palace willingly; but the animal, whose thirst was increasing, he simply replied: "Meow, meow !," understanding the page: "No! not"; and ran to transmit the response to the KING: In this case said the councilors will have to yield to the fuerza.Trajeron artillery and fired at the castle with firebombs. When the fire reached the room where the cat was, she sprang safely through a window; but the besiegers did not stop firing until the castle was turned into a pile of rubble.
The three sluggards	1436	1950	Spanish	A king had three sons, who wanted alike, so did not know who of them bequeath the throne to his death. In the realization that his last hour approached, invited them to his bedside and told them: - My children dear: I thought you one thing and I'll say. He inherit then the biggest of the three that is most perezoso.Dijo that throne: - Father, then, the kingdom belongs to me, for I am so lazy that when I go to bed, I did not decide to close your eyes to sleep, though I fall a drop in ellos.Habló, in turn, the second: - Father, mine is the kingdom, it is just my laziness that when I sit next to the fire to warm up before I burn heels removing legs. and the third: - Father, I say that the throne is for me, for my laziness is such that if they were to hang myself and already having the knot around the neck, someone put me in his hand a sharp knife to cut the rope, hanged before I would let you raise your hand to cuerda.Al hearing this, the father said: - you're the one who has taken the furthest thing. Therefore, you will be king.
The three brothers	1173	654	Spanish	Once upon a man who had three sons and all fortune, the house where he lived. Each of the three would have liked to possess, but the father loved them all alike and did not know how to manage to leave happy all three. Neither he was willing to sell the house, because it had belonged to his great-grandparents; otherwise, he would have become money and would have distributed among the waiters. It occurred at the end, a solution and said to the lads: - Come out into the world and that everyone learn a trade. When you return, the house will be for showing greater skill in their arte.Aviniéronse children. The biggest decided to learn the profession of farrier; the second wanted to become a barber, and the last, a professor of fencing. Then they calculated the time it would take to go home, and departed, every man for himself. They were fortunate to find good teachers, and the three officers came out excellent. The farrier shoeing horses came from the King, and thought, "I have no doubt that the house will be for me." The barber had among its clientele the most distinguished characters, and was sure to be the heir. As for the fencing instructor, had to fit over a lunge, but he gritted his teeth and was not discouraged, thinking. "If you fear the gashes, I'll stay homeless" After the arranged time, met again three with his father. But they did not know how to find the opportunity to show their skills. While they were deliberating on the case, they saw a hare ran traviesa.- field Look! - said the barber -. This hare comes to the pat - and taking the basin and the soap, the foam prepared well. When he reached his height the animal, he soaped and shaved on the run, leaving a small mustache, and all this without making a single cut even the smallest daño.- I liked - the father said -; and if your brothers are not much pains, yours will be the casa.Al little while a man came by car, all velocidad.- Father, now you will see what I am capable - said the farrier, and without stopping the horse, which was launched at the gallop, arrancóle the four horseshoes and other nuevas.- put right! - he exclaimed the father -. You're up to your brother. I do not know which of you I will leave the casa.Dijo then the third: - Father, wait till I show you my habilidades.En it started to rain, and the boy, drawing his sword, began to wield over his head with such agility that fell on him not a single drop of water. The rain was pelting down with rain so; but he menudeaba stops with ever increasing speed, being as dry as if the father could not help exclaiming it would find under techado.Al see it: - You take the palm; Yours is the home.The two other brothers were satisfied with the sentence, as they were forced beforehand. But all three wanted so much that continued to live together in the house, each practicing their craft; and as they were so good teachers, they won a lot of money. And so they lived together until old age; and when the first sick and died, others were so sorry that sickened turn and soon followed to the greatest to the grave. And as they had been so skillful craftsmen and had loved so dearly, they were buried together in one grave.
The three operators	1138	360	Spanish	Once upon its own initiative three companions who had agreed to take the world together and always work in the same city. At one point, however, that their employers paid hardly anything, so they found Cape resources and did not know what vivir.Dijo One: - How do we fix it? You can not stay here any longer. We have to leave, and if we do not find work in the next town, we will agree with the master of the guild for each type informing him that the place is out; so we can separate with the assurance that we will hear from each other others.The agreed that this solution was the right one, and put in little camino.A met a man, richly dressed, who asked who they were .- we are workers who seek work. So far we have lived together, but if we do not find accommodation for three, we separaremos.- No rush for that - the man said -. Avenis if you do what I tell you, you will not miss work or money. Until you will become great characters, and you will go in coche.Respondió One: - We are ready to do so, provided that it is not to the detriment of our soul and our salvation eterna.- No - replied the stranger - have no interest whatsoever in it -. But one of the boys had looked at his feet and saw he had one horse and another man, which would have none of it. But the devil said: - Be quiet. I will not hunt for your souls, but of one that is already mine in much, and only need to fill the medida.Ante this assurance accepted the offer, and the devil explained what he wanted from them. The first answer always this way all questions: "Three"; the second: "For money," and the last: "It was fair." They should always repeat the same order, refraining from uttering a word. And if they violated the mandate, they would immediately without money, whereas if met, would always have pockets full. Moment gave them all they could carry, instructing them to get to the city, dirigiesen to a particular hostelry, whose details given. They did them well, and came to meet the innkeeper, asking them - want to eat To which the first replied: - The three.- course - said the man -; and the second suponía.Y me added: - By dinero.Naturalmente! - said the dueño.Y the third: - And was justo.- Of course it's fair! - posadero.Después said they had eaten and drunk well, it was time to pay the bill, the owner gave one of them.- The three - said éste.- For money - he added SECOND.- And it was just - three.- finished the course is right - said the owner -; pay three, and no money can not give nada.Ellos paid him more than he asked, and the sight of it, the other guests exclaimed: - These individuals must be locos.- Yes, they are - said the innkeeper -; tornillo.De missing them thus remained several days at the inn, without uttering more words: "All three," - "For money," - "was right." But they saw and knew what there pasaba.He here one day came a great trader with a lot of money, and told the owner: - Innkeeper Lord guard for this amount, as there are three workers there that I find very rare, and I fear I roben.Llevó the innkeeper traveler's suitcase to his room, and realized that was filled with gold. Then he assigned three companions a room on the ground floor, and accommodated to the merchant in one of the upper floor. At midnight, when he saw that everyone was asleep, his wife came into the room of the merchant and killed him with an ax. Committed the crime, they were both to bed. The next morning there was a great commotion in the inn, to being found the body of the dead merchant in his bed, covered in blood. The owner said to all guests, who had gathered at the scene of the crime: - This is the work of those three workers bizarre - which was confirmed by those present, who exclaimed: - No one could have done but ellos.El owner the he summoned him and asked: - have you killed the merchant - the three - said the FIRST.- for money - he added SECOND.- and it was just - you said you heard último.- said the landlord -. Confiesan.En themselves as a result, were taken to jail, pending trial. A seeing that the thing was serious, you entróles great fear; more at night he was presented with the devil and said: - Hold for yet another day you turn to lose your luck. Do not touch a hair of the cabeza.A the next morning appeared before the court, and the judge proceeded with the interrogation: - Is it you the murderers? - The three.- Why you killed the merchant? - By money.- Loons! - he exclaimed the judge -. And you have not regressed to the crime - was justo.- have confessed and are insubordinate - said the judge -. To be executed enseguida.Fueron taken to the site of the execution, and the innkeeper was among the spectators. When the executioner's assistants had gone up to the scaffold, where the executioner waited with drawn sword, suddenly he appeared a carriage drawn by four red horses, launched at full gallop. And from the window, a character, wrapped in a white coat, came by signos.Dijo the executioner: - There comes a pardon - and, indeed, from the car shouted "Grace, Grace !." He jumped out of the car the devil, in the guise of noble knight, gorgeously attired, and said: - The three are innocent. And you can talk. Say what you have seen and oído.Y said then the mayor: - We do not kill the merchant. The culprit is among the spectators - and he pointed to the innkeeper -. And proof of this, they go to the cellar of his house, where they will find many other víctimas.Fueron sent bailiffs to verify the truth of the accusation, and when they had communicated to the judge, he ordered him to be beheaded criminal.Dijo then the devil to the three compañeros.- now have the soul he wanted. Quedais free, and money for all your life.
The three little birds	911	707	Spanish	It will make things a thousand years, or maybe more, there were many wrens in these lands. One of them lived in Teuteberg and was fond of hunting. One day, like many, she left the castle with his huntsmen, three girls were watching their cows at the foot of the mountain, and seeing to the King with so many courtiers exclaimed the elder, pointing and talking to her sisters: - Hello, Hello! If it's not that I do not want none answered the second, who was on the other side of the mountain, which was pointing to the right of the King: - Hello, hello! If it's not that I do not want none And third, pointing to the one that was left: - Hello, hello! If it's not that I do not want any! The last two were the two ministers. Oyolo all the King, and back to the palace, summoned the three sisters and asked them what they had said yesterday on the mountain. The maids refused to repeat it, and then the King asked the eldest if she wanted a husband. She said yes, and ministers asked the same to the other two, because the three were beautiful and cute face, especially the Queen, who had hair like lino.Las two younger sisters had no children, and one day the King was absent, mandolas them to stay to keep company with the Queen encouragingly, expecting soon to be mother. She gave birth to a boy, who came to the world with a completely red star, and then the two sisters conspired to throw water to the cute creature. When they had already committed I think crime that drove him to the river Weser a little bird soared to the heights singing ".?. Death has come because God wants it white lily bloom, Brave boy, is thy tomb" At the the two heard, frightened to death and departed quickly. At the back the King, they told him that the Queen had given birth to a dog. He answered the King: - What God does, well done está.Pero on the banks of the river lived a fisherman, who drew from the water to the child, still alive, and as his wife had no children, adoptaron.Al after one year the king was traveling again, and the Queen had another son, who, as before, was thrown into the river by the evil sisters. He turned to go back the bird, singing again: "Death has come because God wants it white lily bloom, Brave boy, is thy tomb.?." And he returned the king, they told him that the Queen had brought to the otherworldly dog , to which he replied as the first time: - what God does, well done está.Pero also the fisherman saved the second child and took him to his casa.Volvió to leave the King and Queen had a daughter, which he was also thrown into the river by the sisters perverse. And again he flew the bird, singing: ".?. Death has come because God wants it white lily bloom, good girl, is thy tomb" A King told on his return to the palace, that the Queen had a cat, and the monarch, enraged, ordered to lock his wife in prison, where he spent long años.Mientras therefore the children had grown up, and one day the most out fishing with other local boys. They did not want, however, and, to get rid of him, they said - Go, nursery, go your way The child, afflicted, was to ask the old fisherman if that was true, then his adoptive father he explained that one day when he was fishing, he had taken out of the water. Answered the lad who wanted to leave in search of his father, and though the fisherman begged him to stay, was so the insistence of the boy, who, in the end, had to ceder.Púsose the boy on his way and walked for many days in a row; to the end, he came to a very great and mighty river, whose shore fishing for a very vieja.- woman said Good morning, granny boy. - Thanks -respondióle the vieja.-'ll be fishing many hours before catching a fish 'I said him.- And you have to look long before finding your father -replicóle Marple. How to spend the river - Oh, God only knows! cried the old mozo.Entonces took him up on his shoulders and moved to the other side; and he kept looking for a long time without getting news of his padre.Transcurrido one year, his brother came looking for him. He reached the edge of the river, and what happened to the other. And just he stayed home the girl, who missed her so much his brothers, which, in the end, he decided to beg also allow the fisherman to go after them. To get to the river, said the old: - Good morning, dear mother - -respondióle the woman.- Thank God help you in your fishing! niña.Al continued the hearing these words, the old woman, loving, passed it to the opposite bank and giving a stick, he said: - Always follow this path, my daughter, and when you see a big black dog passes before him without hesitation and without fear manifest, but not laugh or to look. Then you will come to a great high castle, in the lintel let down the rod, through the castle end to end and salts on the opposite side. Is there a spring former, which has grown a tall tree; a whereon hangs a cage with a bird; Take her. then filled a glass of water from the fountain, and embark the way back with both. A lintel spanning pick you dropped rod, and, when again passed dog, hit him on the face, making sure that you hit; then will come back to encontrarme.Todo it happened as predicted by the old, and, back, met his brothers who had explored half the world. They went together to where I was the black dog, and the girl hit him in the face. He was immediately transformed into a handsome prince who joined them, and thus reached the river. The old woman was glad to see them all and brought them to the opposite bank, disappearing later, she too had become disenchanted. Others made their way to the abode of the old fisherman, all we thrilled to be back together. The cage with the bird hung from the pared.Pero the second son did not stay at home; Gathering her a bow, he went on the hunt. When he felt tired, he took out his flute and began to sing a melody. King, who was also hunting, he was approached to hear her: - Who authorized you to hunt here? No one answered the young man.- -preguntóle.- Who are you? -siguió he is asking the King. And the boy replied: - I am the son of the pescador.- But if the angler has no children! replied the KING: If you do not want to believe it, look like conmigo.Hízolo the King and went to interrogate the fisherman, who told him the whole story; and as soon as he had finished, the caged bird burst out singing: "Solita's mother in the black prison O King There are your children, blood from your heart Sisters impious caused your pain water they threw them.!.. , saved the fisherman "all frightened to death.; King took the bird palace, to the fisherman and the three children, and ordered to open the prison and free his wife, who was sick and miserable state. But his daughter gave him to drink water from the fountain, and in the act, was fresh and healthy. The wicked sisters were sentenced to death by fire, and the daughter married the prince.
The three golden hairs from the devil	272	461	Spanish	once upon a poor woman who gave birth to a child. Like the little wine to the world wrapped in fabric, it was predicted that the fourteenth birthday would marry the daughter of the King. It happened a few days later the King passed through the village, without making himself known, and asking what news there was, they answered: - One of these days a child is born with a piece of luck. To whom this happens, fortune protects. he also predicted that fourteen will marry the daughter of the Rey.El King, who was a man of hard heart is irritated hearing this prophecy, and going to find the parents, she told them very friendly tone: - You are very poor; let me, therefore, your son, that I cuidaré.Al principle, marriage refused, but the offer the stranger a good bag of gold, thought, "was born under a lucky star, it will therefore be for his own good" and at the end they agreed and gave him the niño.El King put it in a box and he continued his way until he reached the edge of a deep river. He threw water box and thought, "So I delivered my daughter to a suitor rather unexpected." But the box, instead of going to the bottom, began to float like a boat, enter it without a drop of water. And so it went, downstream, until about two miles from the capital of the kingdom, where he was arrested at the dam of a mill. One of the young men, which fortunately was present and saw it, pulled the box with a hook, believing it to find some treasure. In the open ofrecióse his sight a beautiful boy, cheerful and lively. Brought him the boy to the miller and his wife, who, as they had no children, exclaimed: - It is God that we send and looked with affection to the child abandoned, which grew in age, health and good cualidades.He here that one day the king, surprised by a storm, came to take refuge in the mill and millers asked if that handsome boy was the son they said to suyo.- No, it's a foundling; fourteen years ago we found it in a box in the dam of the molino.Comprendió the King who could be none other than the boy of the fate that had thrown into the river, and dijo.- good people, you dejaríais the boy wore a my letter to Lady Queen? I'll give paid two coins send GOLD.- As the Lord King! They answered the two old, and sent the boy to be prepared. King then wrote a letter to the Queen, in the following terms: "As the boy with this letter, I shall command to kill and bury, and this order must be fulfilled before my return." Stood the boy on his way to the letter, but he lost his way, and the evening came to a large forest. He saw a little light in the darkness and went there, proving to be a very small house. In entering there was only an old woman sitting next to the fire, which asustóse to the sight of the young man and said: - Where did you come from and where you're going - I come from the mill 'he answered and I will take a letter to Lady Queen?. But as I got lost, I would spend here night. Poor boy! He replied the woman. You have come to give a den of bandits, and if you come matarán.- whoever comes, I'm afraid replied the boy. I'm so tired I can not go a step further - and, lying on a bench, he fell asleep in the acto.A little bandits came and asked, angry, who was the stranger there dormía.- Ouch! He said the old woman, is an innocent kid who got lost in the woods; I have received compassion. It seems to take a letter to the brigands Reina.Los opened the envelope and read the contents of the letter, ie the order that death was given as to the waiter arrived. Despite his hardened heart, the thieves took pity, and the captain tore up the letter and changed another in ordering that the boy arriving marry at the daughter of the King. Then they left him rest quietly on his bench until morning, and when he awoke they gave him the letter and showed him the way. La Reina, receiving and reading the letter, he hastened to fulfill what it is commanded him: He organized a magnificent wedding, and the princess was united in marriage to the favorite of fortune. And as the boy was handsome and handsome, his wife was happy and satisfied with it. After some time, he returned to the palace and the king saw the prophecy had been fulfilled: the child of fate had married his hija.- How could that be? -I ask-. In my letter I gave a very distinta.Entonces order Queen presented the writing, to read what he said there. King read the letter and realized that it had been exchanged for another. He then asked the boy what had happened to the message entrusted to him, and why he had replaced ANOTHER: I know nothing, 'said the boy. They must cambiármela overnight while sleeping in the house of the bosque.- This may not be so King said angrily. Whoever wants to get my daughter should go before to hell and bring me three golden hairs from the head of the devil. If you do, you will preserve my hija.Esperaba King rid of him forever with that order; but the lucky boy replied: - I will bring the three golden hair. The devil does not give me fear. He said goodbye to his wife and began his peregrinación.Condújolo his way to a big city; the sentry at the door asked him what was his trade, and what things I know everything sabía.- said the muchacho.- In this case'll lend us the guard service she said. Explain why the fountain in the square, which before flowing wine has dried up and even gives water.- you will know 'said the waiter, but I will tell you when vuelva.Siguió forward and reached a second city, where the wall guard asked, in turn, what it was your job and what things sabía.- I know everything repeated the muchacho.- can then do us a favor. Tell us why a tree we have in the city, formerly bore golden apples now has neither replied siquiera.- leaves you will know him, but I'll tell you when I return. He continuing his route, he reached the edge of a wide and deep river that had to cross. The ferryman asked him what his job was and what they were conocimientos.- know all him.- That being said, you make me a favor continued the boatman. Tell me why I have to be rowed endlessly from one to another shore, no one will know come to relevarme.- replied the young man, but I'll tell you when vuelva.Cuando had crossed the river, he found the entrance to hell. Everything was filled with soot; the devil was out, but her mistress sat on a wide sillón.- What do you want? He asked to the waiter; and he did not seem angry. - I would like three hairs golden head of the devil -respondióle him, because without them I can not keep my esposa.- Much ask the woman replied. If the devil comes and you are here, you're going to go bad. But you give me pity; ayudarte.Y I see you, transforming it into ant said: - Disimúlate the folds of my skirt; here will be answered he seguro.- Well, it's not bad to begin with; but is it also wanted to know three things: why a fountain that gushed before wine has dried up and gives even water; why a tree which bore golden apples does not have now or leaves, and why a ferryman must be rowed endlessly from one to another bank, but never releven.- questions are very difficult to answer said the old woman but you stay quiet here and quiet and provides attentive ear to what I say the devil when I start the three hairs of oro.Al evening came the devil home, and already entering noticed that the air was not pure: - I smell, I smell human flesh! -said-; here's something extraño.Y recorded every corner, searching and rummaging, but found nothing. He loves rebuked him: - I come sweeping and fix; but as soon as you arrive, you stir everything. You always have human flesh stuck in his face. Sit and dinner, come on! We ate and drank, and as he was tired, put his head in the lap of the housekeeper, asking him despiojara one poco.A few minutes was fast asleep, snoring and snorting. Then the old woman grabbed a golden hair and snatching it, put it aside. - oops! cried the devil, what are you doing - I had a bad dream, 'said the woman and you've thrown the pelos.- And what do you dream? He asked diablo.- I dreamed that a fountain in a square oozing wine had dried up and even out water from it. Who is to blame - Oh, if they knew! He replied the devil. There's a toad under a stone fountain; if you would kill old vino.La Welling began to delousing the devil, until I saw him again asleep and snoring in a way that rattled the windowpanes. Arrancóle then the second cabello.- oops !, what are you doing? cried the devil, riding cólera.- Do not take this the wrong -excusóse is that the old woman was soñando.- And what you dream now - I dreamed that in a certain kingdom grew an apple tree produced golden apples before and instead leaves now or check. What is this should - Ah, if only they knew! He replied the devil. At the root of a rat that gnaws lives; If the kill, the tree would give golden apples; but if not kill, the tree withers of the whole. But leave me alone with your dreams; if you ever bother'll give you a sopapo.La woman reassured him and continued despiojándolo, until I saw him again sleeping and heard him snoring. Taking his third hair, it yanked. The devil jumped, shouting and willing to arrearle the old; but it managed to pacify him for the third time, saying: - What can I give if I have nightmares - What did you dream then? He asked again, full of curiosidad.- I saw a ferryman who complained of having to always rowed from one to another bank, without anyone go to relieve him. Who is to blame - Bah, the very bobo! He replied the devil. If when you get someone ask him to pass puts the oar in his hand, the other will have to Bogar and he will be free. Having already loves the three golden hair and, having coaxed the answer to all three questions, let rest in peace old ogre, who did not wake up until madrugada.Marchado the devil was the old pulled ant crease her skirt and son returned to his humana.- luck There you figure the three golden hairs -díjole-; and I suppose you'd hear what the devil said to your three preguntas.- Yes replied the lad, I've heard and not olvidaré.- already have, then, what you wanted, and you can thank volverte.Dando old for his help, he left the boy hell, very happy the success of your company. A getting to the place where the ferryman, the apprentice must give it the promised Answer.- First pass me the boy said, and I'll tell you how librarte-. When they were on the opposite bank, conveyed the advice of the devil: - A first come to ask you to pass, put the oar in mano.Siguió his way and came to the city of the barren tree, where he went to the meeting the guard, who had promised an answer. Repitióle the words of the devil: - Kill the rat gnawing the root and apples will give oro.Agradecióselo the guard and offered him a reward two asses laden with gold. Finally, he appeared at the gates of another city, one in which the source had dried up, and told the guard to hear what the devil - there's a toad under a stone fountain. Seek him and kill and shall return to have wine in abundancia.Dióle thank the guard, and with them, two donkeys loaded with oro.Al out, the lucky lad was back to the palace, with his wife, who felt great the joy to see him again, and he told his adventures. King gave the three golden hair of the devil, and repairing the monarch in the four donkeys with their loads of gold, and said, very happy: - Since you fulfilled all conditions can have my daughter. But, dear son, tell me where did you get so much gold. It's an immense treasure! - I crossed a river -respondióle the waiter and I have taken from the opposite bank, where there is gold instead of arena.- And could not go get some? asked the King, who was very codicioso.- all you want, 'said the young man. On the river there is a boatman who will pass, and the other will be able to fill the miser sacos.El margin king was on his way without wasting time, and getting to the river beckoned to the ferryman that it happened. The boatman did ride him into the boat, and before reaching the opposite bank. he put him on the pole hand, jumped ashore. Since that day, the King must be rowed; is the punishment for their pecados.- What is rowed yet - Oh yes! No one has to take the pole in hand.
New clothes the emperor	2053	1620	Spanish	many years ago that, there was an Emperor so fond of new clothes that he spent all his income to dress with the utmost elegance. He was not interested by his soldiers, and the theater, and he liked to go walking in the countryside, unless it was to show off their new outfits. Had a different dress for every hour of the day and in the same way that a king is said: "It is in the Council," our man is saying. "The Emperor is in the locker room" The city where he lived the Emperor was very cheerful and bustling. Every day many foreigners came to her, and once two scoundrels who were posing as weavers were presented, ensuring that knew how to weave the most beautiful fabrics. Not only the colors and drawings were so beautiful, but the clothes made them possessed the miraculous virtue of being invisible to anyone who was not fit for his office or hopelessly out estúpida.- They must be gorgeous dresses! He thought the Emperor. If I had, I could find out what officials of the kingdom are unfit for the position they occupy. It could distinguish between smart and dumb. Nothing, quickly put that to weave the cloth. And he commanded the two rogues pay good cash advance, to put hands to work as antes.Ellos set up a loom and simulated working; but they had nothing on the machine. However, it did provide the finest silks and gold of better quality, which pocketed prettily, while still pretending working in the empty looms until late at night. "I wonder if they advance with fabric" - thought the Emperor. But speaking a matter that was somewhat embarrassed, namely, that a man who was stupid or unfit for his office could not see what they were weaving. Not that he feared for himself; on this point it was quiet; but just in case, he preferred to send another first, to be sure how things were going. All the inhabitants of the city were informed of the particular virtue of that fabric, and everyone was eager to see how his neighbor was stupid or incompetent. "I will send my old minister to visit the weavers thought the Emperor. he is an honest man and the best person to judge the qualities of the fabric, it has talent, and no one held the office like him. "the old man and worthy minister presented thus in the room occupied by two tricksters , which they were still working on the empty looms. "God help us! Thought the minister to himself, opening eyes like naranjas-. But I do not see anything !." However, do not let palabra.Los two swindlers begged him who approached asked if could not find magnificent color and drawing. He pointed to the empty loom, and the poor man kept his eyes bulging, but seeing nothing, since nothing had. "Good God! He thought. I be stupid case? Never would have believed it, and nobody has to know. Is it possible to be unfit for office? No, of course I can not say I have not seen the fabric." - What? It does not say anything Your Excellency tissue? He asked one of the tejedores.- Oh, lovely, wonderful! He replied the old minister looking through his glasses. What a drawing and colors! Of course, I'll tell the emperor that I liked extraordinariamente.- gives us a good cheer answered the two weavers, giving the names of the colors and describing the drawing rare. The old man took good care to stay in memory explanations to repeat them to the Emperor; and so hizo.Los scammers then asked for more money, silk and gold, and they needed to continue weaving. Everything went to his pocket, because neither one strand was used in the loom, and they continued as before, working on vacías.Poco machines after the Emperor sent another official confidence to inspect the condition of the fabric and would soon learn whether list. A second thing happened that the first; He looked and looked, but as in the loom was nothing, nothing could ver.- Is not it a beautiful fabric? they asked the two cheaters, pointing and explaining the beautiful drawing that did not exist. "I'm not stupid, thought the man, and employment that I have not lost. It would be very finicky. It should anyone noticing." And he lavished praises of the fabric did not see, and praised his enthusiasm for those beautiful colors and this superb dibujo.- It's admirable! he said to the Emperador.Todos the inhabitants of the capital spoke of the magnificent fabric, therefore, that the Emperor wanted to see it with your own eyes before bring forth out of the loom. Followed by a multitude of characters chosen, among whom were two upright officials of yore, seencaminó stopped at the house where rogues, which continued weaving with all their might, even without threads or hilados.- Is not it wonderful? they asked the two dignatarios- honored. Note Your Majesty in these colors and these drawings - and pointed to the empty loom, believing that others saw the fabric "thought the Emperor How I see nothing This is terrible I be silly ¿.!.!? perhaps no good emperor? That would be awful. " - Oh, yes, very nice! -said-. I like the apruebo-. And with a gesture of welcome looked at the empty loom; I did not want to confess that he saw nothing. All components of his entourage looked and looked again, but none drew nothing of it; However, everything was exclaiming, as the Emperor: - Oh, how nice! - and he was advised to estrenase dresses made of fabric that, in the procession to be held soon. - It's beautiful, very elegant, great! - ran from mouth to mouth, and everyone seemed entranced with her. The Emperor gave an award to each of the two miscreants to have it catch fire in his buttonhole, and the weavers named imperiales.Durante all night preceding the day of the feast, the two swindlers were raised, with lamps sixteen on, so people saw that were active in making new dresses Sovereign. Remove simulated fabric loom, cut with shears and sew with needles strand; finally said: - Finally, the dress is ready Emperor came accompanied by his chief knights and knaves twofilm, raising her arms as if sostuviesen something, they said - This is pants. There's the coat. - Here's the mantle ... The garments are light as if they were cobweb; One would not bring anything on the body, but this is precisely how good the tela.- Yes! - all the courtiers nodded, even though they saw nothing, for nothing había.- Want Your Majesty deign to take off the suit carrying bribones- said the two so that we can clothe the new front of the mirror He took off his clothes Emperor? , and both pretended to put the various pieces of the new dress, which claimed to have finished earlier. And taking to the Emperor by the waist, made like him to be bound something, the tail surely; Monarch and everything was spinning before the espejo.- God, and what you feel good, you're going wonderfully! They would cry them all. Whoops drawing and colors go! It's a beautiful suit! - The pallium under which your Majesty will during the procession, waiting in the street - announced the master of Ceremonias.- Okay, I point to the Emperor he said. It looks good on me, right? - and returned once again facing the mirror, so that everyone believed he saw the vestido.Los you valets responsible for holding the tail down hands to the floor to lift it, and moved forward as if to hold something in the air; by anything the world had confessed that they saw nothing. And so the Emperor walked under the magnificent canopy, while the crowd from the street and windows, said: - What a beautiful new dresses are the Emperor! Tail magnificent! How beautiful is it! -. Nobody allowed others would realize that he saw nothing, not to be had for incapable in office or stupid. No suit the monarch had been so successful as this. But he has nothing on! She exclaimed suddenly a child. - Dear God, hear the voice of innocence! - said his father; and everyone was repeating to hearing what he had just said the pequeño.- Do not take anything; It is a child who says that he has nothing - But he has nothing on! cried at the end, the people entero.Aquello disturbed the Emperor, because the people had guessed right; but he thought: "We must endure to the end." And he continued proudest than before; valets and continued to hold the tail nonexistent.
Mother Hulda (Frau Holle)	225	480	Spanish	Certain widow had two daughters, one of them beautiful and diligent; the other ugly and lazy. However, I wanted much more to this second, because it was true his daughter, and carried all the other tasks of the home, making her the Cinderella of the house. The poor girl had to sit every day next to a well, to the edge of the road, and estarse spinning until her fingers bled. Bloodstained as he put one day the spindle, the girl wanted to wash it in the pit, and behold, it slipped from his hand and fell to the bottom. Crying, went to tell what happened to her stepmother, and this, it was very hard of heart, he quarreled bitterly and said, "Since you dropped the spindle well, go get him out!" He returned to the pit girl, not knowing what to do, and in his anguish, threw herself into the water in search of the spindle. He lost consciousness, and waking up and return itself was in a beautiful meadow sun-drenched and covered with thousands of flowers. Walking through it, he came to an oven full of bread, which shouted: "Get me out of here Get me out of here, I'm pretty burned already cooked!." He approached her, and with the shovel, was taking the loaves. I continuing his way, he saw a apple tree laden with apples, who shouted in turn: ". Shake me, shake me all the apples are ripe" She shook the tree began to fall a shower of blocks to not get any, then that he had gathered in a heap, she went on. Finally he reached a house, a window which was leaning an old; but since had very large teeth, the girl ran off, scared. Old called?.. "What are you afraid, my child stay with me If you want to take care of my house, you'll have a very good Just be careful to shake well my bed so that the feathers fly, because then it snows in earth. I am the Mother Snow. " A hearing to speak in old so affectionate tone, the girl took courage, and, accepting the offer, he entered his service. He made all things to your full satisfaction, and shook the bed, so that the feathers flew snowflakes. In return, he enjoyed good life, did not have to hear another word hard, and every day ate cooked and roasted. When they had a season at home Mother Snow, entróle strange sadness that she herself knew explained, until at the end, he realized that he was homesick. While he was there a thousand times better than at home, she missed yours, and so one day he said to her mistress: "I feel homesick, and although I'm fine here, I do not feel strong enough to continue, I have to go back to mine. " Mother Snow replied: "I am pleased to feel desire to go back home, and since I have served so faithfully, I myself will go with you." And, taking her hand, led her to a large gate. The gate was open, and at the time of transfer it girl, copious rain fell upon her a gold; and gold was left attached to the clothes, so that his whole body was covered with the precious metal. "This is for you, as a reward for the diligence with which I have served," said Mother Hulda, to the time he returned the spindle had fallen into the well. then the door was shut, and the girl found herself back into the world, not far from the home of his mother. And when he came to the yard, the rooster, who was perched on the parapet of the well, shouted: "! Quiquiriquí, our golden girl has come home" He entered the girl, and both her stepmother and her daughter received it very well seeing coming cover oro.Contóles girl what had happened, and the learning stepmother how he had so acquired wealth would seek same fortune to his daughter, the ugly and lazy. Mandola, then, spun by the well, and the spindle blemished blood made that a finger pricking and put his hand on a thorn. He then threw the spindle into the well, and then she jumped. It came as his stepsister, to the meadow delicious, and started down the same path. A passing next to the oven, the bread returned to exclaim: "Get me out of here Get me out of here, I'm pretty burned already cooked!." But the lazy he replied: "You think I want to get dirty?" and he went long. Not quickly found the apple, which he shouted "shake me, shake me All apples are ripe!". Then said she: "I take good care What if I fell one in the head!?" and he continued forward. A arriving opposite the house of Mother Snow, he was not afraid of his teeth because he had news of them, and remained at his service. The first day was dominated and worked with application, promptly obeying her mistress, thinking the gold was going to give him. But the second day and began to loiter; the third was dragged its feet on getting up in the morning, and so worse every day. Nor did the bed as directed by Mother Snow, or shaking so that feathers were flying. In the end, Mrs. tired and dismissed her with great satisfaction the lazy, believing arrival time of the golden rain. Snow's mother also led to the portal; but instead of gold they poured over it a large pot of fish. "This is payment for your services," he told her mistress, closing the portal. And so lazy at home, with all the covered body of a fish, and the cock of the well, to see her, began to shout presented "! Quiquiriquí, Our dirty girl has come home" The fish was left attached, and throughout the rest of his life could not be removed from the body.
Monte Simeli	1349	676	Spanish	There were once two brothers, one rich and one poor. The rich, however, never helped the poor, which barely made a living trading corn, and sometimes he was so bad that I had bread for his wife and children. Once when he was wheeling a barrow through the forest, she looked away, and saw a large bare mountain that had never seen before. He stopped and watched with great asombro.Mientras analyzed that, suddenly he saw coming twelve great men in the direction of where he was, and thinking it might be robbers hid the cart into the thicket, climbed up a tree and waited for see what happened. However, the twelve men went to the mountain and shouted: - "! Mountain Semsi, mountain Semsi, open yourself" - And immediately the mountain opened to the middle, and the twelve went into it, and once inside, the mountain was closed. In the After a while, it opened again, and the men came out carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders. And when they were all in the light of the day, they said: - "Mountain Semsi, mountain Semsi, ciérrate!" - And the mountain closed; there remained any entrance to it, and the twelve departed from there .When they were no longer in sight, the poor man fell from the tree and was curious to know what had really hidden secret in the mountains. So he came over and shouted: - "! Semsi Mountain, Mountain Semsi, open yourself" - And the mountain opened to him also. He entered it, and the whole mountain was a cave full of gold and silver, with large quantities of pearls and sparkling jewels, as if they were grains of corn during harvest. The poor man did not know what to do, if you take some of that treasure for himself or not, but so filled his pockets with gold, leaving the pearls and precious stones where they were. When he went shouted: - "! Mountain Semsi, mountain Semsi, ciérrate" - And the mountain was closed, and returned home with his cart and his carga.Y since he had no more anxiety, and could buy food for wife and children with gold, and also good wine in the store. Developing lived happily and gave aid to the poor, and did good to those who needed it. However, when he ended the gold obtained was where his brother and borrowed a barrel to measure wheat, was mountain and brought back another little gold for him, but never touched any of the most valuable things .The rich brother, however, was every day more envious of the possessions of his brother, and the good life he led, and could not understand where it came from his wealth, nor what he did with his brother barrel measure. Then he had a little trick, and covered the entire bottom of the barrel with rubber, and the next time, when the brother returned the barrel, found a piece of gold stuck in it. Immediately went to his brother and asked: - "What you measure my barrel?" - "Corn and barley." - respondióEntonces showed him the piece of gold, and threatened that if he did not tell the truth, I accuse the authorities. Brother then told him the whole story, as sucedió.El rich man, ordered to enlist their biggest wagon and headed for the mountains, determined to seize the best opportunity as did his brother, and bring back one lot of different treasures. When he reached the mountain shouted: - "Semsi Mountain, Mountain Semsi, open up!" - The mountain opened and he entered. There were all recumbent treasures in his sight, and for a while could not decide on which would begin. In the end, it was filled with many precious stones as he could carry. He wanted to take her out charge, but his heart and soul were so full of the treasure that had even forgotten the name of the mountain, and cried - ". Mountain Simeli, mountain Simeli, open yourself" - But that was not the correct name of the mountain, she never opened and remained closed. Then he was alarmed, and the more I tried to remember, the more you confused thoughts, and their treasures did not serve him at all. At sunset, the mountain opened, and the twelve robbers came and went, and when they saw him burst out laughing and said: - "Pajarito, we find order You thought you never would notice that you've been twice! ? Do not we catch it then, but this third time will not go back "- then the rich man said: -".. but not me, it was my brother "- and left him beg for his life and say what I would like, but at the end they left him locked in the cave until his last days.
Bear's skin	957	361	Spanish	A young enlisted in the army and behaved with great courage, always being first in every battle. Everything went well during the war, but when peace was made, received the license and order to go where he pleased. They had killed his parents and had no home, he begged his brothers to take him in until his return to start the war; but they had the hard hearted and said they could do nothing for him, that was useless and should move forward as best I could. The poor devil had no more than his rifle, threw him on his back and walked uncertainly. It reached a very large desert, which is not seen but a circle of trees. He sat there in the shade, thinking sadly of his fate. 'I have money, I have not learned any trade; while there has been war I could serve the king, but now that it has done no good peace for nothing; so I see I have to starve. At the same time he heard noise and looked up and could see before him a stranger dressed in green with a very luxurious suit, but with a hideous cloven foot. I know what you need, he said the stranger, which is money; you'll want as much as possible, but I need to know if you're afraid, then give nothing cowards. -Soldado and cowardly, replied the young man, are two words that have never twinned. You can submit to the test you want. 'Well, he replied the stranger, look behind you. The soldier turned and saw a huge bear was going to pounce on him giving horrible grunts. Ah! Ah! he exclaimed, I'll break your nose and take your gains to snarl; and throwing the gun into his face, shot him in the face and the bear fell dead on the spot. I see, said the stranger, who do not lack courage, but you must also fill other conditions. Nothing stops me, he replied the soldier, who knew very well who was standing by him, whenever my eternal salvation is not compromised. 'You judge for yourself, he replied the man. For seven years you must not wash or comb his beard and hair, nor cut your nails, nor pray. I'll give you a dress and a coat that you will take all this time. If you die in this range you belong to me, but if you live more than seven years will be free and rich for your entire life. The soldier thought that the great misery was reduced; He who had defied death so many times, could well risk it again. I agree. The devil took off his green dress and was given saying: -While're wearing this dress whenever put your hand in your pocket thou shalt bring forth a handful of gold. Then he removed the skin the bear and said, 'This will be your coat and your bed, then you should not have any other, and because of this dress will be called Bearskin. The devil disappeared quickly. The soldier put on his dress and putting his hand in his pocket, he saw that the devil had not deceived him. Bearskin also endorsed and began to run the world giving good life and not lacking anything that makes fatten people and enflaquecer to the pocket. The first year his appearance was passable, but the second had all the air of a monster. Hair covered her face almost completely beard had mingled with them, and his face so full of silt was that if they had sown grass had been born in him insurance. Everyone was running away from him; However, as was helping all the poor money to pray because they died in the seven years, and as he talked like a man, there was always good host. In the fourth year he entered an inn, whose owner did not want to meet him even in the stable, for fear that not frighten the horses. But when Bearskin pulled out a handful of hard-of-pocket, was allowed to win the pattern and gave him a room at the back of the yard on condition that they would not see so you do not lose your reputation settlement. One night Bearskin was sitting in his room, wishing wholeheartedly the conclusion of the seven years, when he heard mourn in the immediate room. As had a good heart, opened the door and saw an old man sobbing with his head in his hands. But seeing Bearskin enter the frightened man wanted to flee. But he calmed finally heard a human voice speaking, and Bearskin concluded, by dint of friendly words, for him to refer the cause of his displeasure. He had lost all his possessions and was reduced to such misery daughters he could not pay the host and would put prisoner. If you have no other care, said Bearskin, I have enough money to get you out of your apuro.-Y sending coming to the landlord paid him, and also gave a sum that unfortunate strong for your needs. The old man saw himself did not know how to express their appreciation. Come with me, he said; my daughters are models of beauty, you will choose one for women and not refuse when I know what you just did for me. Easygoing is indeed a bit strange, but a woman will be reformed soon. Bearskin consented to accompany the old man, but when the eldest daughter saw its ugly face, he started running scared screaming with fright. The second walk looked firm and after having covered up and down, said, 'How to accept a husband who does not have a human figure? The shaven I saw bear a day at the fair, and was dressed man with a hussar pelisse and white gloves. At the least it was just ugly and could one get used to it. But the less said, 'My dear father must be a very honest man, since he has rescued us; have promised a woman and must honor your Word.-Unfortunately the face Bearskin was covered in hair and mud, because if not might have seen how delighted he was in his heart to hear these words . He took a ring from his finger, broke in two, gave half his fiancee, recommending meantime he would keep it retained the other. In half that he inscribed his own name, and the young in which he kept for himself. Then he left her, saying: -OS leave it up within three years, if I get married, but if I do not return is that I will be dead and then free. Ask God to preserve my life. The poor girl was always sad from that day and the tears in his eyes when he remembered her future husband. His sisters, meanwhile, were directing the coarsest jests. Be careful, as the saying, when you give your hand, do not desuelle with his paw. -Desconfía of him, said the second; Bears are fond of white meat; If you like you comerá.-You'll have to always do his will, as he added, because otherwise be gruñidos. will not be short-But, added the second, the wedding dance will be glad; bears dance well. The poor girl kept talking to her sisters without incomodarse. As for the man in the bearskin, he was always about doing all the good he could and giving generously to the poor that they might seek for him. When reached to the last day of the seven years, he returned to the desert and stood in the square of trees. a very strong air rose, and soon present the devil in a bad mood; the soldier gave his old clothes and asked his green. Wait, Bearskin said, it must cleanse me before. The devil was forced, despite himself well to fetch water and wash, comb her hair and cut nails. The young man took the air of a brave soldier lad much better than it was before. Bearskin was relieved of a great weight when he broke the devil without torment him in any other way. He returned to the city, and put on a magnificent velvet dress, and up to a coach drawn by four horses, white, was driving home from his fiancee. No one knew him; the father took him by a superior officer and led him to the room where his daughters were. The two largest made him sit beside him, they served an excellent meal, and declaring that they had never seen a handsomer man. As for his fiancee, she sat across from him with her black dress, downcast eyes without saying a word. The father asked, finally, whether he wanted to marry one of her daughters, and the two biggest ran to her room to get dressed, thinking each would be preferred. The stranger was alone with his fiancee, took half of the ring in his pocket and threw him into a glass of wine offered. Citing began to drink and distinguished that fragment in the bottom of the vessel; his heart trembled with joy. He picked up the other half that hung to his neck and approached the first, joining both exactly. Then he said, I'm your fiance, you've seen under a bearskin; Now, by the grace of God, I have regained the human figure and I am purified of my sins. And taking her in his arms, he shook them affectionately at the very moment they entered her two sisters with their magnificent costumes; but when they saw that the young man was so handsome for his sister and the man was Bearskin, they left full of disgust and anger. The first is pulled down a well and the second hung from a tree. At night they knocked on the door, and going to open the husband saw the devil in his green dress she said: 'I have gone wrong; I lost a soul but I have won two.
Pulgarcito	349	700	Spanish	Once upon a poor farmer who was one night with home stoking the fire, while his wife spun, sitting at his lado.Dijo man: - How sad not to have children! What a silence in the house, while the other is all noise and joy! - Yes, 'said the woman, sighing. Even if it was one, and even if it was small as a thumb, I would be satisfied. I would like more than our vida.Sucedió the woman decomposed felt, and at the end of seven months brought the world a child who, although perfectly formed in all its members, was no longer a pulgar.Y finger parents said : - it is as we had hoped, and we will want with all my heart. Considering their size, they named him Tom Thumb. They fed him as well as they could, but the child was not growing, but still so small as to the principle. Anyway, his gaze was shrewd and sprightly, and soon proved to be smart as they come, and very able to get away with anything that emprendiera.Un day the woodcutter was about to go to the forest to collect firewood he said to himself, speaking in a low voice: "If I had someone to take the car !." - Father! Pulgarcito- said, I'll take the car. You rest assured; when it will be due in the forest. The man laughed, saying: - How will you manage? Do not you see you're too small to handle the reins? - No matter, Father. If only hitch mother, I set it up at the ear of the horse and lead you where you want. "Well, thought the man, not miss anything to prove." When he rang the appointed time, the mother caught the horse and put his ear Pulgarcito; and so it was bossing the little animal, "Arre 'After passing !. Soo!" Everything went without a hitch, as if little had been an accomplished highway, and the car took the road to the forest. But behold, when, at the around the corner, the rapazuelo shouted, "Arre, arre !," were right to spend two forasteros.- Here! cried one, 'what is this? There goes a car, Cartman yells at the horse, however, is not seen anywhere. - Here's some mystery! He nodded the other. Follow the cart and see where it goes. But the car went into the woods, heading straight to the spot where the father was cutting leña.Al Pulgarcito him, shouted - Father, I am here with the car, put me down to earth! The man held the horse with his left hand, while his right ear pulled from the nag to his son, who sat on a blade of grass. A seeing the two strangers to Pulgarcito were dumbfounded, until at the end, wearing one aside the other, he said - Hey, this trifle could make our fortune if exhibiésemos from city to city. I's buy. And, addressing the woodcutter, they said: - Sell Us little man, it will go down well with us. - No, 'said the father, is the light of my eyes, and would not for all the gold of the mundo.Pero Pulgarcito, who had heard the proposition, clutching a fold of her father's pants, climbed to his shoulder and whispered in his ear: - Father, let me go; I'll be back. Then the woodcutter gave men for a nice piece of gold. - Where do you want to sit? -They Asked. - Put me on the brim of your hat; I can walk about it and contemplate the landscape: I'll be careful not to fall. They did what they asked, and once Tom Thumb had taken leave of his father, outsiders left him and walked until dusk. Then said little: - Let me down, I need it. - Bah !, do not move 'I replied the man whose hat was traveling enanillo-. I will not get angry; Also the birds loose something from time to time. - No, no Pulgarcito- protested, I'm a guy well educated; Put me down, Quick! The man took off his hat and deposited the little boy in a field that stretched to the edge of the road. He hit a few jumps between terroirs and suddenly, escabullóse in a gazapera who had been looking for. - Good evening, gentlemen, can go on without me! he shouted from his refuge, mockingly. They went to the hole and they were poking him with sticks, but in vain; Thumbling got increasingly in; and as the night was soon shut down, they had to resume their way sulky and empty bags. When Tom Thumb was sure they were gone, he left his hiding place. "That walk through the countryside dark is dangerous, 'he said, with the slightest carelessness you break your neck." Fortunately he gave an empty snail shell, "Blessed be God cried Here I can spend the night safe!.." And got into it. In a little while, and almost falling asleep, he heard two men passed and that one of them said. - How will we will make up for us with money and silver from the priest? - I can tell you cried Pulgacito. - What is this? he asked, startled, one of the thieves. I heard someone. Sa stopped both to listen, and Tom Thumb went on -Llevenme with you, I will help you. - Where are you? - Look on the ground and notice where the voice comes replied. At the end they discovered thieves and raised in the air - UNHAPPiLY microbe! Do you intend to help? - Look 'he answered. I'll get through the bars of the gate, into the room of the priest, and pass them everything they want to take. - All right, 'said the thieves. We will see how you behave. To get to the priest's house, Tom Thumb crept inside the room, and already inside, shouted with all his might: - You want to take everything here? The Reivers, frightened, said: - Speak softly, do not go to wake someone else Pulgarcito, as if they had not heard, repeated cry peeled: - What do they want? Will they take everything? Heard him cook, who slept in an adjoining room, and, sitting up in bed, he listened. Thieves, frightened, had run; but at the end of a stretch they regained courage, and thinking that this diablillo only gastarles wanted a joke, stepped back and said: - Come on, do not play and pásanos algo.Entonces Pulgarcito started shouting for the third time with the full force of his lungs : - It will give them all at once; only put out your hands! The maid, who followed stalking, heard clearly his words and, leaping out of bed, then rushed to the door, whereupon the robbers ran as a soul by the diablo.La servant, he did not see anything suspicious, She came to light a candle, and Pulgarcito took advantage of his momentary absence to go to the barn without being seen by anyone. Domestic, after exploring every corner, went to bed convinced she had been dreaming despierta.Pulgarcito climbed by tallitos of hay and ended up finding a place to sleep on purpose. He wanted to rest until daybreak, and then headed for the home of your padres.Pero still had to pass many other adventures. Never sorrows and tribulations are finished in this underworld! At the daybreak, the maid jumped out of bed to feed livestock. He went first to the barn and took an armful of grass, precisely one in which poor Tom Thumb was durmiendo.Y is the case that his dream was so deep, that is not realized nothing woke up and found in the mouth the cow, who had taken along with grass. - Oh my GOD! he exclaimed. How I will have gone to this mill? But soon he realized where he had gone. It was something to be careful not to get between the teeth and be reduced to mush. Then there was slipping with grass to the stomach. - In this little room they have forgotten the windows he said. Here the sun does not enter, nor even light a little light. The room did not like, and the worst was that as more and more hay came through the door, the space is continually reduced. In the end, really scared, pse cried out with all his might: - Enough forage, fodder enough! The maid was milking the cow, hearing about and seeing no one noting that it was the same voice last night, was so frightened that fell from his stool and poured all leche.Corrió to the priest and told him , tousled: - Good God, sir pastor, the cow has spoken! - You are crazy? He replied the priest; but, nevertheless, he went down to the barn to see what happened. Just put your foot in it, Tom Thumb shouted again - Enough forage, fodder enough! The priest was stunned in turn, thinking that some evil spirit had entered into the cow, and ordered her killed. They did; but the stomach, where Tom Thumb was locked, was thrown into the estercolero.Allí the little boy tried to break through to the outside, and although it cost a lot, could finally reach the entrance. I was about to stick his head when he fell into a new misfortune, as a hungry wolf's stomach swallowed a mouthful. Pulgarcito he not discouraged. "Maybe he can get along with the wolf," he thought, and, from his belly, he said - wolf friend, a place where you can eat at ease. - Where is? He asked the wolf. - In such and such a house. You'll have to go down the drain and you will find scones, bacon and sausages to give you a surfeit -. And he gave the address of his parents' house. The wolf did not repeat; it was drained into the sewer, and, entering the pantry, he swelled to fill. She fed up, wanted to leave; but he had filled so that he could not go out the same way. With this Pulgarcito had counted, which, within the belly of the wolf, he began to scream and fuss with all the vigor of his lungs. - Shut! 'I said the wolf. You are going to wake people in the house. - And that! He replied the pequeñuelo-. You are filled you well, now it's my turn to have fun-and resumed crying. Awoke at last, his father and his mother and ran to the pantry, looking inside through a crack. A seeing that inside was a wolf, turned to look, man, ax, and the woman, a sickle. - You stay behind the man said coming into the room. I'll hit him with an ax, and if not kill him, then you open your belly with the sickle. Tom Thumb heard his father's voice and shouted: - Father, I am here in the belly of the wolf. And then the man exclaimed, joyfully: - Praise God, our son has appeared! -and he sent his wife to leave the sickle, not to hurt Pulgarcito. Raising his arm, dealt such a blow on the head of the beast, it collapsed, dead on the spot. They then went to look for knife and scissors, and opening the belly of the animal, took it to his son. - Ouch! He exclaimed the father, how distressed we've passed! - Yes, Father, I have run much of the world; I thank God again breathe the air puro.- And where were you? - Oh, father! I was at a gazapera, in the stomach of a cow and in the belly of a wolf. But today I'll stay with you. - and we will not sell for all the treasures of the world, 'he said the parents, caressing and kissing his beloved Pulgarcito. You got to eat and drink and commissioned new dresses, for those who had had spoiled during his wanderings.
Rapunzel	110	310	Spanish	There was once a man and a woman who lived alone and heartbroken not to have children, until finally the woman conceived the hope that Our Lord was about to satisfy his longing. The house they lived in was on the back wall a window overlooking a magnificent garden, which grew splendid flowers and plants; but he was surrounded by a high wall and no one dared enter it because it belonged to a very powerful witch and feared around the world. One day the woman looked out that window to admire the garden, and saw a patch of rampion hermosísimas planted, so fresh and green, which awakened in her a craving violent eating. The craving was increasing every passing day, and as the woman thought impossible, was losing color and desmirriándose, visibly. Seeing her so unwell, scared her husband asked: "What ails you, woman?" - "Ouch!" I said to her, "I'll die if I can not eat rampion of the garden behind our house." The man, who loved his wife, he thought, "Before get the rampion let her die, regardless." And in the evening, he jumped the wall of the garden witch, hastily plucked a handful of rampion and took his wife. This was prepared once a salad and ate very comfortable; and both him and liked him so much, that, the next day she longed for it three times more intense. If you want to enjoy peace, the husband had to jump back to the garden. And he did, at dusk. But he had barely set foot on the floor, had a shock terrible, for he saw the witch come before it. "How dare you," he said to him with angry look, "to which a burglar enter into my garden and steal my rampion? We'll pay dearly." - "Ouch!" the man replied, "Have pity on me If I have done has been a great need.. my wife saw from your window you rampion and felt a craving to eat them so great, that if I had not would die" The sorceress left to soften and said: "If it is as you say, I'll let you take rampion many as you want, on one condition: you must give me the child that will come will be fine and take care like a mother.." It was so rushed the man, who agreed to everything, and when the child was born, she was a child, the Witch and presented himself after putting the name of Rapunzel; is the llevó.Verdezuela was the most beautiful girl I saw the sun. When he was twelve, the sorceress locked her in a tower which stood in the middle of a forest and had no doors or stairs; only the top was a tiny window. When the witch wanted to let in, she to the foot and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair!" Rapunzel had beautiful long hair like fine strands of gold. When he heard the voice of the enchantress came loose braids, wrapped them around a window hook and hanging left: and when they had twenty ells, ellas.Al witch climbed after a few years, it happened that the son of the King, being in the woods, happened to pass by the tower and heard a voice singing so sweetly that he stood still to listen. It was Rapunzel, who in her loneliness trying to air his sweet voice. The prince wanted to climb up to her and looked for the door of the tower, but finding none, he turned to the palace. However, that song had so enraptured that every day going to the forest to listen. Finding himself once hidden behind a tree, saw approaching the sorceress, and heard her screaming, going to or higher "! Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair" Rapunzel let her tresses, and the witch climbed to the top of the tower. "If this is the ladder to climb up there," the prince said, "I also try fortune." And the next day, when it was getting dark, she went out of the foot of the tower and said, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair!" Braid down quickly, and Prince subió.En the first time, he was frightened Rapunzel Rapunzel was frightened at seeing a man because his eyes had never seen one. But the prince addressed him with great affability and explained that his song had so impressed his heart, he had not enjoyed a moment of peace to find a way to climb to see it. At the listening he lost Rapunzel fear, and when he asked her if she wanted for her husband, seeing the girl was young and handsome, she thought, "I want more than the old," and he replied, putting his hand on hers: " Yes, very much I want to go with you, but do not know how to lose here every time you come, bring a skein of silk. with them will braid a ladder and, when completed, will go down and you take me on your horse. " They agreed that until then the prince would come every night, as it was day old. The witch suspected nothing, until one day Rapunzel asked: "Tell me, Aunt Gothel, how much it costs me Subiros to you that the prince, who is up in a jiffy?" - "Ah, wicked!" cried the witch, "what do I hear? I thought you had isolated around the world, and yet, you deceived me." And, furious, picked up the beautiful braids Rapunzel, gave them a few laps around his left hand, pushing scissors right, whick, whick, in the blink close eye eyes he cut them, and threw the the hair splendid floor. And it was so ruthless that led to poor Rapunzel into a desert place, condemning her to a life of desolation and miseria.El same day that he had taken the girl, the witch tied braids cut the hook of the window, when the prince came and said, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair!" Witch released them, and for them the son of the King rose. But instead of finding his beloved Rapunzel found himself face to face with the sorceress, looking at him with evil eyes and evil, "Aha!" exclaimed mockingly, "you wanted to take the pretty girl;. but the bird is no longer in the nest nor will sing the cat has hunted, and you will draw the eyes Rapunzel is lost to you;. never you'll never see it. " Prince, beside himself with grief and despair, threw himself from the top of the tower. He saved his life, but the thorns on which was to fall they dug into the eyes, and the poor man had to wandering wandering through the woods, blind, feeding on roots and berries and crying constantly losing his little wife loved. And so he walked aimlessly for several years, miserable and sad, until at the end, came to the desert where Rapunzel lived with two small children the twin little children, a boy and a girl, who had given birth . Prince heard a voice that seemed familiar, and the come Rapunzel knew and he started crying neck. Two of her tears welled eyes, and at the same time you cleared, returning to see as before. Then he took her to his kingdom, where he was received with great joy, and lived many happy, happy years.
San José in the woods	1898	480	Spanish	Once upon a time a mother who had three daughters; most were poor and dismissive; the second, despite its flaws, was already much better, and the third, a paragon of piety and kindness. Mother, strangely enough, he preferred most, and instead, could not suffer little, so I used to send her to a forest in order to get rid of it, convinced that one day or another will go astray and never return home. But the guardian angel who watches over good children, not abandoned, and always driving on the right track. However, once the little angel pretended distracted, and the girl failed to find the path to return. He walked until dusk and seeing in the distance a little light, went towards her hastily and came to a small hut. He knocked, the door opened and the cross it, found himself facing a second door, which he called too. He went to open an old man of venerable appearance and very white beard. It was St. Joseph himself, he said, affectionate: - Come in, small, sit by the fire in my seat and warm yourself; I'll pick limpid water if you're thirsty; but food wise, here in the woods I have nothing to offer you, as a non rootlets will have to peel and cocer.Dióle San Jose roots; the girl the I scraped carefully and then removing the piece of tortilla and bread that he had given his mother, put everything to fire in a pout and fired in a puré.Cuando was prepared, and said San Jose: - I have so much hungry! You do not give me some of your food The girl willingly served a greater portion of which he was left to herself; but God blessed their dinner, and the girl was sated. Then the saint said: - Now, to sleep; but I have only one bed. You're sleeping in it, and I will let down on the floor, on the paja.- No - replied the girl - you're left with the bed; enough for me to paja.Pero San Jose picked her up and carried her to the little bed where the girl slept after reciting his prayers. A waking up the next morning, he wanted to say good morning to the old, but I did not see it. I searched everywhere without being able to find it, until finally, behind the door, he discovered a bag with money so heavy that I could barely take it; and above it was written it was for the girl who had slept there that night. He carrying the sack, made his way back home, which arrived without mishap. And he gave all the money to his mother, she could not help but be satisfied. To the other day entráronle second sister wanted to go to the forest, and the mother gave her much more tortilla and bread that her sister Eve. They discoursed things as small. I arrived at nightfall the hut San Jose, who gave roots to cook them, and when they were already prepared, he also said: - I'm hungry! Give me some of your cena.Respondióle girl: - We iguales.Y parts when the saint offered the bed, telling him that he would sleep on the straw, the girl replied: - No, sleeps in the bed with me; there is room for dos.Pero San Jose picked her up, laid her on the cot, and he fell on the straw. In the morning, waking the child, San Jose had disappeared, and the girl behind the door, found a small bag, a foot long, with money, and above had also written that it was for the girl who had spent night in the house. The girl left the bag and arriving home, he gave his mother; but he had previously kept secretly two or three monedas.Picóse with this most, and proposed also go to the woods the next day. The mother put all the tables and all the bread you wanted the girl, and also cheese. A sunset with San Jose found himself in the hut, like her sisters. Cooked the roots, to the San Jose say: - I'm hungry! Give me some of your food - the girl replied: - Wait till I'm tired; I'll give you what I have sobrado.Y it ate almost everything, and San Jose had to be limited to scrape the old good plato.El then offered his bed, he brindándose to sleep on the floor, and she accepted without fuss, She is lying on the bed and letting the old slept on the hard straw. A waking up in the morning, I did not see anywhere in San Jose; but he did not care for it, but it went straight to find the bag of money behind the door. It seemed to him that there was something on the floor and unable to distinguish what it was, he bent down and gave noses against the object, which he was adhered to the nose. At the rise realized with horror that it was a second nose pressed to the first. He began to mourn and scream, but nothing helped; I always saw those noses that both disfigured span. He ran screaming until he reached San Jose, and, kneeling at his feet, he stood to beg and plead so hard, that the good saint, pitied, took the new nose and gave him two reales.Al reach house, recibióla mother at the door and asked: - What gift and bring her lying, said: - a large sack of money;? but I've lost along the way. Lost! - cried the woman -. Then we have to go get it - and, holding her hand, wanted to take her to the bosque.Al principle, the girl cried and refused to accompany her; But in the end, he went with it; but by the way they attacked the countless lizards and snakes, which they could not escape. A bite killed the bad girl; and, as the mother, they got are bitten on one foot as punishment for not having better educated his daughter.
Six out of all	674	513A	Spanish	There was once a man skillful in all kinds of arts and crafts. Served in the army, had been brave and courageous; but at the end of the war it was discharged without giving more than three real as costas.- help Await some said, that not one mocks me. As find men I need, they are not going to be enough for the King, to pay me, all the treasures of the país.Partió very irritated, and crossing a forest saw a man who had just uproot six trees as easily that if they were reeds. Said to him: - Will you be my servant and go with me - Yes replied the man, but first let me take my mother this hacecillo wood -;? grabbed one of the logs, it did serve as a rope to tie the remaining five, and charging the beam shoulder, he took it. In the little time I was back, and he and his new master set off. Said to the master: - Let's get out of everything, we walked dos.Habían a while, when they found a hunter who put knee and pointing the shotgun. Master asked him: - What do you aim, hunter To which the hunter: - Two miles from here is a fly perched on the branch of an oak tree, and I acertarla in the eye izquierdo.- Fly now with me! said the master- all three together we will get out of todo.Avínose the hunter and joined them. Soon they came to a place where seven windmills rose, with blades rotating at full speed, even though the slightest breeze is not felt, and that a single leaf of tree did not move. The man said: - I do not know what moves these mills, for not blowing a breath of wind-and went on his way with his peers. They had traveled two miles, when they saw an individual climbed a tree, holding a finger one of the nostrils, blew the other.- Hey !, what are you doing up there? He asked the man; to which he replied the other: - Two miles from here are seven windmills, and I'm blowing them to girar.- Come with me, 'he said the other man, that going the four will get out of todo.Bajó of the tree blower and joined others. At the end of a long way they met a character who stood on one leg; He had removed the other and beside her. Master said to him: - Well you have not managed badly to rest - I'm andarín replied the man, and I have removed a leg not to go so fast;! when I run with both legs, or birds can seguirme.- Come with me, going all five together we will get out of todo.Marchóse with them, and a little while after them came another step wearing his hat over his ear. - Go finesse! She cried the soldier. Take off your hat ear and put it on your head! It would seem that you need a tornillo.- I do take good care of replied the other, because if I put it on the head, begin to make a cold so terrible that the birds of the sky will freeze and fall muertas.- Vente me said the leader, who six together we going to get out of todo.Y the group came to town hawking whose king had commanded that his daughter would be for the man who aviniese to compete with it in the race and expires; it being understood that if he failed, would also lose his head. He presented the head to King and said - I'll have one of my run raised by mí.A which King replied: - Well, but on condition that you also put your head in pledge, so that if you lose, you will die the dos.Aceptada the condition, the man sent to the broker put the other leg and said: - and now, ready, and see that ganemos.Habíase agreed that the winner would be the one to return first from a remote source, bringing a water jug. They gave two separate jars the princess and his competitor, and the two set off simultaneously. But at a time when the princess had he walked but a short space, and the andarín had lost sight, as if he had taken the viento.Llegó to the source and, after filling the water jug, undertook the Return. In the middle of the road, however, I felt himself fatigued and fell on the floor with jug at his side, he fell asleep. Was, however, careful to use as a hard pillow horse skull found there, so hard I of the cushion will not let him sleep mucho.Entretanto the princess, who was very good runner, much as you would in a normal person, he had come to turn to the source and filling the jug, he had taken over. A seeing his opponent slept on the floor, was glad, saying: - The enemy is in my hands! -and vaciándole the vessel, he followed his camino.Todo would have been lost if not for the hunter lynx eyes that had seen the scene from the roof of the palace. It was said to herself: - As the daughter of the King not get away with it-and, carrying the shotgun, shot with such aim that hit the skull that served as a sleeping pillow without touching it. He awoke the andarín and realized that his pitcher was empty and the princess was ahead. man is not discouraged for so little; he returned to the fountain, filled the jug again, and still came to the palace ten minutes before your competidora.- Now yes I have done to serve your legs! -said-; I've done the leg can not be called correr.Pero to the King, and even his daughter, it hurt that marrying a soldier vulgar, so they deliberated on how to get rid of him and his men. King said: - He devised a means, do not worry; You will see how we get rid of them -. And, addressing the six, they spoke ASi: Now you have to celebrate your victory with a good feast-and led them to a room that had the floor and the iron gates; As for the windows, they were secured by thick bars of iron too. In the room they had set a table with succulent viands, and King went on: Enter there and regalaos And when they were inside is shut the doors and throw them locks!. then calling the cook ordered him to encendiese fire under the room and kept all the time necessary to put the iron is hot. He obeyed the cook, and Cape little six people locked in the room began to feel intense heat. At the beginning they thought it was so good they had eaten; but going increasing temperature, tried to leave, meeting with doors and windows were locked. Then they understood the evil plan of the KING: Well, he will not get away with it! He said the of the hat; I will cause a frost such that the fire avergonzado.Y will retire, putting the hat on his head, a few moments he began to feel excessive cold, to the point that food froze in the dishes. A couple of hours elapsed, believing the King that everyone would already charred, he sent open the door and personally went to see the result of his stratagem. And behold, as soon as the door opened out six, fresh and healthy, saying they were already looking out to warm up a little, because in that room was so cold that froze up the dishes. King was beside himself, went to scold the cook for not fulfilling their orders. And the man replied: - Well, there's a good fire, Your Majestad.Entonces King See it was found that iron under the floor of the room was burning a huge fire, and realized that nothing could with that new gente.Tras ruminations, always looking the means of getting rid of such unwelcome guests, he summoned the head of the six and said - you want gold for my daughter's hand? I will give you as quieras.- Okay, Mr. King said the chief; that give me that can take one of my servants, I will renounce your hija.Púsose the Sea King happy, and the other continued: - In two weeks I will buscarlo.Y thereupon brought together all the tailors of the country, which spent fourteen days sewing a sack. When he was finished, the strongman of the six, who tore trees rennet, took him up on his back and presented to the King. He exclaimed: - Ah burly man who carries on his shoulders a bale of cloth like a house! And he thought, afraid: "How much gold can bring !." He ordered them to bring a ton, for which they needed sixteen of its most robust men; but the strongman him up with one hand and putting it in the bag, said: - Why do not you bring more? This just fills the bottom of the bag! And so the King had to surrender gradually all his treasure, that the strongman was getting into the sack, and still it was not busier than to mitad.- let them bring plus! said the man. What I do with these handfuls We had to send trucks to the entire kingdom, seven were loaded thousand carts, that the strongman got into the sack with oxen dragged them: - I will not be picky he said, I will send what come, just to fill the bag -. When there was nothing left to load, he said: - Let's finish once; it may tie a sack even if not full of the whole -. And echándoselo in tow, he went to meet his compañeros.Al see the King that the man was just leaving with the riches of the whole country, ordered, beside himself, to come out the cavalry in pursuit of the six, with order Remove the bag to the strongman. Two regiments were soon up and shouted to them - Daos prisoners! Let sack gold, if you do not want me to dust - What does it say? cried the soplador-, what we give prisoners? Before you go flying all through the air! -and, covering one-stop nose, stood to blow toward the other of the two regiments, which, in the blink of an eye, were scattered, with men and horses flying through the air, beyond precipitates from the mountains. A sergeant begged for mercy, saying he had nine wounds, and was brave man who did not deserve this reproach. The blower then loosened a little to let it land without damage, then said: - Go to the king and tell him to send more cavalry, because I have a great desire to have one flying toda.Cuando the king heard the message, he exclaimed: - march Let them alone; no one who can not with them.And six took the treasure home, where they lived happily and handed him the rest of his life.
An enigmatic tale	1525	407	Spanish	Three women were turned into flowers in the field of the garden, but one he was allowed during the nights could be at home as a human. Then one night, when approaching the day and would have to be a flower again, she told her husband: "If when you come back later come to the garden and gather me, stay free and I can always be with you." And he did so. Now the question is: How did the husband what was the correct flower, if all looked exactly the same, without any difference in form Answer: "As she spent the night at home and not in the garden, there was then spray on her as it had on others, and so the husband knew what was to take. "
A Ojito, Two and Three Ojitos Ojitos	1233	511	Spanish	Once upon a woman who had three daughters. Most called A Ojito because only one eye in the middle of the forehead; the second, Two Ojitos, because I had two, like everyone else; and third, Tres Ojitos, it had three, one of them in the middle of the forehead. And the second was no different at all from other people, her two sisters and her mother could not bear it. They said to him - with your two eyes do not excel in anything of ordinary people; do not belong to our clase.Y thus rejected it, forcing her to wear dresses in rags, and eat no more than gave leftovers; and above, they mortified as podían.Un day when two Ojitos had gone to the field to feed the goat, sat on the edge of the road, crying inconsolably, so that it seemed as though his eyes will flow two creeks, because her sisters had not been fed and was very hungry. At one point raising his eyes, saw his side to a woman who asked: - Two Ojitos, why are you crying and the girl answered: - How should I not mourn? Because I have two eyes like everyone else, my mother and my sisters hate me, push me from one corner to another, throw old clothes me and just give me to eat what they leave. So today I have little hunger then atormenta.Díjole me the fairy: - Dry your tears, Two Ojitos, I'll teach you a few words with you and you will suffer no more hunger. Just say this, by going to your goat, "Bala, Cabrita, take cover, side table." And then you will have before you a table, elaborately prepared with the tastiest delicacies, and you can eat your fill. And when we're satisfied and no longer need the table, say, "Bala, Cabrita, stand back, side table." And disappear in the act of your vista.Y said, the fairy left. Two Ojitos thought: "It's something to try right away if it is true that you have told me, because it really tormenting hunger"; and exclaimed, "Bala, Cabrita, take cover, side table." Hardly had said these words saw before him a table covered with a snow-white tablecloth, and on top, a plate with his knife, fork and spoon, all silver. There were magnificent viands, still steaming, as if they had just left the kitchen. Two Ojitos prayed the briefest prayer, few knew: "My God, be our guest for ever and ever, amen !." He served and ate with real enjoyment. When he was already satisfied, he said, as he taught the fairy, "Bala, Cabrita, stand back, side table." And in a trice disappeared table with everything he had. "Here's a convenient way to cook!"; Two Ojitos thought, and very good humor.Al return home to dusk with the goat, found a clay bowl with some food that had left the sisters, but did not touch her. A marchóse the next day again with the goat, ignoring the crumbs that had given him for breakfast. At the beginning, the sisters did not pay attention to the fact, but, recurring, dijeron.- Something happens with Two Ojitos. the food is always left when before cat devoured everything what we left him. Surely someone else recurso.Para found out what was happening, agreed that a Ojito accompany her to feed the goat to spy on their actions and see if anyone brought her food and leave bebida.Al Two Ojitos, he approached Sister more and he said - you'll come to the field; I want to know if you keep good goat and take a good pastos.Pero Two Ojitos perfectly understood the thought of the other and driving the goat to a meadow where tall grass growing, he said: - Come, A Ojito, let's sit down here; I sing you a canción.Un Ojito was tired of the walk and the heat of the sun; sat down, and her sister began to sing: "A Ojito, ¿candles A Ojito, do you sleep?." always repeating the same words, until the other, closing his eye, she fell asleep. A Two Ojitos seeing her sister was sound asleep and could not discover it, said, "Bala, Cabrita, take cover, table." And, sitting at the table, ate and drank until she was satisfied. Then he said, "Bala, Cabrita, stand back, side table." And all disappeared in a moment. Two Ojitos then woke his sister and said: - A Ojito, come to save the goat and go to sleep. The animal could have gone around the world. Come, let us return to home.And left, and again left intact Two Ojitos dinner. But one Ojito could not tell her mother why her sister refused to eat. Disculpóse he is alleging that she had fallen asleep in the meadow. A mother the next day to Tres Ojitos said: - This time you go; Look closely if two Ojitos eat there, and if someone brings him food and drink, it is forced to eat and drink secretamente.Acercóse Dos Tres Ojitos Ojitos and said - go with you to see if you keep good goat and give enough hierba.Pero Two Ojitos he clearly realized the purpose of her younger sister. He led the goat to the meadow and said: - Let's sit down, Tres Ojitos, you sing you a canción.Sentóse Tres Ojitos, tired feeling of the road and the burning of the sun, and Two Ojitos returned to sing his ditty: "Tres Ojitos, ¿candles, only inadvertently, instead of saying: "Tres Ojitos, do you sleep ?," sang "Two Ojitos, do you sleep,?" each time repeating: "Tres Ojitos, ¿candles Two Ojitos,? sleep "Ya Tres Ojitos were closed both eyes, and he fell asleep;?.. but the third, because of the mistake in the chorus, he lay awake true that closed the girl, but by ruse, pretending to sleep with he also, thus, opening covertly could see everything when two Ojitos thought the other was sound asleep, he delivered his magic formula. "Bala, Cabrita, take cover, table," and after satiate hunger and thirst, made the table retire. ". Bala, Cabrita, retire, table" But it turned out that Tres Ojitos had witnessed everything He approached Two Ojitos him and said, - Yea, you fell asleep, Tres Ojitos? Whoops way to keep the goat! Come, let us return to casa.Al arrive, Two Ojitos resigned back to dinner, and Tres Ojitos told the mother: - I know why this proud not eat. When, back in the meadow, says the goat, "Bala, Cabrita, take cover, table," immediately faces a table with the tastiest meats, much better than what we eat; and when it's had enough, she says: "Bala, Cabrita, stand back, side table," and everything disappears again. I've seen everything perfectly. With his song made my two eyes were laid down; more fortunately, I was awake the frente.Llamando then the envious mother Two Ojitos, he rebuked, saying: - So you want to spend it better than us? Well, I'll take your desire! And taking a knife stabbed in the heart of the goat, matándola.Dos Ojitos left his house and desolate and sad, sitting on the edge of the field, he began to mourn bitter tears. Presentósele second time the fairy, and said: - Why are you crying, Two Ojitos - How should I not mourn! - said the girl -. My mother killed the goat every day, when you recite the verse that taught me, I put on the table as well, and now I have to suffer hunger and privaciones.Díjole again the fairy: - Two Ojitos, I will give you good advice: ask your sisters to give you the guts of the dead goat, and bury front door of your house. Suerte.Desapareció will bring the fairy and two Ojitos, returning home, he told the sisters: - Give me a little goat, sisters. I ask nothing good; tripa.Echáronse them only laughed and replied: - If you do not ask anything else, you can keep ella.Y Two Ojitos took guts, and that night went to bury her, as quietly, in front of the door, as you recommend the hada.A the next morning, waking up each and go out, they were astonished at seeing a magnificent tree, which stood outside the house. It was a prodigious tree with silver leaves and golden fruit. The world would have not found anything so beautiful and gorgeous. Nobody knew what was out there that tree, the overnight. Only two Ojitos knew that sprang from the gut of the goat, as he stood at the very spot where she had buried her. A mother said Ojito: - Go up, my daughter, to catch some of the frutos.Trepó girl to drink; but when trying to reach one of the golden apples, the branch escaped her hands, repeating things every time you tried to take a fruit. Mother then said: - Tres Ojitos, get thee, with your three eyes best see your hermana.Bajó A Ojito and he seated Tres Ojitos; but it was not more fortunate; much to look around, golden apples continued unaffordable. Finally, the mother, impatient, is herself climbed the tree. But it did not fare better than their daughters. Every time I thought to grab one of the fruits, was filled with hand aire.Dijo Then two Ojitos: - I'll try; may have better suerte.Y although the sisters increparon: - What you want to do with your two eyes! - she climbed to the top, and the golden apples no longer fled, but spontaneously dropped into his hand. The girl could catch them one by one, and, after filling her apron, came down from the tree. The mother removed them all, and a Ojito and Tres Ojitos, instead of giving better treatment to her sister, envious at seeing that only she could get the fruits, savaged her even more than antes.He here than being found one day all at the foot of the tree, they saw a young man approaching caballero.- Quick, Two Ojitos! - cried the sisters - get in there under, and we will not have to be ashamed of you - and hastily jumped him an empty barrel they had on hand, also putting apples Two Ojitos had just caught. A arriving the gentleman turned out to be a gentleman Gallardo, stopping to admire the magnificent gold and silver tree told the sisters: - Whose is this beautiful tree? By one of its branches I would regard me pidiesen.Tres eyes and a Ojito replied that the tree belonged to them, and break a branch to give it. Again and as could strived; but all their attempts were in vain, for the branches and fruit continually shunned. Then the gentleman said: - It is very strange that perteneciéndoos the tree, you may not cut a branch of him.But they persisted in asserting that the tree was his. While fierce, Two Ojitos, from inside the barrel rolled down two or three golden apples that were to stop at the feet of the knight, for the girl was angry that the others not to tell the truth. A stranger seeing the apples, he asked, amazed, where they came from, and Tres Ojitos and a Ojito replied that they had a sister, but not taught because he only had two eyes, like people vulgares.El gentleman wanted to see it and shouted !: Come out, Two Ojitos the maid, gaining confidence, came out from under the barrel, and the gentleman, admired her great beauty, he said - Surely you can cut a branch of the árbol.- Yes - replied Two Ojitos - certainly I can, because the tree is mine - and, pulling up to the glass, easily he broke a branch with its silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave it to the forastero.Dijo this then: - Two Ojitos, what do you want in return - Ouch! - said the girl - here suffer hunger and thirst, sorrow and deprivation from morning to night. If quisieseis take me with you and rid it would feliz.Subió the gentleman Two eyes at the back of his horse and led her to the castle of his father, where he gave beautiful clothes and food in abundance; and as the maid was indeed charming, loved her, and recently, the wedding was held between the largest regocijo.Al see that the gentleman was carrying two Ojitos, the sisters felt great envy their fate, but They are comforted thinking: "anyway, the wonderful tree remains, and although we can not take off, all who pass by here stop to contemplate and call our house to express his admiration who knows where it is our fortune. !. " But the next morning, the tree had disappeared and with it, their hopes. And when two little eyes looked out the window of his new apartment, with great joy saw that the tree stood in front of her, then she had followed. The girl lived happily for a long time. One day showed up at the castle two poor women who were begging, and two little eyes to seeing them, recognized his sisters, who had come to such misery, they should go begging their bread from door to door. Two Ojitos welcomed them warmly, he treated them with great kindness and lavished favors, so other wholeheartedly repented of their evil with his sister.
A dutiful girl	1485	1451	Spanish	Once upon a beautiful girl, but lazy and careless. He hated so much spin, when a lump appeared on linen, small as it were, rather than plucked a handful undo linen, pulling to the ground. Had a maid who it was, however, very hardworking. Flax picked her mistress wasted and, after cleaning, it spun; and those remains came to be a nice dress. A young man had asked for the hand of Miss lazy, and approached the wedding day. On the eve of the feast, the dutiful maid came to dance, decked out in her pretty dress, and the bride made the following comment: ". How jumps doncellaen a suit that is not it" Oyolo fiance and asked what he meant by that. The bride told the maid wearing a dress made with flax she had thrown. In the know the boy, he found loitering Miss and industriousness of the poor servant, so he planted the first and chose the second wife.
A promise	3802	313	Spanish	There was once a woman who had no children, and so eager to have them, not getting their prayers to God to obtain it, offered to the devil give fourteen the child she bore, if their average could tenerlo.A nine months gave birth to a child, and lived thrilled to the principle of having it; but the more the child grew and he approached age fourteen, he fretted over and sadden mother. Mourn seeing one day, she asked her son what she had, and she told him: 'How to be, mother! said the boy when he had heard his mother's relationship. He can not be helped, and if he does not fulfill what was promised, the devil will come for you; well, I'm going to the infierno.Echó to walk, but did not know the way. He found some carriers, who asked if they knew the way of the infierno.-¡Jesús! they replied them. God forbid. But that path down there is a cave, where we have seen a monster. That may be what sepa.Encaminose the boy to the cave, and saw the monster, he was a man very deformed and frightening, and when he heard the attempt to the boy took pity, and with the signs of the path to follow given a letter to the daughter of the Devil mayor.-Do not want to take, 'he said; but tell him is his friend, and if he refuses to take it, any more than he guided for morada.Cuando came to hell gave the letter and message to the daughter of the greatest Diablo, which raged much with the letter and his compadre, but had no choice but to do what's asked his compadre papel.-in that you are innocent, 'he said to the boy, and you have to grab my father to make you sin. Now it will take you to a garden of beautiful flowers in appearance, but are flowers hell, poisoned flowers; and so, no lame, nor any smell, but do not tell him gustan.Y it did. When the biggest devil took the boy to a most beautiful garden he had the most beautiful flowers, though he urged that cogiese, or even smelling, no way. A big devil took him Barabbas, and thought: Do not be careful, tomorrow you escaparás.Al next day, as the daughter of the Devil knew the thoughts of his father, he told the boy: Today will tell my father that passes through a cave, which will leave an awful bear to tear you apart. When you see him come say three times "Mary, Mary, Mary" and will not dare to touch you, but to be cast to huir.Y so it happened. The biggest devil was bellowing, and said to himself: Tomorrow you will not escape, because I have to go in person to matarte.La daughter of the largest Devil told the boy: Tomorrow my father will kill you in person. Hide behind the door of your dungeon, and when you give comes with these two sticks, and put on the cross, and fall to the ground, face on the ground, dead. Then flies away, and do not stop running until a iglesia.Así did the boy, and was freed from the clutches of the devil, as will anyone who resists temptations, invoke the name of Mary and protect him from the Cross.
Jorinda and Joringel	654	405	Spanish	Once upon a time an old castle, rising in most midst of a large and thick forest. I lived an old witch who lived all alone. Day took the figure of a cat or an owl, and the night came again regained his human form. He had the virtue to attract all sorts of birds and wild animals, of which it fed. Anyone who approached a hundred steps of the castle was stopped, unable to move from the spot until she allowed it; and always came within this circle close a maid, the old bird and transformed into, putting it in a basket, the cage into a room of the castle. It might have about seven thousand baskets of this clase.Vivía also at that time a maid named Jorinda, more beautiful than any. He was promised a doncel, very handsome too, whose name was Joringel. Were still in the best of their courtship, and nothing much as they liked being together. To speak alone, they went one day to walk around the bosque.- Guard yourself well - Joringel said - of getting too close to the castle was a beautiful evening;! the sun was shining through the branches of trees, bathed with light green jungle, and a turtledove sang mournfully from the top of the old haya.De soon to Jorinda was moved to tears; sat in the sun, and began to mourn; and cried Joringel. Both were prey to a strange anguish, as if presintieran the proximity of death. They looked around, bewildered and did not know how to get home. The sun was setting; only half of the disc protruding from the top of the mountain when Joringel at the turn our gaze through the undergrowth, he discovered, within walking distance, the old wall of the castle. Terrified, he felt a fear of death, while Jorinda sang: ". My little bird of the red ring sings sorrow, sorrow, sadness, sings death his pichoncillo, sadness sings, jug, jug, Tirit, Tirit" Joringel turned to look at Jorinda. The maid had turned into a nightingale and sang: "Tirit, Tirit !." An owl with glowing eyes went three times flying over their heads, screaming every time, "Chu, chu, ju, ju !." Joringel could not move; It felt like petrified, unable to mourn, nor speak, nor move hand or pies.El sun had disappeared, the owl flew into a bush, and immediately left on it a crooked old, skinny and haggard, with large red eyes and corva nose almost touched his chin pointed. Grumbling, he caught the nightingale, and took it. Joringel could not utter a word or move from the place; the nightingale was gone. Finally, he turned witch and a muffled voice said: - Hey, Zaquiel! When lunita shine in your basket, breaks, Zaquiel in good hora.Y Joringel he was disenchanted. Fell at the feet of the woman and begged to give him back his Jorinda. But she replied that she would never see her, and disappeared. The boy cried, cried, wailed, but all in vain. "What will happen to me ?," he said. He walked uncertainly, and so came to a strange village, where he lived for a long time, working as a shepherd. Often he would roll down the places of the castle, but never venturing too close. He dreamed one night that he found a red flower as blood, in whose center was a beautiful large pearl. He plucked the flower and went with her to the castle; everything he touched with the flower was a disenchanted moment; to order also recovered his Yorinda.Al up in the morning began looking over hill and dale the dream flower, until, arriving early morning of the ninth day, he found. In the center was a dewdrop, big and beautiful as a pearl. Journeyed with this flower and carried her to the castle; when he reached his hundred steps not froze, but he managed to get to the door. Very happy, flower touched the portal and it burst open. He crossed the courtyard, sharpening the ear to locate the apartment of the birds, and to the heard. A he found himself entering into the witch, who was feeding the birds locked in the seven thousand baskets. A seeing the old to Joringel angry, very angry and began to curse him and spit bile and venom; but he could not approach him more than two steps. Him, ignoring him, went to the baskets containing birds; But among many hundred nightingales, how he would recognize his Jorinda? While still searching, he noticed that the old woman quietly take away a basket, and she walked toward the door. Rushing on the witch with flower touched the basket and the same time, the woman, who lost in the act all his powers of witchcraft, while reappearing Jorinda, as beautiful as before, and threw herself into his arms. You ransomed him then all the other maidens transformed into birds, and Jorinda, returned home, which already lived many years with all happiness.
