Bluebeard	3847	312	Italian	There was a time when such a rich man brutto.Egli owned buildings in the city, country villas, stables full of horses, chests full of gold coins, but it had a blue beard, a beard that made him look so terrible that all the girls were running away as soon as vedevano.Aveva already asked the hand of several young girls, as she wished to marry; but all they had rifiutato.Tuttavia he never tired and kept trying moglie.Nella his own town there was a great lady who had two very beautiful daughters, and Bluebeard (all the so called) I asked a married: he did not care if greater or minore.La great lady hesitated: she also had two sons, to whom he wanted to prepare for the future; However, widowed, had fallen into povertà.Un marriage to a wealthy man like Bluebeard would be fortunate for all ... Not wanting to force the will of his girls, left her free to accept or no.Ma neither felt the courage to take that step. Especially since, it was said, Bluebeard had already been married before, but no one knew where his wife had gone to finire.Allora Bluebeard began to cover the two girls gifts: flowers, beautiful jewelry, invited them along with her mother in one of his villas where, for one week, followed each dance parties, hunting, banquets ... Finally the youngest daughter concluded that the man had not then shave as much blue ... and in a jiffy he decided to sposarlo.Le wedding was celebrated with great pomp, and the bride felt very proud when he could show her friends the wonderful building where abitava.Un day Bluebeard announced to his wife that he had to be away from home for some business. However desired that in the meantime she had fun with her friends, and invited to the palace: - I'll leave you the keys to all the doors, all the chests of all cabinets - said a bunch of keys jingling removing pocket. - Adopera how you want the service crockery and cutlery of gold and silver; rummage through closets, plunder the pantry. But for no reason at all you will have to open the door that is in the bottom of the tunnel that opens with this stick of oro.Guai to you if you come in that closet: you whole! So saying, he handed the keys to moglie.Questa immediately had a great curiosity to see what was hidden in the mysterious stanzino.Tuttavia promised to be obedient and to use all keys less than that of oro.Barbablù got into the car and drove off; immediately after she invited her sister Anna and all her friends to go to them visita.Invitò also the two brothers, but they promised that they would only come the day dopo.Il procession of girls, with the bride in the head, beatings halls and the galleries of the sumptuous palace and continuous ringing of the "Oh" of wonder at the riches that came to light: jasper and crystal cups, plates of gold and silver ... Finally was not loyal to visit him in the closet end of the gallery, and the bride hesitated a lot, stingendo pinch the golden key ... then he thought that it was better to leave from her friends; left alone, he could satisfy the curiosity without anyone being accorgesse.Infatti, after the pleasantries. The sister Anna went to sleep upstairs, and the bride was able to go quietly into the room misteriosa.Infilò the key in the lock, turned it softly, went in, but ... horror! A big clump still bloodied and thrown a sharp ax the straw to show that they were in that closet he came only to die ... Now on the stump dancing mice, but in one corner lay several bodies of women: all with the head tagliata.Le wives disappeared Bluebeard ... Horrified, the bride put her hands at the eyes no longer see; but that gesture in the key of the hand escape and fell into a puddle sangue.La picked up and ran away, after having carefully closed the door; then took refuge in her room trembling all over the damn piedi.Guardò chiavicina and saw it was dirty sangue.Subito tried to dry it and clean it, but there riuscì.La key was enchanted, and the bloodstains from a deleted hand, reappeared from another. Terrified, thought to escape from the building, but that very night he will Bluebeard ritorno.La bride pretended to welcome him joyfully, but in his heart he felt die for paura.Barbablù not asked for the return of the keys and went to sleep without question, but the morning after, assuming an air that does not promise anything good, he asked: -Have you used the key that I had forbidden you to use? Want to give it back now? The girl handed him the key with trembling hands, Bluebeard and saw immediately that it was macchiata.- Why is there blood on this key? - I just do not know ... - Well, I know! - he shouted fiercely man. - You have disobeyed me and you get in the closet. Therefore you will return, and this time forever, for I will cut your head off and will put alongside the other women who were curious as te.La poor girl at his words became pale as death, and dropped to his knees: - Forgive me! - hiccup. - I will not tell anyone what I veduto.- All women are gossips as they are curious; only when I will have you cut off the head, I'll be really sure that you will not speak. - I promise I will always obey! I promise I will not say a single parola.Barbablù laughing heartily, he said: - I've seen the test! And now I'm tired of chatter: come with me because your last hour suonata.Fece to grab the girl by the hair, but she drew back: - You can not kill me without my having first recommended my soul to God. Let me alone, that I may pray in pace.Barbablù hesitated, but although it was a cruel and vicious man, dared not oppose a rifiuto.- okay, - he said. - I'll give you a quarter of an hour of time: no more. I, meanwhile, am going to sharpen scure.Si off toward the terrible closet, and the poor wife went to wake up her sister Anna.- My dear sister - begged - climb the tower and see if you see our brothers. They should be here this morning. If you see them mention that affettino for carità.La sister Anna immediately ran to the window of the tower, while the bride was waiting with my heart in gola.Nel Meanwhile Bluebeard, who had finished sharpening the ax, began to gridare.- The fourth an hour has elapsed. Hurry down, otherwise I get it! - Just a minute - said the unhappy, and asked anxiously: - Dear sister Anna, you do not see anyone? - No - replied Anna. - I see only the glittering streams and verdeggiante.- grass you finished or not? I'm tired of waiting. If you do not come down, I will go up. She screamed while Bluebeard. - One moment, one moment - answered the bride crying. And again asked: -Sorella Anna, you see anyone? - I see a dust cloud ... But these sheep that go pascolo.In that moment they heard the heavy footsteps coming up the Bluebeard scale.Egli threw open the door with a kick while the bride asked one last time: - Sister Anna, you see anyone? - i see two knights ... ... Yes, yes, it is precisely our brothers! Anna is ripping the scarf from her shoulders and began to shake the window motioning to the two young affrettarsi.Essi burst into the courtyard and climbed the stairs four at a ... Just in time, because the bride Beard had grabbed by the hair and was dragging it horrible stanzino.I the youth jumped on him with drawn swords, and a moment later he lay down dead, while his sister with his hands still clasped over his heart, he did not know whether to laugh or piangere.Poi that terrible fright passed, and even Bluebeard was forgotten, as always it happens to cattivi.La wife inherited all of its assets, and those could give a dowry to his sister Anna, who married a gentleman good and rich; He helped the two brothers to create a good future; Finally she chose an honest and loving husband who consoled by all the sorrows tested with Bluebeard.
snow-white	503	709	Italian	Once, in late winter, while the snowflakes falling from the sky like feathers, she sewed a queen sitting beside a window, ebony frame. And as she worked, her eyes to look at the snow, she pricked her finger, and three drops of blood fell into the snow. The red looked beautiful upon the white snow, she thought to herself, "If I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the wood of the window!". Shortly after, she gave birth to a baby white as snow, as red as blood and hair blacks as ebony; and, therefore, they called Snow White. And, when he was born, the queen died. After a year, the king took another wife, a beautiful woman, but proud; He could not bear to be surpassed in beauty. He owned a mirror and, when there was reflected, said -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? -And the mirror answered: -E 'yours, Queen, of all the best! -Ed she he was happy because he knew that the mirror spoke the truth. But Snow White was growing up, becoming more beautiful and, when she was seven years old, was as beautiful as the light of day, and more beautiful than the queen herself. Once the queen asked the mirror: -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? - The mirror replied: -The your appearance here of all is the most beautiful, but the raven-haired Snow White is more beautiful the Queen! -All'udire these words, the queen and allibì went white with rage and envy. From that moment onwards, the mere sight of Snow White the upset, both the hated. And envy and pride grew so much in her, as to leave more peace n, day n night. She called a huntsman and said -Conduci the little girl in the wild forest, I will not see her anymore. Kill her and bring her lungs and liver as proof of his death-. The huntsman obeyed and took Snow White away, but when they took out the knife to stab her innocent heart, she began to cry and said, Ah, dear huntsman, take my life; I'll go into the woods and I'll never make back home-. And she was so beautiful the huntsman took pity and said: -It 'well, poor bimba-. "The wild animals will soon devour" he thought; but he felt he had picked up a heavy weight from the heart when he spared to kill. And because, at that moment, a wild boar came running, slew him, removed the lungs and liver, and took them to the queen as proof. She, in her eagerness, let them cook in salt and devoured them believing eating lungs and liver of Snow White. Meanwhile, the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and he was so scared that he feared the leaves of the trees and did not know what to do to save themselves. Then he ran and ran over sharp stones and through the thorns; the wild beasts after her, but did her no harm. He ran until the legs would carry; in the evening, he saw a little house, and came to rest. Everything there was tiny but as pretty and clean. There was a small table covered with a white cloth, and seven little plates each plate had his spoon, seven boxcutters, seven forks and seven shots. Along the wall, side by side, there were seven little beds, covered with white sheets. Snow White was so hungry and thirsty, ate a bit 'of vegetables and bread from each plate and drank a drop of wine each glass, because he did not want to finish up one. Then, because she was so tired, he lay down in a bed, but there was not one that was all right: this was too long, another too short; at last the seventh was the right one, I went to bed, commended himself to God and fell asleep. When it was dark, the masters of the house were seven dwarfs who mined minerals from the mountains. They lit their seven candles, and when the house was lit up, they saw that someone had entered, why was not everything in order as they had left. The first said: -Who is sitting on my chair? - The second: Who has been eating off my plate? -. The third. -Who took a piece of my sandwich? -. The fourth: Who has eaten a bit 'of my vegetables? -. The fifth Who has been using my little fork? -. The sixth Who has been cutting with my boxcutter? -. The seventh Who has been drinking from my glass? - Then the first looked round and saw that her bed was a bit 'squashed and said: Who has been lying on my bed? -. And the others came running, and cried in my -Although there was someone! -. But the seventh when he looked in his bed, he saw Snow White asleep. Then he told the others who came running up, screaming in astonishment, and their seven candles lit and Snow White. Ah, my God! ah, my God! - they exclaimed -that beautiful little girl! - And their joy was such that not wake her, but let her sleep on. The seventh dwarf slept with his companions, one hour with each, and the night passed. In the morning, white awoke and saw the seven dwarfs, he became frightened. But they asked her gently: -How's your name? -. -My name Biancaneve- said. -How did you get to our house? - they asked the dwarfs. Then she began to tell her stepmother wanted her killed, but the huntsman had spared her life, and she had run all day long, had found their dwelling. The dwarfs said: -If you will keep our house, cook, make the beds, wash, sew and to knit, and keep everything neat and clean you can stay with us and you will lack anything-. White promised that he would do everything, and kept order in their house. In the morning the dwarfs went to the mountain to dig for gold; in the evening and dinner had to be ready. During the day the girl was alone, and the dwarves warned her, saying: -Make attention to your stepmother, she will soon know that you are here: do not open a no-. But the queen, believing he had eaten the liver and the lungs of Snow White, not thinking about anything except that she was again the first and most beautiful; He went before the mirror and said -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? -And it answered -Your appearance here of all is the most beautiful. But far from here, in a little house of seven dwarfs, tiny, tiny, Snow White is the raven-haired much more beautiful Queen! -The Queen was horrified because she knew that the mirror did not lie, and she realized that the huntsman had deceived her and that Snow White he was still alive. And, because the mirror had told her that the child was in the mountains, where the seven dwarfs, she began to think again how to kill her because if it was not the most beautiful in the whole country, not envy He gave her rest. He thought and thought, painted her face and disguised himself as old pedlar, managing to make themselves perfectly unrecognizable. Thus disguised, he went over the seven mountains and came to the house of the seven little dwarfs, He knocked on the door and shouted: beautiful -Roba to sell! buy! -. Snow White looked out the window and said: Good day, good woman, what have you to sell? -. -Roba good, stuff nice- answered the old -stringhe all colori.- And, so saying, he pulled out a colorful silk and held it. "This good woman can let her in," he thought Snow White "has good intentions." He opened the door and bought the pretty lace. -Wait bimba- said the old-as if tanned! Come for once let me lace you must! - Snow White does not suspecting nothing, he stood up before her and let her lace her with the new string. But the old woman shook so much and so quickly that Snow White gasped and fell to the ground as if dead. -Finally your beauty Is Down! - said the wicked woman, and went away. Shortly after, towards evening, the seven dwarfs were terrified to see their dear Snow White lying on the ground, motionless as if she were dead! They lifted her up and saw that she had a too narrow waist, cut the string. Then she began to breathe heavily, then, little by little she returned. When the dwarfs heard what had happened they said, -The old pedlar woman was none other than the queen. He Is' on guard, and do not let anyone in, while we do not we! -. But the wicked queen, just at home, went in front of the mirror and asked: -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? -And it answered -Your appearance here of all is the most beautiful. But far from here, in a little house of seven dwarfs, tiny, tiny, Snow White is the raven-haired much more beautiful Queen! -All'udire these words, the blood rushed to her heart with fear, for she saw that Snow White had returned to live. So he went back again to think about how he could get rid of it and thought to use a poisoned comb. Then she disguised herself and took back the appearance of a poor woman, quite different from the previous one, though. He spent seven mountains and came to the house of the dwarfs; He knocked on the door and shouted: beautiful -Roba to sell! buy! -. Snow White looked out and said: -I can not let go no-. But the old woman said, -Look a little 'what beautiful combs! -. He pulled out what poisoned and showed it to her. The child liked it so much that he let himself get around, opened the door and bought it. Then the old woman said: -Let you pettini-. Snow White did not suspect anything wrong, but as the old woman put the comb in her hair than the poison and the girl fell to the ground as if dead. -Finally, it's over for you! - said the old woman, and went away. But fortunately it was almost evening, and the seven dwarfs came home. When they saw Snow White lying on the ground as if dead, they thought now to a new deception of the evil stepmother; they started searching and found the poisoned comb. How they were taken away, Snow White herself, and related what had happened. Then once they warned her to be careful and not to open the door to anyone. At home, the queen stood before the mirror and said -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? -As usual it answered -Your appearance here of all is the most beautiful. But far from here, in a little house of seven dwarfs, tiny, tiny, Snow White is the raven-haired much more beautiful Queen! -A these words, she shivered and shook with anger. Then he shouted: -Biancaneve must die, even if it costs the vita.- He went to a secret room where no one could get in and prepared a poisonous apple. Outside it was so beautiful red, which induced people only see it, but whoever ate a piece had to die. When the apple was ready she painted her face and disguised himself as a peasant; well camouflaged went over the seven mountains and came to the house of the dwarfs. He knocked, Snow White looked out the window and said: -I can not let anyone in, the dwarves have forbidden me! -. -Do importers answered the woman -venderò the same my apples. Here, I will give you una.- -NO- said Snow White, I can-not accettar nulla.- perhaps -You're afraid of poison? - said the old woman. -We like this: you shall eat the red part and I that bianca.- But the apple was so cunningly made that only the red part was poisoned. Snow White longed for the beautiful apple, and when she saw that the peasant woman eating he could no longer restrain himself and reached out to lend him his half. But the first bite, fell down dead. Then the queen said: -This time no one will awaken! -. She went home and asked the mirror: -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? -Finally it answered -E 'yours, Queen, of all the best! -It's heart had finally envious peace, though there can be no peace as an envious heart. At night, when the dwarves returned home, they found Snow White lying on the ground: from his lips had not been out of breath, he had died. They lifted her up, looked at whether there was something poisonous, her laces, combed her hair, washed her with water and wine, but to no avail, the poor child was dead, and remained dead. Then they laid her on a bier, and sat all seven and wept for three whole days. Then they wanted to bury her, but she was still so fresh, her cheeks were red so beautiful as to make it still look alive. Then they said, -We can not bury her in the earth and made nera- make a crystal coffin, why, it could be seen from all sides, they laid her, and put his name on it, in gold letters, and wrote that she was the daughter to say. Then they set the coffin on the mountain, and one of them remained always on guard. Even the animals were crying Snow White, first an owl, then a raven, and lastly, a dove. Snow White lay for a long, long time in the coffin, but it does not decompose seemed to be asleep because he was still as white as snow, as red as blood, black as ebony. But one day a prince happened in the woods and went to spend the night in the house of the dwarfs. He saw the coffin on the mountain Snow White and read what was written in golden letters. Then he said to the dwarfs, -Let me the coffin; I will give you what you want in compenso-. But the dwarves answered: -Not to give in to all the gold in the world-. -So regalatemela- he said-not I can live without seeing Snow White: I want to honor her and ossequiarla as the one who is more dear to me mondo.- At these words the good dwarfs took pity and gave him the coffin. The prince ordered his servants to take her on his shoulders. Now it happened that they stumbled over a bush, and with the shaking the bit of poisoned apple that Snow White had swallowed came out of her throat. She came back to life, he sat up and said, -Oh God! where am I?-. -Are you with me! - he replied the prince filled with joy, told her what had happened and added: -I love above all else in the world; come with me in the house of my father, will you be my sposa-. Snow White, and went with him, and their wedding was held with great pomp and splendor. But the party was asked the wicked stepmother. Put on her beautiful garments, she went to the mirror and said -Mirror fairy, in this castle, you've probably seen more beautiful? -The glass answered: -Here are the most beautiful, oh Queen, but much more beautiful is the bride ! -All'udire these words, the poor woman was frightened, and her grief was so great that he could no longer control himself. At first he did not want to attend the wedding, but envy the tormented to the point that he had to go and see the young queen. Upon entering, he saw that it was the other that of Snow White and froze in horror. But over coals they were ready two iron slippers: they were incandescent brought them to him, and she was forced to wear the red-hot shoes and here to dance until, you miserably burned the feet and fell down dead.
Snow-White and Rose-Red	1534	426	Italian	There was once a poor widow who lived in a modest house with her two children. The bore white and Rose-called because they were similar to the red and white blossoms of roses that grew in front of his house: they were good, pious, hard-working and kind. Biancarosa was more quiet and submissive, Rosella more carefree and lively. A Rosella liked to run and jump through the fields, to hunt for butterflies and pick wild flowers, while white was sat at home to help my mother with the chores, or to read a book while she was sewing. The two children were so well and were holding her hand when they went out together: they said that they would never separate and they would always divided fraternally everything. Often addentravano lot in the forest to look for strawberries and blueberries, but wild animals did not do them any harm. The hares came to eat the cabbage leaves which the girls held out them, the deer grazed without fears, goats cavorting around playing, and the birds remained in warble on bushes without running away at their approach. There they had stayed bad, and if late in the forest, and night came, they lay down on the moss, and slept until morning. Mom had no fear, even though the sun in knowing how bosco.Una time, when they had spent the night in the forest, when the dawn had roused them, they saw a beautiful young girl dressed in a dazzling white who was sitting near their bed. She stood up looking at them with love and, without a word, went back into the forest. When they looked round, they realized that they had been sleeping was on the brink of a precipice, and would certainly have fallen in the dark if they had taken two steps more. The mother said that the apparition who had seen was, without a doubt, one of the angels who protect the good kids from harm. Biancarosa and Rosella were holding their little cottage so neat that it was a pleasure to look inside. Every morning, in the summer, Rosella before putting the house in order and then caught a bouquet of flowers for mom, and we always put a white and a red bud that took from each of the two rose bushes. In the winter, Biancarosa lit the fire and we put on, full of water, the coffee pot, which was of copper, shone like so much gold was well polished. At night, when falling snowflakes, the mother said, "Biancarosa, go to close the door with the bolt" and then they sat around the fireplace and the mother took her spectacles to read a big book aloud while the girls were spinning. Beside them he lays a lamb, and behind them upon a perch, sat a white dove, who was asleep with his head under the ala.Una evening, as they were thus sitting, he heard a knock at the door, as if someone wanted to enter. "Soon, Rosella," cried the mother, "soon, open the door, there will be some traveler who needs asylum." Rosella pulled the bolt and opened the door, expecting to see a poor man; Instead, it was a big fat bear who peeped. Rosella screamed and ran back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered and Biancarosa hid behind her mother's bed. The bear, however, began to speak and said: "Do not be afraid, I do not want to hurt, but I'm half frozen and I would warm up a little." - "Poor bear!" exclaimed the mother, "come in and lie down in front of the fire, only take care not to burn your coat" and then went on: "Come here, Rosella and Biancarosa, fear not, the bear will do you harm: you see that his intentions are good. " So they came and slowly also the lamb and dove dominated their fear and made good reception to rude visitors. "Girls," said the bear before entering "come and shake off the snow." They went to get the broom and swept the whole. Then the bear lay down before the fire and growled contentedly; gradually the girls took a lot of confidence with him to dare him the jokes: the pulling the hair, put their feet on the back, made him roll back and forth, and came even to beat him with a carpet beater, laughing when he grumbled. The bear calmly stand all these games when they were too rough he called Leave me alive, Biancarosa and Rosella, or never married you! When it was time to go to bed and the girls went to bed, the mother said to ' bear: "You can lie there by the fireplace, if you want, will be safe from the cold and bad weather." When dawn came, the girls brought out the bear that he trotted over the snow: and soon took to get back to the cabin every night at the same hour. He stretched out before the fire and let the girls were playing with him as long as they wanted: gradually they got used so much in his presence that they would not put the deadbolt on the door until he arrived. But When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one morning to Biancarosa I must go away and would not be back for the whole summer. "Where are you going, then, dear bear?" Biancarosa churches. "I have to go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs. During the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged to stay holed up in their caves and can not go out, but now that the sun has heated the land and has softened, the dwarves dig long tunnels and steal everything they find. what is past in their hands and they hide in their caves you can not easily get back. "Biancarosa was very sad for the bear's departure and opened the door so reluctantly, that quand'esso slipped through the crack, he left on the handle a little piece of fur: and torn off his coat seemed to Biancarosa a glimpse of a golden shimmer; but she was not sure. The bear, therefore, he went quickly, and was soon hidden by trees. A short time later, his mother sent the girls into the forest to gather wood, and, while they were intent on trying twigs scattered on the ground, they came upon a fallen tree through the lane. They saw something in the grass going up and down and did not understand at first that it was, but when we were approached, they saw a dwarf from the old and wrinkled face, and a long white beard a meter. The tip of the beard was caught in a crevice of the tree, and the little man jumped around like a dog tied to a rope, not knowing how to get free. He looked at the girls with his fiery eyes and exclaimed: "What do you stand there? Do not you leave without help, right?" - "What have you done, Daddy?" He asked Rosella. "You stupid, curious" exclaimed one, "I wanted to split the tree to make firewood for my kitchen. I had put the wedge and everything was going well, when it is blown away suddenly and the rift was closed so early that I have not had time to pull back my beautiful beard, and is now taken there and I can not leave. There! Do not laugh, faces of cardboard? So you are dazzled? " The girls gathered their efforts to pull off the beard of the nano, but failed. "I run to get help," she cried Rosella at the end. "You senseless and" snarled the dwarf. "What is the need to call other people? You two are even too much for me; you can not think of something better?" - "Do not be impatient," said Biancarosa "I thought of something" and she pulled out of her pocket her scissors, cut off the end of the dwarf barba.Appena felt free, grabbed his bag, which was hidden among the roots of 'tree and it was full of gold. But he was careful not to show gratitude: he fell on his shoulders a knapsack and went frowning, muttering and shouting: "Stupid, cut a piece of my beard!" A bit 'of time after, Biancarosa Rosella and they went away to fish; as they approached the pond, they saw something like a large grasshopper jumping towards the water as if about to leap in. They ran to it and found the dwarf. "What are you doing?" He asked Rosella. "You will fall in the water!" - "I'm not that stupid," said the dwarf, "but you do not see that this fish wants to pull me!" The dwarf was fishing and the wind had twisted his beard with the fishing so that when a big fish bit, and the feeble creature had not been enough to bring it up and the fish was about to have the upper hand in the fight. The dwarf clung to the willows and bushes growing on the shore, but even that did not need; the fish pulled him where he wanted and would take him soon in the pond. Fortunately, the two girls arrived in time and tried to liberate the beard of the nano from the fishing line; but it was so twisted that it was no longer possible to dissolve quell'intrico. Biancarosa took out the scissors again and cut another piece of beard. When the dwarf saw it, flew into a rage and said, "Silly! And 'This is the way of sfigurarmi? There was enough tagliarmela once, now I also togliermene the best part? I will not have the courage to show me from my people. it would be better that they go the soles off your shoes before coming here! " Then he took out a lot of pearls which lay in the bushes and, without another word, slipped away and disappeared behind a pietra.Non long after this adventure, the Rosella and Biancarosa mom needed to thread, needles, pins, laces and ribbons, and sent the two children to buy them in the nearest town. The road passed through an area where numerous boulders were scattered here and there, and they saw, just above their heads, a large bird flying spiral lowering gradually until, suddenly, fell behind one of those boulders. Afterwards they heard a piercing scream, and ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and tried to take him away. The girls compassionate seized him in turn and held him hard until the bird gave up fighting and he flew away. However, as soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried with his shrill voice: "You could not have it more carefully? You dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes. Helpless clumsy creatures are not more ! " With these words he took up a sack full of precious stones, and slipped into his cave in the rocks. The girls time were used to dwarf and they continued their way to the city, where they made their purchases. Returning home etc. They went to that location and, without realizing it, they crossed a clearing on which the dwarf, thinking only of being, had scattered the precious stones of his sack. The sun was shining and refracting stones shone its rays: there was such a variety of colors that the children stood still and looked at. "What are you doing there with his mouth open?" He asked the dwarf, and his face became flushed with anger. He continued to shout insults against poor girls, when they heard a growl and a black bear came out of the forest. The dwarf sprang up, terrified, but did not have time to return to his cave, for the bear was already close. Then he shouted: "Spare me, dear Mr. Bear, I'll give you all my treasures, and even these precious stones. Grant me the life that you can be afraid of a little creature like me? Would not feel me between your teeth. Here are two bad girls, they are tender morsels, fat as young quails eat them! "the bear, however, not bothering to speak, gave a fatal blow to that nano heartless, that did not move. The girls had run away, but the bear called "Biancarosa, Rosella, fear not, wait that I accompany you!" They then recognized the voice of their friend and stopped reassured. But when the bear came near them, his cloak fell from him and appeared, a handsome man, dressed all in gold. "I am the son of a king," he said, "and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen all my treasures, condemning me to wander in this forest as a bear until his death I was freed. Now he has got the punishment he deserved. " So they returned to the cottage: white was married the handsome prince and Rosella's brother to him, and they divided the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered. The old mother lived happily for many years with her daughters; the roses that were in front of the house were transplanted before the palace, and every year bore the beautiful red roses and white roses even more beautiful.
Little Red Riding Hood	244	333	Italian	There once was a sweet little girl; only saw her liked her all right, and her grandmother, who did not know what to give. Once she gave her a little cap made of red velvet, and because it suited her so much, and she wanted to wear it, to be known as Little Red Riding Hood. One day her mother told her: "Come, Little Red Riding Hood, here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine, bring to the grandmother is weak and sick and refresh you. Be polite, say hello to me and goes' to be good without leaving street, if you fall down and break the bottle and grandmother left empty-handed. "" Yes, I'll do everything right, "Little Red Cap promised his mother, and gave her his hand. The grandmother lived out in the woods, a half hour from the village. When Little Red Riding Hood entered the wood, she met the wolf, but did not know it was a wicked animal he was, and was not afraid. "Good morning, Little Red Riding Hood," he said this. "Thank you, wolf." - "Where are you going so early, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "To Grandma's." - "What you got under your apron?" - "Wine and focaccia for the weak and old grandmother; yesterday we baked the bread, so will reinforce!" - "Where does your grandmother live, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "A good quarter of an hour from here, in the woods, under the three large oak trees; there is his house, is under the clump of hazel, you'll know already," said Little Red Riding Hood. The wolf thought to himself ': This girl is a tender one good tasty dish for you, you must make sure to catch it. He took a piece of the road with Little Red Riding Hood, then said, "Look at 'many beautiful flowers there are in the woods, Little Red Riding Hood, why not take a look? I think you do not even hear how beautifully the birds are singing You stand all serious like going to school, and is so cheerful in the woods! "Little Red Riding Hood raised her eyes, and when he saw the sun filtering through the trees, and all around full of beautiful flowers, he thought: If i bring her grandmother a bunch of flowers, will please; It is so early that still arrive in time. He ran into the woods looking for flowers. Each time she picked one she thought that farther on there was one even more beautiful, ran there and so is going further and deeper into the forest. But the wolf went straight to the grandmother's house and knocked on the door. "Who is it?" - "Little Red Riding Hood, I bring you some cake and wine open to me." - "You have only to lift the latch," called out the grandmother, "I am too weak and can not get up." The wolf lifted the latch, came in, and without saying a word he went straight to the grandmother's bed and swallowed. Then he put on his clothes and headphones, lay down in the bed, and pulled the cortine.Ma Little Red Riding Hood had turned in search of flowers, and when she had gathered so many more that I could not wear, she remembered her grandmother and set out way to go to her. When he arrived, he marveled that the door was wide open, and entered the room had an impression so strange that she thought, "Oh, my God, I so afraid? And say that usually I'm so happy with my grandmother!" Then he went to the bed and pulled back the curtains: Grandmother was lying there with her cap pulled down over his face, and looking very strange. "Oh, grandmother, what big ears!" - "better to hear you." - "Oh, grandmother, what big eyes you have!" - "To see you better." - "Oh, grandmother, what big hands!" - "better to grab you." - "But, grandmother, what terrible mouth!" - "To eat you better!" And as he said these words, the wolf jumped out of bed and swallowed poor Rosso.Poi Riding Hood, with beautiful full belly, he got back into bed, fell asleep and began to snore loudly. Just then he passed there in front of the hunter and thought to himself ': "How the old Russian! You have to look at it if you need anything." He entered the room and approached the bed he saw the wolf that he was looking for a long time. He was to point his gun when it occurred to him that maybe the wolf had eaten the grandmother, that he could still save her. So he did not fire, but took a pair of scissors and opened the belly of the sleeping wolf. After two cuts he saw the red cap shining, and after two more the girl jumped out and cried, "I was so frightened! It was so dark inside the wolf!" Then he came out alive as well grandmother. And Little Red Riding Hood went to take much of the large stones with which filled the wolf's belly; when he woke up and tried to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he fell down and morì.Erano pleased all three: the hunter took the skin of the wolf, the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine he had brought Little Red Riding Hood; And Little Red Cap thought to himself ': "Never again will you run alone in the woods, away from the path, when my mother tells me not to." They also tell how Little Red Cap was taking some baked things to her grandmother, and another wolf had spoken to her, trying to convince her to deviate from the path Little Red Riding Hood But he looked good, he went straight on his way and told the grandmother that I saw the wolf that had greeted her, but looking at her with wild eyes: "If you do not he had been on the public highway, I would eat it! " - "Come," he said the grandmother, "we close the door because, do not enter." Shortly afterwards the wolf knocked, and said, "Open, Grandma, I'm Little Red Riding Hood, I'll take the cake." But those, silent, did not open; then the evil wandered a bit 'around the house and finally jumped onto the roof to wait for Little Red Riding Hood in the evening, take the way back: he wanted to follow her on the sly to eat it in the dark. But the grandmother realized his intentions. In front of the house there was a large stone trough, and she said to her: "Get the bucket, Little Red Riding Hood; yesterday I cooked sausages, leads into the trough where water boiled han." Little Red Cap carried water until the large, large trough was clear full. Then the smell of sausage went up to the nostrils of the wolf; he began to sniff and peer down, and eventually both craned his neck that he could no longer restrain himself and began to slide: slid off the roof into the trough, and drowned. And Little Red Cap returned merrily into the house and no one did hurt.
Godfather Death	417	332	Italian	A poor man had twelve children and had to work day and night in order just to feed them. When he was born on the thirteenth, not knowing what to do, ran on the road to ask the first person whom he met to be godfather. The first he met was the good Lord. The good Lord already knew what was in his heart and said, "Poor man, I pity you: I will keep your child at baptism, and care for, to be happy on earth." - "Who are you?" the man asked. "I am the good Lord." - "Then I do not want to appear, because, by the rich and make the poor suffer from hunger." So spoke the man, he did not know how wisely God divides out wealth and poverty. Then he turned away and went to the Lord. She went to the devil and said: "What? If I'm godfather to your son, I will give gold, and all the pleasures of the world." The man asked: "Who are you?" - "I am the devil." - "Then I do not want to appear; you deceive men to seduce them," the man said, and went on. The meeting was Death, and said: "Take my godmother" - "Who are you?" the man asked. "I am Death, who makes everyone equal." Then the man said: "You are right: take either the rich or the poor without distinction, will you be my godmother." Death answered, "I will become your child's rich and famous, who has for a friend, I do not lack anything." The man said: "Next Sunday is the baptism: be on time." Death appeared as he had promised, and served as godmother to the boy was piccolo.Quando adult, took him into the woods, and one day the godmother him across, when they were alone, he said, "Now you shall have my gift baptism. I will make you a famous doctor. When you are called to a sick person I will appear each time: if you see me at the foot of the bed, you can say frankly that well again; give him an herb that will show and it will heal, but if you see me at the bedside of the sick, it is mine, and you say that every remedy is useless and you must die. " Then Death pointed to the miraculous herb and said: "Look dall'usarla against my will." Soon, the young man became famous around the world. "He has only to look at the patient to determine if heal or if it should die." So they were saying about him, and people flocked from all over to take him by the sick and gave him as much gold as he requested, so that in a short time became a wealthy man. Now it happened that the king became ill, and they sent for the doctor because, said if he had to die. But when he approached the bed, he saw that Death was at the sick there was more grass availed himself. But the doctor thought, "Maybe for once I can cheat Death, and since it is my godmother, not if it will really that bad!" So he took the king and turned it so that Death was now standing at his head; then he gave him the grass and the king recovered and healed. But Death went from angry doctor and grim-faced said, "This time you step because I'm your godmother, but if you dare to deceive me again, I will go in your own life!" Not long after the princess became ill and no one could heal her and. The king cried day and night not to see each other anymore; Then he proclaimed that whosoever rescued her from death should become her husband and the heir to the crown. When the doctor came to the bed he saw Death at her bedside. But she thought the promise of the king and also the princess was so beautiful that he forgot the warning and, even if Death threw him terrible glances, turned the sick by putting their heads instead of feet and gave the grass, so that, she returned to vita.Ma Death, seeing himself defrauded a second time for what was hers, she went to the doctor and said, "Follow me!" She grabbed him with ice his hand and led him into an underground cave, where there were thousands and thousands of lights out of sight. Some were great, others medium, others small. Every instant some were extinguished and others were relit, so that the flames seemed to jump around. "See," said Death, "these lights are the lives of men. The large ones belong to children, the means of the spouses in their prime, the little old. But sometimes even the children and young people have only a small candle. When you turn off, their life is at an end and they belong to me. " The doctor said: "Show me mine." Then Death pointed to a tiny little moccoletto that threatened to shut down and said, "There it is!" Then the doctor was shocked and said: "Ah, dear godmother, because accendetene another, can enjoy my life, becoming king and husband of the beautiful princess!" - "I can not," answered Death, "One must go out before the new one is lighted." - "Then set the old one onto a new one, on burning after the old one is finished," he begged the physician. Then the feigned death to fulfill his wish, and took a great new spark plug. But, unite them, deliberately missed, because he wanted revenge, and the little piece fell down and died. The physician immediately fell to the ground: he too had fallen into the hands of Death.
Crow and the Fox	8110	57	Italian	Sen was Messer Crow on a alberocon a nice piece of cheese in its beak, when the fox is sweet morsel leccodi that began to tell him: - Hello, Sir Raven, I do not conoscouccel you more vague in the bosco.Se is ver what is diceche your singing is beautiful as are bellequeste pens, you are a Phoenix -.A say this is not in vain pelleil Crow: Fox and wanting to give a saggiodel his famous song, opens its beak come out and let the cheese .The seize the fox and says: - Well, my dear, who dell'adulator pays spese.Fanne your pro 'that forsela my lesson worth your cheese -.Il Corvo silly intesee (a little' later) to be sworn in wiser.
Allerleirauh	618	510B	Italian	There was once a king who had a wife with golden hair, and it was so beautiful like no other in the world. But it happened that the queen fell ill and when she felt to be close to death he called the king and said: -If you want to get married again after my death, take no one who is less beautiful than me and has not golden hair like mine ; you promettermelo-. When the king had promised her this, she closed her eyes and died. For a long time the king was inconsolable and not thought of taking another wife. But in the end the councilors said: -There is no other solution, the king must marry again, that we can have a queen-. They sent messengers everywhere to seek a bride who equaled the late Queen. However, none in the world was so beautiful and, even if they had found it, he would not have had those golden hair. Then the messengers returned without accomplishing anything. But the king had a daughter who was just as beautiful as her dead mother, and had golden hair like his. When she was grown up the King looked one day he saw that looked across at his dead wife; then he felt a burning love for her and said to the councilors: -I want to marry my daughter, is the counterpart of my late wife, otherwise I can find no bride earth-. On hearing these words, the councilors were horrified and said, -God has forbidden a father to marry the daughter; from sin can not be any good-. Although the girl was terrified when he came to know the intent of the father, but still hoped to be able to deter. So he said: -Before you fulfill your wish, I must have three dresses: one as golden as the sun, the other silver as the moon, and one as bright as the stars; and i also want a cloak made with all sorts of fur, and every animal in your kingdom must give a piece of sua-. But she thought the idea was impossible to realize, and that the father would have wicked intentions. But the king did not give up, and the cleverest maidens in his kingdom had to weave the three dresses, one as golden as the sun, the other silver as the moon and one shining like the stars; and his huntsmen had to capture all the animals of the kingdom and remove them with a piece of leather; so it was made a mantle of furs of all sorts. When he was ready, the king sent for him and said: To-morrow there will be wedding albums. The princess saw that there was no longer any hope of turning her father's wishes, and so, at night, when everyone was asleep, he got up and took three of his gold jewelry: a ring, a small cast and a small reel. She put into a nutshell the three dresses of the sun, moon and stars, put on the fur coat of all sorts, and blackened her face and hands with soot. Then she commended to God and went. She walked the whole night until she reached a great forest, and, because she was so tired, she got into a hollow tree and fell asleep. The sun was high and she still slept. Now it happened that the king whom this forest belonged, was hunting in; When his dogs came to the tree, they sniffed, and began to race there barking around. The king said to the huntsmen -Guardate a little 'what animal is hiding there once. The hunters went and returned, saying -Nell'albero cable there is a strange animal that we've never seen: the skin has all sorts of hair; He is lying and dorme-. The King said: -Try to capture him alive, then tie on the bandwagon and take it with you-. But when the hunters grabbed her, the girl woke up and, frightened, she said: -I am a poor child, deserted by parents, have pity on me and take me with you-. They said: -Yes, Allerleirauh, you go well for the kitchen; Come with us, you fuck cenere-. They made her sit on the wagon and took her to the royal palace. There they pointed out a closet under the stairs, where it never reached the light of day, and said -Bestiola bristly, you can stay here and sleep-. Then she was sent into the kitchen, she carried water and firewood, swept the hearth, plucked the fowls, picked the vegetables, raked the ashes, and did all the dirty work. Allerleirauh long he lived miserably. Ah, beautiful princess, who will never be you! But one day in the castle gave a party, and she said to the cook: Can I go for a while 'to see? I will place myself outside the door-. The cook replied: -Yes, go 'as well, but in half an hour you must be back here to sweep the cenere-. Then she took her lamp, went into her den, put off the cloak and soot from his hands and face, so, that her full beauty, like the sun appearing from behind the clouds. He opened the nut and took out the shining dress like the sun. Then he went to the party and everyone gave way, because no one knew her, and thought it was definitely a princess. The king approached her, held out his hand and danced with her, thinking in his heart, "I've never seen one so beautiful." At the end of the dance she curtsied, and when the king looked around, she was gone somewhere. They were called the guards who stood outside the castle, but no one had seen her. She had run into her den, had quickly taken off her dress, she had blackened her face and hands and put on the cloak again become Allerleirauh. When she walked into the kitchen to get back to work and sweep up the ashes, the cook said: -Let alone till morning, and make me the soup for the king: I want to go upstairs to see a little '. But let no hairs fall in, or you will not have anything to eat! -. The cook went away and Allerleirauh prepared the soup for the king; the best she could, and when she was ready, she went to the closet to take his gold ring and put it in the bowl in which the soup was served. After the dance, the king sent for the soup; He ate it, and liked it so much that he thought he had never tasted better. But when he got to the bottom, he found the gold ring and could not understand how it had happened there. Then he sent for the cook. Hearing the order, he was terrified and told Allerleirauh: -You certainly let a hair fall into the soup, and if so prendi-. When he came before the king, he asked who had made the soup. The cook replied: -I I- prepared. -Not true- he said the king -was made differently than usual, and was very migliore.- Then the cook said, -I have to confess that I did not get it, but Dognipelo-. -Fatela venire- said the king. When Allerleirauh came, the king asked: -Who are you? -. She replied: -I am a poor girl who no longer has the parents-. He continued: -What you doing in my castle? -. -I'm not good for anything, except to take the boots on testa.- -Where did you get the ring that was in the soup? - I do not know -Dell'anello nulla.- So the king could learn nothing, and had to send her back to the kitchen. After some time there was another festival, and even before, Allerleirauh begged the cook for leave to attend the dance. The cook replied: Yes, but in half an hour you must be a return to prepare the soup that the king eats much volentieri-. Then she ran into her den, washed herself quickly, took from the nut the silvery dress like the moon and put it on. He went up and was like a princess; The king met her, happy to see her again, and since, was starting a dance, danced together. But when it was ended, she again disappeared so quickly that the king lost sight of. The young woman ran instead into her den, turned back into a hairy animal, and went into the kitchen to make the soup. While the cook was upstairs, he took the golden melted, put it in the bowl and poured so that the soup. Then they were taken to the king, who ate it taste like the first time; He sent for the cook who had to admit again had prepared the Allerleirauh. Allerleirauh again came before the king, but said it was only good to have boots on the head and that he knew nothing of the gold zone. When the king gave a feast for the third time, everything went as before. The cook said: -You are a witch, shaggy beast, and always put something in the soup which makes it so good that the King likes it more than I do I-. But she begged so hard, he let her go at the appointed time. She put on the dress which shone like stars, and entered the hall. The king danced again with the beautiful maiden, and thought that she had never been so beautiful. And, as they danced, L slipped a gold ring on her finger, without her noticing it; and he ordered that the dance should last a very long time. When it was over, she pressed her hands to hold her, but she freed himself and ran among the people, so quickly that he did not see her anymore. He ran as fast as she could into her den beneath the stairs and, since it was more than a half hour stop, no pot, take off her pretty dress, but simply covered with hairy garment; and, in a hurry, she did not make herself quite black, but one finger remained white. Then he ran into the kitchen to prepare the soup for the king, and when the cook was away, put in the golden reel. The King found the bottom of the dish, he Allerleirauh to be summoned; and he saw the white finger and the ring he had put during the dance. Then he took her by the hand, and when she wanted to release herself and run away, her mantle of fur opened a little ', and thus make the gown sparkle. The King clutched the mantle and tore it off. Then her golden hair and beautiful dress, which she could no longer hide. He removed ash and soot from his face, and there was the most beautiful princess who had never seen the world. The king said: -You are my dear bride, and we will never part more-. The marriage took place, and they lived happily until death.
Donnette	1330	1940	Italian	"Where are you going?" - "I'm going to Cogozzo." - "I'm going to Cogozzo, you go to Cogozzo: well, well, let's go together." "Do you have a husband? What's his name?" - "Tito." - "My man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, you go to Cogozzo: well, well, let's go together." "Do you have a child? What's his name?" - "Pine tree." - "My child Wild, thy child Wild, my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, you go to Cogozzo: well, well, let's go together." "And you've got the cradle?" - "It's called Sbattéiluna." - "My cradle Sbattéiluna, your cradle Sbattéiluna; my child Wild, thy child Wild, my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, you go to Cogozzo: well, well, let's go together." "Ce have you drudge? " - "It's called Vabelbello." - "My Vabelbello, your Vabelbello; my cradle Sbattéiluna, your cradle Sbattéiluna; my child Wild, thy child Wild, my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe, you to Walpe well, well, let's go together. "
Frederick and Catherine	560	1387	Italian	There was a man who was called Frederick and a woman called Catherine; they were married and lived together as young married folks. One day Frederick said, "Now go and plow, Catherine; when I come back, there must be something to the table roasted with hunger, and a cool drink to the thirsty." - "Va ', Frederick," answered Kate, "just go' well, I will do everything." When he approached the lunch hour, she got a sausage from the chimney, put it in a pan with a little 'butter and set it on fire. The sausage began to fry and to hiss, Catherine stood there, lost in thought, holding the handle of the pan; Suddenly it occurred to her: While the sausage is cooking, you could draw beer cellar. Thus assured the handle of the pan, he sets a jug, and went down to the cellar to draw beer. The beer was down in the bowl and Catherine was looking at her; Suddenly it occurred to her: Ohi, not Is he entered the dog over which ports get the sausage from the pan? It would be the last straw! and he rushed up the stairs. But the rascal had the sausage in his mouth and dragged her to the ground. Catherine began to chase him and ran after him for a long stretch in the fields, but the dog was faster than Catherine and did not let go of the sausage that skipped over. "What's done it is done!" said Kate; turned and, as he was tired for the race, she walked quietly, wiping the sweat. Meanwhile the beer kept coming out of the barrel, because the woman had not turned the tap; and when the can was full and there was no other place the beer began to flow around the cellar, until the barrel was empty. Kate was on the scale, and already noticed the accident. "Damn," he shouted. "What do because, Federico does not notice?" He thought a bit '; Finally it occurred to her that the last fair was still in the attic a lot of beautiful wheat flour, could go and get it and spread it on beer. "Yes," he said, "everything retreat, when you need it has already found!" He went so take the bag in the attic, brought it down and threw it right on full mug spilled spreading the Federico beer cellar. "Very good!" said Kate, "where there must also be the one the other." And scattered all over the flour. When he had finished, he said, heartily she delighted with her work: "How beautiful, shiny and clean!" At noon home came Frederick. "Now, wife, what you gave me?" - "Ah, Frederick," she replied, "I wanted arrostirti a sausage, but the dog took her away while I was drawing the beer, and while running after the dog, the beer ran out, and while it was drying up the beer with the flour I also overturned the mug; in return, the cellar is quite! " Said Frederick, "Kate, Kate, you did not do it! You do steal the sausage, leave the tap of the barrel, and moreover throw out all our flour!" - "Indeed, Frederick, I did not know, you should have told me!" The man thought: my wife is like, you have to be more careful. He had put together a good sum of money, and thought, as well, to change it to gold and said to Catherine, "Look, are yellow counters: put them in a pot and bury it in the stable under the manger, but you Stanne away or you will regret it." - "No, Frederick," said she, "certainly not going to touch." When Frederick was gone some pedlars came into the village who sold pots and earthen pots, and asked the young woman if he intended to buy. "Good people," said Kate, "I have no money and can not buy anything, unless you use for yellow counters." - "Yellow counters, why not? But just let us see," replied the merchants. "Go into the stable and dig under the manger you will find them there: I can not go there." The rogues went thither, dug and found pure gold; they took him and cut the rope, leaving home pots and pans. Catherine though she must use the pots in some way, and since, in the kitchen had enough, and the smashed them all as ornaments on the fence poles all around the house. When Frederick came and saw the decorations, he said: "What have you done, Catherine?" - "I bought them, Frederick, with hidden yellow counters under the manger. I did not go, sellers had to dig s'" - "Ah, wife," said Frederick, "you did! Were not the counters, but pure gold, and it was all our wealth; you should not do that! " - "Yes, Frederick," she replied, "but I did not know, you had told me sooner." Catherine stood for a while 'to think, then said, "Listen, Frederick, we will have again we will run after the thieves . " - "Come on," said Frederick, "we try, but take with you some butter and cheese, to have something to eat on the way." - "Yes, Frederick, I will take it." They set out, and as Frederick was the better walker, Catherine followed him. So what, he thought, when we come back I shall be part of the way! He came to a mount, and the two sides of the road there were deep ruts. "But look a bit '," said Kate, "as they broke, peeled and crushed the poor earth will never heal again." And, with a compassionate heart, she took her butter and smeared the ruts right and left, because they were not crushed by the wheels; but, as he leaned her charity, a cheese out of her pocket and rolled down the slope. Catherine said: "I have already made once the road, I do not want to back down, we will go to another to catch it!" So she took another cheese and rolled it down. But the cheeses did not return; then he threw a third thinking maybe waiting for company and did not like being alone. Since they did not return even in three, he said: "I do not understand! But it could be that the third has not found the road has gone wrong, send the fourth to call them." But the fourth did no better than the third. Then Catherine was angry and threw down the fifth and sixth; and they were the last. She remained standing for a while ', but then, seeing that never came, said: "Lenses like you, folks to send in death! Perhaps you think you still want to expect? I'm going on my way, if you want you can run after , your legs are younger than mine! " Catherine went and found Frederick, who had stopped to wait for her because he wanted to eat something. "Let me see what you brought." But she gave him dry bread. "Where I am butter and cheese?" He asked Frederick. "Ah, Frederick," answered Kate, "I smeared with butter the roadway and the cheeses are coming: one ran away from me, so I sent others to call him." Said Frederick, "You should not have done that, Catherine, spread butter on the street and throw the cheese down the hill!" - "Yes, Frederick, but you should have told me!" They ate the dry bread together, and Frederick said, "Catherine, did you make the house safe when you came away?" - "No, Frederick, you should have told me sooner." - "So, go back to shut the house, before we go on, and also brings something else to eat. I'll wait here." Catherine went back and thought Frederick wants something more to eat, but butter and cheese does not like, so I will take a handkerchief full of dried pears and a pitcher of vinegar to drink. Then he bolted the top of the door; the lower one, however, the unhinged and put it on his shoulders, believing that the house was safer if he brought with him the door. After he set out all quiet and when he reached Federico said, "There you are the door, Frederick, so you can keep the house for yourself!" - "Oh, God!" they exclaimed, "what a wise wife I have! Undermine the bottom door, anyone can run in, and bolts the upper! Now it's too late to go back home yet, but since you have brought the door here, You shall bring it even further. " - "I will carry the door, Frederick, but the dried pears and the vinegar-jug will be too heavy to hang the door, they may carry them." So they went into the woods to look for the thieves, but they found them. Meanwhile it grew dark and the two climbed into a tree to spend the night. But as soon as they were up there, they came those who carry away what does not go, and find things before they go astray. They sat under the tree, lit a fire and wanted to share the spoils. Federico came down the other side, picked up the stones and came up with the intent to throw at him to thieves killing them with stones. But stones do not hit them, and the criminals exclaimed: "It 's almost morning, the wind knocks over the pine cones." Catherine always had the door on his back, and because it weighed so much he thought it was the fault of the dried pears, and said, "Frederick, I must throw the pears down!" - "No, Catherine, not now," he replied, "may betray us." - "Ah, Frederick, I must have to do that weigh too much!" - "And then throw them, for God's sake!" The dried pears rolled down between the branches, but the thieves said: "Bird Dropping." After a while ', as the door continued to weigh, Catherine said, "Ah, Frederick, I must overthrow the vinegar!" - "No, Catherine, you do not, it might betray us." - "Ah, Frederick, I must do it by force, too heavy!" - "Then throw it, damn it!" Catherine poured vinegar spraying thieves who said: "Begin now to drop the dew." Finally Catherine thought: What if it's the door to wear on me so much? and he said, "Frederick, I must throw the door down." - "No, Catherine, not now, could betray us." - "Ah, Frederick, I must do it by force, too heavy!" - "No, Catherine, keep it strong!" - "Ah, Frederick, I let it go!" - "So," he replied Frederick angrily, "let it go to all the devils!" The door fell with a great noise, and the robbers shouted: "The devil comes down from the tree!" and cut the rope planting there all. At dawn, when the two came down from the tree, they found themselves all their gold, and took him to the house casa.A Federico said, "Now, Catherine, you must get to work commitments." - "Yes, Frederick," she answered, "I will. I'll go in the field to harvest." When he was in the field, Catherine said to himself ': I eat or sleep before you reap? Be ', I will eat first! He ate and eating was sleeping; so he began to harvest and, half asleep, cut his clothes: apron, skirt and shirt. When he woke up after a deep sleep, he found himself half-naked and said to himself ': "Are not I? Ah, I am not sure!" Meanwhile night had fallen; Catherine ran into the village, knocked at her husband's window and shouted, "Frederick?" - "What's up." - "I would like to know if Catherine is in." - "Yes, yes," he replied Frederick, "be sleeping." She said, "Then I'm not really me," and ran via.Fuori Catherine found some vagabonds who were going to steal. He approached them and said: "I want to help you steal." Those thought I knew the opportunities that offered the place, and were willing. Catherine went in front of the houses, shouting: "People, you have something? We want to rob you!" We made a big deal! They thought the Marauders, and desired to get rid of Catherine. They said: "The pastor has a field of turnips in front of the village, take it easy and Gather." Catherine went to the ground, and began to pick turnips, but it was so lazy that you never righted. A passerby stopped to look and thought it was the devil to dig between the turnips. He ran into the village to the pastor and said, "Reverend, there's the devil in your field that collects the turnips." - "Oh, God," replied the pastor, "I have a lame foot, I can not go and chase him away!" The man said: "Then I will carry on their shoulders," and took him out. And, when they reached the ground, Catherine sat up and stretched. "Ah, the devil!" She cried the priest, and took to their both legs; and, for the great fear, the priest, with his lame foot, ran as straight man who had carried on his back, with healthy legs.
Fernando Fernando faithful and unfaithful	1192	531	Italian	There was once a man and a woman who so long as they were rich had no children, but when they were poor they had a little boy. But they could find no godfather; then the man said he would go to another place, to see if he could get one. On the way, he met a poor man who asked him where he was going; he said he was going to see if he could find a godfather: he was poor and so there was no one who wanted him to appear. -Oh- said the poor man -you are poor and so do I: I'll do it to appear. But they are so poor that I can not give anything to the child; go and tell the nurse to take him chiesa.- When they reached the church, the beggar was already there, and called the child Ferdinand the Faithful. Leaving the church, the beggar said: -Now go home: I can not give you anything, and you also do not give me anything-. But he gave a key and asked her to give it, just at home, his father, that the care of it until the child was fourteen years of age; then he was to go on the moor, and there had to be a castle that would open with that key, and everything that was in it was hers. When the child was seven years old, and had grown very big, he once went to play with other kids, and everyone had got more from his godfather than the other, but he could not say anything, then he began to cry , she went home and told his father: -Do I get nothing from my godfather? -. Oh, yes -ti said his father gave him a key if there is a castle on the moors, goes' to aprirlo.- So he went, but there was just no castle. After seven years, when he was fourteen, back there, and there was a castle. He opens it, and inside there is only a white horse. The boy is so happy to have a horse, that he mounted and galloped back to his father. -Now I have a white horse, and I will travel! - he says. So he goes, and along the way, he sees a pen to write on the road. At first want to pick it up, but then thinks, "Oh, leave her alone! A pen to write a find anywhere if you need it." While away, a voice that shouts: -Fernando Faithful, take it with you! -. He looked around, but saw no one, then go back and picked it up. After riding a bit ', it passes near a river, and on the shore there is a fish gasping. Then he says: -Wait, dear fish, I'll help you get back in the water-. He takes it by the tail and throws it in the river. Then the fish put its head from the water and says: -You have helped me and I will give thee a flute in case of need, Play it, and I will help you; and if something fell into the water, he plays the flute and I will give riporterò-. The young man goes and meets a man who asked him where he wants to go. Oh, at the village vicino.- -How's your name? - -Fernando fedele.- -But look, we have almost the same name: my name is Fernando infedele.- And both they go to the village inn near. But the trouble was that Ferdinand the Unfaithful knew everything that another thought and wanted to do; I knew all kinds of evil arts. In the inn there was a beautiful girl with a bright face and good manners. She fell in love with Ferdinand the Faithful, why, it was nice; and asked him where he was going. Oh, he wanted to travel the world. But she told him that he ought to stay in that country there was a king who would gladly took a home or a tread; he ought to enter his service to the king. But He answered he could not go and offer himself. Then the girl said: Oh, I will! -. He went straight to the king and told him that he knew of an excellent servant. THE king was happy, he sent for him and wanted to be his home. But he liked better to be an outrider, for where his horse, he had to be there; and the king made him an outrider. When Ferdinand the Unfaithful learned that, he said to the girl: -How, help him and not me? -. -Oh- said she also -aiuterò te.- And he thought: -You must tenertelo friend because of him we can not be trusted. "So goes the king, and offered him as a pet, and the king was willing. In the morning while Fernando unfaithful dressed him, the king always sighed: Ah, if I had with me my bride! -. But Fernando unfaithful hated Ferdinand the faithful and, one day the king began to complain that way, he said: -You the tread: send him to take it; and if he does not, Off with his head-. Then the king sent for Ferdinand the faithful and told him he had a girl he loved and so he was to bring otherwise would have died. Ferdinand the faithful went into the stable to his white horse, and complained and lamented: Ah, poor me! -. Then he heard a voice behind him: -Fernando true, why are you crying? -. he looked round but saw no one and continued to complain: Oh my dear little white horse, now I have to leave you, I must die! -. Only then he realized it was her pony whi or to ask him, -Are you, my horse? You can speak?-. And he added: -I have to go to a place like this and am to bring the bride; you tell me what should I do? -. The white horse replied: -Go to the king and tell him bring the bride if he will give you what you want: Can you give if a ship full of meat and a full of bread. On the sea at Great giants, and if you do not I brought them flesh, you would do in pieces; and there are the large birds which would pick the eyes if you had no bread for them-. Then the king said to all the butchers in the land kill, and all the bakers bake bread, to fill the two ships. When they were full, the white horse told Ferdinand the Faithful: -Now saltami riding and boarded with me; When will the giants, you will say: "Now the anger should be forgotten, and without delay come and eat!" And when the birds will still say, "To you I wanted to bring something, or immediately come to peck!" Then you do not they will do anything, and when you get to the castle, the giants will help you: go up to the castle and take two giant with you, there will be the sleeping princess; But I do not wake her up: the giants must lift it with the bed and carry on ship-. And everything went as he had told the white horse Ferdinand the Faithful gave the giants and the birds what he had brought; the giants rabbonirono and carried the princess in her bed to the king. But when he reached the king, she said she could not live if he did not have his papers, which had remained in the castle. At the suggestion of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, Ferdinand the Faithful was called, and the king ordered him to go and get the cards in the castle, or die. Then he went back to the barn and wept and said, Oh, my dear little white horse, I have to leave again, how are we going? -. Then the horse said he was still load the ship. Everything went as before and giants and the birds were satisfied, and made gentle by the meat. When they reached the castle the horse told him to come: the cards were on the table, in the room of the princess. Fernando faithful comes and takes them. When they are in the sea, Fernando faithful pen falls into the water, and the horse says: -Now I can not help you-. Then it occurs to him the flute, he began to play and the fish came with the pen in his mouth and hands it to her. He brings to the castle, where they were celebrating the wedding. But the queen the king did not like it, he had no nose, but she loved Fernando faithful. Once the gentlemen of the court were assembled, the Queen said that you do feats of magic if anyone wanted to try, she could cut off his head and put it on again. But no one wanted to be the first, so Ferdinand the Faithful, always by the advice of Ferdinand the Unfaithful: the queen cut off his head and put him in place, and it healed quickly, so, seemed to have a red thread around his neck. Then the king said to her, My child, where did you learn it? -. -Si- answered she -conosco art: I also try with you? - Oh, yes her husband said. But she cut off his head and put it on again, pretending not succeed and that the head would not keep fixed. So the king was buried, but she married Ferdinand the Faithful. But these always rode on his white horse, and once the horse told him to go to another heath which he knew, and do three times around a gallop. When he had done, the horse stood up on his hind legs and turned into a prince.
fairytale riddle	1524	407	Italian	Three women were changed into flowers in the middle of the field, but one of them could spend the night at his house. Once, on the break of day, when he had to return to her companions in the field and become a flower, she told her husband: "If you come and catch me this morning, I will be free and will always remain with you." And so it happened. Question: how her husband, if the flowers were all equal and no differences? Answer: "Because, had spent the night in his home, and not in the field, the dew had not as wet as the other two could recognize it. So her husband knew her. "
The brother and sister	99	450	Italian	The brother took his sister by the hand and said, "Since our mother died we have had no good days; our stepmother beats us every day, and when we go near her she kicks us. The stale bread crusts are our food, and the dog under the table is better than us: he occasionally throws something good. My God, if he knew our mother! Come, let us go together to the world. " They walked all day through meadows, fields, stony paths, and if it rained the sister said, "God and our hearts cry together." The evening came to a great wood, and they were so weary with hunger and their long journey, they sat inside a hollow tree and addormentarono.La morning, when they awoke, the sun was high in the sky and its brightly through the tree. Then the brother said, "Sister, I am thirsty; if I knew where a source go and drink; I think I have heard the murmuring." The brother got down and led his sister by the hand and wanted to seek the source. But the wicked stepmother was a witch and had known quite well that the two children were gone; He had sneaked after them, secretly, like witches, and had bewitched all the brooks in the forest. When they found a little stream flowing smoothly on the stones, the brother was drinking; but the sister heard the murmuring source: "Who drinks of me a tiger! Who drinks of me a tiger!" Then the sister cried, "Oh, brother, please do not drink, or become a wild beast, and tear me to pieces." The brother refrained from drinking, though his thirst was great, and said, "I will wait until next spring." When they came to a second brook the sister heard it say, "Who drinks of me becomes a wolf! Who drinks of me becomes a wolf!" Then he shouted: "Oh, brother, I beg you, do not drink, or you will become a wolf and eat me up." The brother did not drink, and said, "I will wait until next spring, but then I must drink, you can say what you want, I too thirsty." When they came to the third brook the sister heard murmuring: "Who drinks of me become a deer! Who drinks of me become a deer!" The sister said, "Oh, brother, I beg you, do not drink, or you will become a deer and run away." But the brother had already kneeled by the source, he was stooped and drunk water; as soon as the first drops passed his lips, he lay on the ground, turned into a small capriolo.La sister wept over her poor lost brother, and the fawn was crying, and stayed sadly beside her. Finally the girl said, "Never mind, dear fawn, I will never leave you." Then she untied her golden girdle and bound it round the fawn's neck, then tore the rushes and it a soft cord. He tied the animal, she led him on, and he went deeper into the woods. Walk, walk, finally they came to a little house; The maiden looked inside, and as it was empty she thought, "We might as well live." He tried then leaves and moss to make a soft bed with venison and every morning went out and gathered roots, berries and nuts, and the roe deer brought tender grass; and it used to eat out of his hand, he was happy and was playing in front of her. In the evening, when the sister was tired and had said her prayers, she laid her head on the back of the fawn that was her pillow, and softly fell asleep. And if only the brother had had his human form, it would have been a life meravigliosa.Per a certain period of time so they lived, alone, in the wilderness. But it happened that the king of the country held a great hunt in the woods. Sounded through the trees the sound of the horns, the barking of dogs and the merry shouts, and her fawn heard them and was eager to be among the match. "Ah," said his sister, "let me go hunting, I can not take it anymore!" And he begged so long that at last she consented. "But," he said, "he will return tonight. Against the wild hunters I lock my door to identify yourself, and knocking ':" Little sister, let me in! "But if you say so, I will not open." Then the fawn sprang out, and was so well and was so cheerful outdoors! The king and his huntsmen saw the beautiful animal and gave chase; but they could not reach it, and when to take it believed he sprang away over the bushes and disappeared. When it was dark he ran to the cottage, knocked, and said, "Little sister, let me in!" Then the door was opened, he jumped in, and rested all night on his soft bed. The next morning the hunt began anew, and when the fawn heard the horn and the cry of hunters, had no more peace and said, "Sister, let me in, I have to leave." The sister opened the door and said: "But tonight you must be back here with your password." When King and his hunters saw the fawn with the golden collar, all are pursued, but he was too nimble and swift. The hunt lasted all day, but finally evening the hunters surrounded him, and one slightly wounded him in the leg, so he began to limp and to go slowly on. Then a hunter slipped after him to the little house and heard to exclaim: "Little sister, let me in!" and saw that it was open the door and immediately closed again. The hunter kept everything in mind, went to the king and told him what he had seen and heard. Then the king said: "Tomorrow we will hunt again." But the sister was terribly frightened when her fawn was wounded. He washed the wound, she puts it over the herbs and said, "Go 'to your bed, my fawn, so heal." But the wound was so small that in the morning the deer no longer felt nothing, and again when he heard the riot of the fighter said: "I can not resist, I must go; it will not be so easy to catch me." The little sister wept and said: "Now I will kill you; do not let you out." - "And I'll die of sadness here, if I hold back," said the deer. "When I hear the hunting horn seems not to stay longer in the skin!" Then the sister had to give up, opened the door with a heavy heart, and the fawn bounded away into the forest and happy. When the King saw him, he said to his huntsmen, "Chase him all day until evening, but no one hurt him!" As the sun had set, the king said to the hunter: "come and show me the little house." And when he got to the door he knocked and called out, "Dear little sister, let me in!" Then the door opened and the king went in and found a girl as beautiful as he had never seen. But the girl was frightened when she saw a king with a crown of gold instead of its fawn. The King looked kindly on her, gave her his hand and said, "Will you come with me to my castle and be my dear wife?" - "Ah yes," he answered the girl, "but must also come roe deer, not abandonment." The King said: "It will stay with you until, live and did not miss anything." At that moment he jumps to the deer; sister tied back to the cord of rushes picked herself, and together they left the house in bosco.Il King put the beautiful maiden in his castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great pomp; Now she was Her Majesty the Queen, and they lived happily together for a long time; venison it was well fed and well cared for and ruzzava in the castle garden. But the wicked stepmother, because of which the children had left for the world, believed that the sister had been torn to pieces by wild beasts in the woods, and his little brother, turned into a deer, had been killed by hunters. When she heard that they were happy and they were so good, envy and jealousy arose in her heart and left her no peace, and he did not think that the way to bring misfortune upon them. Her own daughter, who was ugly as night and had only one eye, complained and said, "being a Queen This fortune was mine!" - "It's' quiet," said the old woman, "At the right time, I'll know what to do." And when the time came and the Queen gave birth to a baby boy, while the king was hunting, the old witch on the appearance of the maid took it, went into the room where the Queen lay, and said to her: "Come, the bath is ready , it will do well and will reinforce, and soon, before it gets cold. " There was also his daughter; they carried the sick Queen was, in the bathroom, put her in the tub and went quickly closing the door. But in the bathroom they had kindled a fire of hell, so that the beautiful young queen stifled presto.Ciò well done, the old woman took her daughter, put a cap on his head and placed it in the bed instead of a queen. The also gave its shape and its appearance, but she could not restore the lost eye. But because the king would not notice anything, she had to lie on the side where the eye was missing. In the evening, when the King came home and heard that a child was born, he was full of joy, and was going to bed of his dear wife to see how she was. Then the old woman said, "Please, let the curtains closed: the queen not bear the light and must rest!" The king withdrew and did not know that the bed was a false regina.Ma when it was midnight, and all was quiet, the nurse, who was sitting in the nursery by the cradle and was watching there alone, saw the door open and the true queen. She took the child from the cradle, laid it in her bosom, and fed; then fluffed her little pillow, put it back in bed, and covered it with the small blanket. But he does not forget the fawn either, went to the corner where he was and stroked his back. Then quietly she left the door and the nurse next morning asked the guards if overnight they saw someone enter the castle; But they answered: "No, we have not seen anyone." The Queen came many nights, and never said a word; the nurse saw her always, but did not dare say anything to nessuno.Quando was after a certain period of time, one night the queen began to say: "What do they do in their bed venison and my baby? Even twice so far I will come, but one must be. " The nurse said nothing, but when he had disappeared she went to the king and told him everything. The King said, "My God, what is this! I want to watch by my son the next night." In the evening he went into the nursery; at midnight the queen again appeared and said, "What do they do in their bed venison and my baby? Once again I will come this far, but one must be." He took care of the child as always, before disappearing. The King dared not speak to her, but the next night he stayed awake again. She said, "What do they do in their bed venison and my baby? For the last time I am come down here again must be." The king could now no longer, but rushed towards her, saying: "You can not be that my dear wife." She replied: "Yes, I am your dear wife." And in that moment, by divine grace, he returned to live, fresh, rosy and healthy. Then she told the King the snare that the wicked witch and her daughter. The king made her judging both, and they were condemned: the daughter was led into the woods, where the wild beasts tore as soon as they saw her; the witch was thrown into the fire and had to burn miserably. And when it was reduced to ashes, the fawn, and regained its human aspect; and sister and brother lived happily together until death.
Cat and mouse in partnership	12	15	Italian	A cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had so much about the great love and friendship that her, that at last the mouse agreed to live with him; They would keep house together. "But we have to cater for the winter, or we shall suffer from hunger," said the cat, "and you, little mouse, can not venture out everywhere, or else you will end up falling on my trap!" The good advice was followed, and they bought a pot. But they did not know where to put it; Finally, after much consideration, the cat said, "I do not know where he might be safer than in church; there no one dares to commit a theft We will put it beneath the altar, and not touch it until we need it." The pot was stored safely but the cat was soon longing for it, and said to the mouse, "I wanted to tell you, little mouse, that my cousin has asked me to be his godfather gave birth to a small, white with brown spots, and I have to hold him over baptism. Let me go out today, and you look after the house chores. " - "Alright," said the mouse, "go, and if you eat something good think of me: a drop of sweet red wine you would drink it again myself!" But there was nothing to it: the cat had no cousin, and had asked to be godfather. He went straight to the church, crept up to the pot, he began to lick at it, and licked off the film of grease. Then he went for a stroll on the roofs of the city to the rest of the day looked around, then stretched out in the sun, licking his whiskers whenever he thought of the pot. He did not return home that evening. "There you are," said the mouse, "You must have had a happy day. What name did they put the baby?" - "top off," said the cat in one breath. "What a strange name," said the mouse, "is common in your family?" - "What's strange," he said the cat, "is no worse than Rubabriciole, the name of your godchildren!" Before long the cat was seized by another fit of longing. So he said to the mouse, "You must let me once again the pleasure to look after the house alone; I want again to be godfather, and since the child has a white ring around its neck, I can not refuse." Again the mouse agreed, and again the cat crept up to the church, and devoured half the pot of fat. "It 's true: nothing is tastier than what you eat alone" and was quite satisfied with his day at sunset came home. The mouse of the day just passed and then asked: "this child as you called?" - "Half," let out the cat. "Half! What a name," said the mouse, "I'm sure that does not even exist on the calendar!" Soon the cat was mouth watering and since there is no two without three, said to the mouse " I have to be godfather again. This time the little one is all black, only it has white paws all over the rest of the body has not a single white hair. This only happens once every two years, you let me go? " - "top off, and half done," mused aloud the mouse, "are names that me stop and think!" - "You are you with your dark gray fur coat and long braid in the house, and it ends up that you to your head! It happens so when you quit ever!" She said the cat suffered and went out. That greedy cat came into the church and of course ate verything the lard pot: "Only when everything is over you are alone!" he said to himself and returned only at night at home he founded and well-fed. The mouse, which in the meantime had hurried all the chores and put the house in order, once again asked what name they had given to the third child. "Well, do not like it either," said the cat, "cried the mouse is called!" - "I cried the mouse certainly is the most worrisome name, I've never seen written. Which ever going to want to say?" but she shook her head, curled up and addormentò.Da then no one asked the cat to be godfather. Coupling the winter, when it is not out trovavapiù anything, the mouse thought of their stored food, and said, "Come cat, we go where we put in Serbia our pot of fat succeed we will enjoy." - "Of course," he answered the cat to himself "you enjoy this as eating hot air!" It Missero journey, and when they arrived the pot was still in place, but completely empty. "Ah," said the mouse, "now I see what has happened, now everything is clear. Bell'amico you are! You ate everything when you were serving as a godfather First top off, then half done, then ..." - "Do you want keep quiet, "said the cat," one more word and I eat you! ' "cried the mouse," he finished saying at that moment the rat. So the cat leapt grabbed it and made it one gulp. See, so goes the world.
scum	89	210	Italian	Galletto said to the hen: "The nuts are ripe, we go to the hill together and Death Eaters at once and fill before the squirrel takes them all away." - "Yes," he replied the hen, "come, we will have some pleasure together." They went away to the mountain, and since, was a bright day they stayed till evening. Now, I do not know if they had eaten till or if they become too arrogant, but they would not go home on foot, and the cock had to build a little carriage of nut shells. When she was ready, the little hen seated and told Cockerel "You can pull." - "No," said Rooster, "what an idea! Rather than pulling I go home on foot: these were not the pacts. Making the coachman and sitting on the box, that's fine, but pull me, not that." While fighting a ' duck quacked: "Hey you, thieves, who told you to come to the mountain of my nuts? ve'll make you pay!" and he rushed on Galletto. But the cock also was not idle, and fell boldly on the duck, and eventually attacked with spurs so hard, she asked for grace and punishment willingly let herself be harnessed to the carriage. Galletto sat on the box as a coachman and departed in a gallop. "Duck, go as fast as you can!" After they had gone part of the way they met two pedestrians, a pin and a needle. They shouted: "Halt, halt," and said he was going to become pitch dark, and they could not take another step, and then the road was so dirty! They could go for a while '? They had been at the inn for tailors, out of town, and had stayed too long drink beer. As they were thin people, who do not take up much room, the cock let them both, but they had to promise not to step on toes to him and his little hen. Late in the evening came to an inn, and since they did not go at night, and the duck was shabby and fell from one side to the other, they stopped. At first the innkeeper made many objections, his house was already full; besides he thought it could not be very distinguished people. But they constrained him many fine words: he had the egg laid by hen on the way and would keep the duck every day I put down one, so that in the end he yielded. So they did serve at the table and feasted merrily. Early in the morning, when day was breaking, and every one was asleep, cock awoke the hen, took the egg, opened its beak and ate it together; they threw the shell on the hearth. Then they went to the needle which was still asleep, took him by the head and stuck it into the host's chair cushion, while I slipped the needle into the towel. Finally they ran away to the plain, as if nothing had happened. The duck who liked to sleep outside and had stayed in the yard, heard them going away, he woke up, he found a stream and followed in the current swimming: it was faster to pull the carriage! A couple of hours later the landlord got up, washed and wanted to dry with the towel, but scratched his face with the pin; then he went into the kitchen and wanted to light a pipe, but when it came to the hearth the egg shell darted into his eyes. "This morning I have it all with my head!" he said, and sat angrily in his chair. "Ouch!" The sewing needle had worse point, and not in the head, so he jumped up in fright. Now he was thoroughly angry, and suspected the guests who had arrived the night before so late; and when he went to look for them were gone. Then swore never more ragamuffins who eat a lot, do not pay anything and come thanked play mischievous tricks.
Gian Porcupine	1022	441	Italian	There once was a rich farmer who had no children. Often, when he went to town with the other peasants, they mocked him and asked why he had no children. One day became angry and when he got home he said: "I want to have a child, it was also a porcupine." And here, his wife gave birth to a child, half hedgehog, half man, and when she saw horrified and said, "See, we have cast a curse!" The man said: "What can you do? We have to baptize the same, but we can not take a appear." The woman replied, "we can not call it that-Hedgehog." After the baptism, the priest said, "With these barbs can not get in a regular bed." So they settled down a bit 'of straw behind the stove and put us Gian Porcupine. He could not even be nursed by her mother, because she would tip her with his quills. So he lay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father was tired and wished only that he would die; but he died, and he was laying there. Now it happened that there was a market in town, and the peasant wanted to go, so he asked his wife what he should bring. "A little 'meat and some sandwich, what is needed in the house," she said. Then he asked the servant, who wanted a pair of slippers and socks with the spur. Finally he asked: "And you, Gian Porcupine, what do you want?" - "godfather", he said, "bring me bagpipes." When the farmer returned home, he gave his wife what he had bought, and meat sandwiches; then he gave the maid the slippers and socks with the spur, and finally he went behind the stove and gave the bagpipes-Hedgehog. And when he had the bagpipes, he said: "godfather, let me go to the forge and shoeing my cock, so leave and will never go back." The father was happy to potersene free; him to shoe the cock and when it was ready, the-Hedgehog climbed on his back, taking with him, even donkeys and pigs who wanted to preserve the forest. In the forest the rooster had to fly with him on a high tree, and he remained there to guard donkeys and pigs. He remained there several years while his herd swelled and his father did not know anything about him. On the shaft, he played his bagpipes, and the music was beautiful. One day a king who had lost passed by and heard the music; he marveled, and sent his servant to see where it came from. What he looked around but saw only a pet sitting atop a tree; It looked like a cock with a hedgehog on his back playing. Then the king said to the servant to ask him why, if they themselves sitting there, and if he knew where she spent the way for his kingdom. Then-Hedgehog descended from the tree and said he would show him the way if the king promised in writing the first thing that came to court he had met on his arrival. The king thought: "You can do very well, much-Hedgehog understands nothing, and you can write whatever you want." So he took pen and ink and wrote something, and when he finished, Gian Hedgehog showed him the way and he got safely home. But his daughter, seeing him from afar, full of joy ran up and kissed him. He thought-Hedgehog and told her what had happened to him: he had to promise in writing to a strange animal that home meet him on his first; the animal was riding on a cock and played very well; but he had written that would not give him anything because, much, Gian Hedgehog could not read. The princess was happy and said it was well done, because there would be gone in no caso.Ma-Hedgehog kept donkeys and pigs, was always merry and sat on the tree playing the bagpipes. Now it happened that another king came in a carriage with his servants and bearers; he was lost and could not go home because the forest was so large. He heard now the beautiful music from a distance and said to his bishop to go see what it was and where it was the music. These went under the tree and saw the rooster with Gian Porcupine riding. She asked him what he was doing up there. "I guard donkeys and pigs, but you, what do you want?" The bishop replied that they were lost and could not get back into their realm, and if he wanted to show them the way. Then-Hedgehog descended from the tree with the cock, and told the old king who would show him the way if he had granted the first thing that had come to meet in front of his castle. The king said yes and signed a promise-Hedgehog. Then he beats him riding his cock, showed him the way, and the King returned happily to his kingdom. When he arrived at court, it was great joy. The king had an only daughter, very beautiful; she met him, jumped on his neck, kissed him, happy that his old father had returned. She asked him where he had been so long around the world, and he told her that he was lost, and that she might never returned; but while through a great forest, a creature half hedgehog, half man, who was riding on top of a tree to a rooster, and played very well, had helped him and showed him the way; But in return he had to promise him the first thing that had come to meet at court, and this was her, and now he was so afflicted. But she promised that the arrival of Gian Porcupine would follow him willingly for the sake of his old padre.Ma-Hedgehog kept his pigs, and the pigs brought into the world and became more pigs many that the whole forest was no full . Then Gian Porcupine sent word to his father to clear out all the sties of the village and to make room, as he would come with such a herd of pigs, if they wanted to, they could all be slaughtered. On hearing this news, his father was angry because he thought-Hedgehog had died long ago. Gian Porcupine, however, climbed atop his cock, brought pigs to the village and took them to slaughter. Ah, it was a massacre whose noise could be heard two hours away! Then-Hedgehog said, "Babbino, go in the forge to make even shoe once my cock and then I go and never come back in my life." Then the father had the cock shod, and was happy that Gian Porcupine no longer wanted tornare.Gian Porcupine went away in the first kingdom; The king had ordered that if one came riding on a rooster and a bagpipe, fired against all comparison, the chattering and hurt her, why would not enter the castle. So when he arrived-Hedgehog, the they flung themselves with bayonets; but he spurred his cock, and flew out the door, until the king's window; He alighted and shouted to him to give him what he had promised, or he would kill him and his daughter. The king asked his daughter to go to Gian Porcupine, to save his life and that of his father. She is dressed in white, and her father gave her a carriage with six horses, magnificent servants, money and goods. She got into the carriage and Gian Porcupine sat down beside her with the cock and the bagpipes; then they took leave and drove away, and the king thought that he would never see her again. Instead he went very differently. When they were some distance from the city, the Porcupine Gian undressed and pierced it with his quills until he was all bloody and said, "This is the reward for your disloyalty; go, do not want you." So let out and sent her home, and she was disgraced for the vita.Gian Porcupine instead continued on his cock and with his bagpipes to the second kingdom, where he was the other king to whom he had shown the way. These had ordered, one as if it came Gian Porcupine to present arms, let him freely, shouting cheers and introduce it in the castle. When the princess saw him, he was horrified, because her appearance was really weird; but thought that there was nothing else to do, he had promised her father. So he welcomed-Hedgehog, he had to accompany her to the royal table, and she sat down at her side, ate and drank together. In the evening, when it was time to go to sleep, she was very afraid of his quills, but he told her not to worry, he would not be harmed; and told the old king to send four men who did the guard in front of their bedroom door and kindled a great fire came into the room to go to bed, he'd snuck out of his hedgehog skin and would leave by the bed ; then the four men had to pick it up quickly, throwing it into the fire and wait for the fire had destroyed. When the clock struck eleven, he went into the bedroom, took off the hedgehog's skin and left it on the floor beside the bed; then came the men, and took it in a hurry, and threw it in the fire; and when the fire he had destroyed him, he was released from the spell, and was lying in bed now completely man; But it was as black as coal, as if it had burned. The king sent for his physician who washed him with good ointments and perfumed; and he became a young gentleman, white and beautiful. When she saw him, the princess was glad; rose happy, ate and drank, they celebrated their wedding-Hedgehog and obtain the kingdom by the old re.Quando was spent a few years, he went with his wife by his father and told him that it was his son; but the father replied that he did not: glien'era born only one who had the quills like a porcupine, and gone around the world. Then he made himself known, and the old father rejoiced and followed him into his kingdom.
Gianni fine head	300	1696	Italian	The demand Gianni mother: -Where are you going, John? -. Gianni replied: -From Ghita-. -Do not make nonsense, nonsense Gianni.- -Nothing. Farewell, mamma.- Gianni is from Ghita. Good day, Ghita.- -Good morning, Gianni. I bring good? - -Nothing port, dare.- Ghita gave him a needle. Gianni says: Good-bye, Ghita-. Good-bye, Gianni.- Gianni takes the needle, sticks it into a hay wagon and behind the wagon, back home. Good evening, mamma.- Good evening, John, where have you been? - -From Ghita.- -What did you bring? - -Nothing brought, she dato.- -What gave you? - -Ago since. - -Where you the needle, Gianni? - -Ficcato in wagon fieno.- -What fool, Gianni! You had to throw it in your sleeve! - -It nothing, another volta.- -Where you going, John? - -From Ghita.- -Don't let nonsense, nonsense Gianni.- -Nothing. Farewell, mamma.- Gianni is from Ghita. Good day, Ghita.- -Good morning, Gianni. You bring good? - -Nothing port, dare.- Ghita gives to Gianni a knife. Good-bye, Good-bye Ghita.-, Gianni.- Gianni takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. Good evening, mamma.- Good evening, John. Where have you been? - -From Ghita.- -What did you bring? - -Nothing brought, she given-. -What gave you? - -Coltello, dato.- -Do you have the knife, Gianni? - -Infilato in manica.- -What fool, Gianni! You had to put it in your pocket! - -It nothing, another volta.- -Where you going, John? - -From Ghita.- -Don't let nonsense, nonsense Gianni.- -Nothing. Farewell, mamma.- Gianni is from Ghita. Good day, Ghita.- -Good morning, Gianni. I bring good? - -Nothing port, dare.- Ghita gave him a goat. Good-bye, Good-bye Ghita.-, Gianni.- Gianni takes the goat, ties its legs, and if the sticks in his pocket. When he gets home it is suffocated. Good evening, mamma.- Good evening, John. Where have you been? - -From Ghita.- -What did you bring? - -Nothing brought, she dato.- -What gave you? - -Capra, dato.- -Where did you put the goat, Gianni? - -Ficcata in tasca.- -What fool, Gianni. You had to tie it to a rope! - -It nothing, another volta.- -Where you going, John? - -From Ghita.- -Don't let nonsense, nonsense Gianni.- -Nothing. Farewell, mamma.- Gianni is from Ghita. Good day, Ghita.- -Good morning, Gianni. I bring good? - -Nothing port, dare.- Ghita gave him a piece of bacon. Gianni ties it to a rope and pulls him back. They are the dogs and eat lard. When he arrives home, holding the rope and nothing in his hand. Good evening, mamma.- Good evening, John. Where have you been? - -From Ghita.- -What did you bring? - -Nothing brought, she dato.- -What gave you? - lard -piece, dato.- -Where did you put lard, Gianni? - -Legato of war, brought home, stole cani.- -What fool, Gianni! You had to take him in the head! - -It nothing, another volta.- -Where you going, John? - -From Ghita.- -Don't let nonsense, nonsense Gianni.- -Nothing. Farewell, mamma.- Gianni is from Ghita: Good day, Ghita-. -Good morning, Gianni. You bring good? - -Nothing port, dare.- Ghita gives to Gianni a calf. Gianni puts it in his head and the calf bruised face. Good evening, mamma.- Good evening, John. Where have you been? - -From Ghita.- -What did you bring? - -Nothing brought, she dato.- -What gave you? - -Vitello dato.- -Where you the calf, Gianni? - put himself on head, pounded the faccia.- -What fool, Gianni! You had to tie him up and take him to the crib! - -It nothing, another volta.- -Where you going, John? - -From Ghita.- -Do not do anything foolish, Gianni.- -Nothing nonsense. Farewell, mamma.- Good day, Ghita.- -Good morning, Gianni. I bring good? - -Nothing port, dare.- Ghita says: -I want to go with you-. Gianni Ghita binds to a rope, leads the front of the manger and the attacks for good. Good evening, mamma.- Good evening, John. Where have you been? - -From Ghita.- -What gave you? - -Ghita come with me.- -And where did you leave? - -Menata with rope, tied to the crib, put the grass in front. - -What fool, Gianni! You had to be polite and throw eyes on him! - -It nothing, another volta.- Gianni goes in the stable, hollow eyes calves and sheep, and throws them in the face of Ghita. Then Grethel rages, ripping the rope, runs away, and farewell bride Gianni!
the waste	1484	1451	Italian	There was once a maiden who was pretty, but idle and negligent. When she had to spin she was so annoyed that if the linen had a small knot, he once pulled out a pile and threw it to the ground beside her. Now she had a hard-working maid, who picked up the linen thrown away, cleaned, them fine, and with it came a beautiful gown. When the lazy girl was married, and you were about to celebrate the wedding, the industrious one was dancing merrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said, -Look, look, kid. With that gap has made her a dress. So it is dressed up pretty, has nice time, by heart! -The husband heard it, and asked her what she meant. Then she told him that the girl was wearing a dress made with linen that she had discarded. At hearing the bridegroom took notice of his laziness and hard work of the maid; therefore, he gave her up and went across and took her to wife.
Hansel and Gretel	139	327A	Italian	Near a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter and he had nothing to feed themselves; He could barely buy bread for his wife and his two children, Hansel and Gretel. Finally there came a time when he could no longer provide even this and did not know which way to turn. One evening, as he turned restlessly in bed, his wife told him: "Listen to my husband, dawn tomorrow take the two children, give each a piece of bread and bring them out in the woods, at the point where it's denser and turn them a fire, then go away and leave them alone there. we can not feed them any longer. " - "No, my wife," the man said, "I have not the heart to leave my beloved children in the forest, wild animals sbranerebbero them right away." - "If you do not," she said, "everyone will die of hunger." He did not leave him alone until he no acconsentì.Anche the two children could not sleep for hunger, and had heard what her mother had said to her father. Gretel thought it was over for them and began to weep bitterly, but Hansel said, "Shut up Gretel, do not fret, I will manage." He stood up, put his spencer, opened the downstairs door and slipped out. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles shone like brand new coins. Hansel stooped and stuffed it in the pocket of those pot jacket, make it come and went back home. "Consulates Gretel and rests quietly," he said; went back again to bed and addormentò.Allo daybreak, even before the sun had risen, the mother came and woke them both: "Get up children, we want to go in the woods, here's a piece of bread for each of you, but be wise and save it for noon. " Gretel put the bread under her apron, because Hansel had the stones in his pocket, then walked toward the woods. When they had gone a little way Hansel stopped and looked back at the house; so did several times. The father said: "Hansel, what is it that you turn to look at and why, you stop? Come on, come on!" - "Oh, Daddy, I look at my white kitten sitting on the roof and wants to say goodbye." The mother said: "Hey, fool, is not your kitten, it's the morning sun shining on the chimney." However, Hansel had not looked at the kitten, but had thrown every time on the road one of the shiny pebbles he had in tasca.Quando arrived in the woods, the father said, "Now gather firewood, children, I want to light a fire not to freeze. " Hansel and Gretel gathered dry branches and made it a heap. Then they lit the fire and when the flame is high lifted, his mother said, "Now lie down by the fire and sleep, we go to chop wood in the forest; wait until we get back and get you." Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire until noon, then each ate their pieces of bread. They believed that his father was still in the woods, because they heard the blows of the ax; instead it was a branch that he had tied to a tree and that the wind beat here and there. So they waited until evening, but the father and mother did not come back and nobody came to pick them up. When it was night Gretel began to cry, but Hansel said, "Just wait a little, until the moon arises." And when the moon rose, he took Gretel by the hand; pebbles shone like new coins brand and showed them the way. They walked all night and when it was morning, and came to the father's house. The father was heartily glad when he saw his children, because he had regretted having to leave alone; the mother also pretended to rejoice, but secretly he was furiosa.Non was not long and the bread went missing in the house, and Hansel and Gretel heard one evening the mother said to her father: "When the children have found the way and I let it pass, but now there is nothing new, it remains only a half loaf of bread in the house, you have to lead them deeper into the woods tomorrow, why not rediscover the way: for us there is no other remedy. " The man felt his heart and thought, "It would be better if dividessi the last mouthful with your children." But since he had already sold once, could not tell the no.Quando children had heard that speech, Hansel got up to collect back the pebbles, but when he reached the door, her mother had closed. However comforted Gretel and said, "Go to sleep, dear Gretel, the good Lord will help us." At daybreak they had their little piece of bread, even smaller than last time. For Hänsel road crumbled in his pocket; he often stopped and threw a crumb on the ground. "Why, you stopping, Hansel, and look around?" said his father. "Walk!" - "Ah! I look at my pigeon sitting on the roof and wants to say goodbye." - "Fool," said the mother, "is not your pigeon, it's the morning sun shining on the chimney." But Hansel crumbled all of his bread and threw the crumbs to via.La mother led them even farther into the woods, where they had never been in their lives. There had to again sit by the fire and sleep and the parents evening would come and get them. At midday Gretel shared their bread with Hansel, who had scattered all his due. But noon came and even spent the evening no one came by poor children. Hansel comforted Gretel and said: "Wait for the emergence of the moon: then shall see the crumbs of bread that I have scattered; show us the way home." The moon rose, but when Hansel looked for the crumbs not found: thousands and thousands of birds of the forest they had seen and had pecked. Hansel thought too find the way home and was carrying Gretel, but soon were lost in the great forest; They went all night and all day, then slept for much fatigue. Then they walked even a whole day, but could not out of the woods, and they were so hungry, because they had nothing else to eat a bit 'of berries found for terra.Il third day, when they had walked till noon they came to a little house made of bread and covered with cake, with clear sugar windows. "We will sit here and eat your fill," said Hansel. "I'll eat a piece of the roof, you, Gretel, eat a piece of window: it is sweet." When Gretel began to gnaw sugar, a thin voice called out from inside: "He who eats my casinazuccherosa and superfine?" The children said, "It 's the wind that bends each stem, the beautiful child from heaven." And they continued to eat. Gretel took out the whole a round glass and Hansel broke off a huge piece of cake from the roof. But suddenly the door of the house opened and a decrepit old woman came out slowly. Hansel and Gretel are so frightened that they dropped what they had in hand. But the old woman shook her head and said: "Ah, dear children, as you are still reading? Come inside with me, you're welcome." He took both by the hand and led them into her little house. They were served a good dinner, milk and pancakes, apples and walnuts; then they were prepared two beautiful white beds, and Hansel and Gretel went to bed and thought to be in the old Paradiso.Ma was a wicked witch who was waiting impatiently for the arrival of children and, to attract them, he had built the house of bread. When a child fell into his hands, killed, she cooked it and ate it; and for her that was a day of celebration. It was just glad that Hansel and Gretel had stumbled there. Early in the morning, before the kids were awake, she got up, went to their beds, and when he saw them rest so gently, he rejoiced and muttered yes: "It will be a good treat for me!" Then he grabbed Hansel and locked him in a coop. When he awoke, he found himself surrounded by a grate, like a chicken fat, and could only do a few steps. Then the old Gretel woke up with a jolt and shouted: "Get up, chair, get water and go to the kitchen to prepare something good; your brother is there in the coop and I want to grease it and then eat it; you have to feed him. " Gretel was frightened and cried, but he had to do what I wanted to strega.Ora Hänsel were cooked every day the most delicious foods, because, had to gain weight; Gretel rather not receive nothing but crayfish shells. Every day the old woman came and said, "Hansel, lean out your fingers, if you feel that you will soon be fat." But the Hansel always stuck out a little bone, and she was surprised that she did not want their own fat. After four weeks, one evening he said to Gretel: "Go get some water, quickly; it is fat or thin, tomorrow I'll kill your little brother and cook in the meantime I'm going to make bread to be baked in the oven." With a heavy heart, Gretel took the water in which was to be cooked Hansel. He also had to get up early in the morning, light a fire and hang the pot full of water. "Now he 'attention," said the witch. "I light the fire in the oven to bake bread." Gretel was in the kitchen and wept hot tears as he thought: "We had devoured the wild beasts in the forest! At least we would die together without having to endure this pain, and I should not boil the water to serve for my brother's death . Dear God, help us, poor children! "The old woman cried out," Gretel, come here at once in the oven! " and when Gretel came, she said: "Have a look in if the bread is my eyes well cooked and golden, are weak and I do not get to see him there. And if you do not succeed, sit on the axis: you I push you in, so you can better control. " But the wicked witch had called Gretel because, he thought, once spintala to the oven, closing it and eat it roast for her as well. But God inspired idea to the girl, and she said, "I do not know how to do, let me see you first: sit on the axis and I'll push you in." The old woman sat down and as he was light, Gretel pot, push it, as far as it will; then he closed the door quickly and put the iron stake. Then the old woman began to scream and complain in the hot oven, but Gretel ran away, and she had to burn miseramente.Gretel ran to Hansel, opened the door and shouted: "Jump out, Hansel, we are free!" Then Hansel jumped out, like a bird when they open the cage. And they wept with joy and kissed. The whole house was full of pearls and precious stones: these he filled his pockets and went in search of the road that lead them back home. But they came to a large river that they were unable to cross. Then the sister saw white un'anatrina swim here and là.E shouted: "Ah, dear anatrina, prendicisul your back." Hearing these words, the anatrina came swimming up and brought before Gretel Hansel and then across the river. After a short time they found themselves their home: her father was heartily glad when he saw them, because he had not had a day of happiness when her children were gone. The mother was dead. Now the children brought riches enough, because they no longer need to procure the necessities of life.
The twelve apostles	1904	766	Italian	Three hundred years before the birth of Christ, he lived a mother who had twelve sons, but it was so poor and miserable that he did not know how to keep them alive. She prayed to God every day to grant that all her sons might be on earth with the promised Redeemer. Since their misery grew bigger, he sent them one after another around the world to earn a living. The eldest was called Peter went and had already walked for a whole day, when he came into a great forest. He sought a way out, but did not find her and he penetrated more and more, he was so hungry that he could scarcely stand. Eventually he became so weak that he had to lie down and believed to be close to death. Quite suddenly he was beside a bright child, beautiful and kind as an angel. The child tapped, her little hands, so he had to look up and watch it. The child said: -Why, are you here all sad? -. -Ah- said Pietro I am going about the world seeking bread in order to live and get to see the promised Redeemer is my greatest desire the child said, -Come like me and your wish shall be fulfilled . He took Peter by the hand and led him into a cave. As they entered everything was shining with gold, silver and crystal, and in between there were twelve cradles next to each other. Then the angel said to him in the first -Coricati and sleep a while, I will rock. Peter did so, and the angel sang lullabies and rocked him until he was asleep. And while he slept, the second brother came, he led by his guardian angel, and he was rocked until he fell asleep. And so they came the others, one after the other, until all twelve lay there sleeping in the golden cradles. They slept for three hundred years, until the night when the Redeemer was born. Then they awoke, and were with him in the earth, and were called the twelve apostles.
The twelve huntsmen	635	884	Italian	There was once a King who had a girlfriend and he loved her dearly. One day when he was with her, happily, news came that his father was dying and wanted to see him again. Then he said to his beloved: -I have to go and leave, but I give you this ring in my memory. When I am king, I will return to prenderti-. Then he rode, and when he arrived, his father was dying and said: Beloved-child, I wanted to see you again; promise to marry you in my will-. And he named a certain princess who was to become his bride. The son was so afflicted that replied, without thinking: -Yes, dear father, your will-be made. The king closed his eyes and died. The prince was proclaimed king, and when he spent the period of mourning, he had to keep his promise to his father, so he ask for the hand of the princess and he was granted. He learned his first girlfriend, and fretted so much that she nearly died. Then the father said -Figliola dear, why are you so unhappy? You'll have everything desideri-. She thought for a moment, then said: -Caro father, I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in the features and in the face-. The king said: -If you can, it will be done-. And he did look around the kingdom, until eleven young maidens were found in his daughter in the features and in the face. When they came to the princess, she had twelve hunter clothes, all the same, and eleven girls had to wear them, she herself put on the twelfth. Then he took leave of her father and went with them, rode to the court of her boyfriend of the past, which he loved. She asked if he needed to hunters and if he would take them all to his service. The king looked at her without recognizing and dealing with people from looking, said he would gladly took them, and now the twelve hunters of the king. But the king had a lion that was a strange beast: he knew everything that was hidden and secret. One evening she said to the king: -Do you have twelve huntsmen? -. -Si- answered the king are twelve cacciatori.- -I sbagli- replied the lion are twelve fanciulle.- The king answered: -You can not! How can you prove it? -. Oh, does' scatter peas nell'anticamera- replied the lion-and you'll see it right away: men have a firm step, and if you step on the peas did not even move one; but the girls trot, trotting, walk shuffled and they roll the piselli.- The king liked the idea and did scatter the peas. But there was a servant of the king who protected the hunters, and when he heard that they wanted to test them, he went and told them everything, saying: -The Lion wants to prove to the king that you are fanciulle-. The princess thanked him and then said to his attendants: -Controllatevi and walk on the peas deciso- step. When the morning after the king sent for the twelve hunters, and they came into where they were scattered peas, they walked over so confidently and had a step so firm and decisive, that not one rolled or stirred. They left, and the king said to the lion -You deceived, walk just like men-. The lion replied: -Sapevano that would be put to the test, and have assumed some strength. But do bring antechamber twelve spinning: we will approach it with joy, and that no man ago-. The king liked the idea, and had the spinning machines in the hall. But the servant who favored the huntsmen went to them and revealed the catch. They were alone, the princess said to her eleven girls: -Controllatevi and never look at the filatoi-. The next morning, when the king summoned his twelve hunters, they went through the antechamber without looking at all. Then the king again said to the lion: -You deceived, are men: they have watched filatoi-. The lion replied: -Sapevano that would be put to the test and have controllate-. But the king said: -I do not want more crederti-. The twelve huntsmen always followed the King to the chase, and he loved them more and more. But one day, while they were out hunting, news that was coming the wife of the king. The news grieved so much the real girlfriend, who seemed to die and fell to the ground unconscious. The king thought that it was a misfortune happened to his dear huntsman, ran to help him and stole his glove. Then he saw the ring he had given to his first bride, and when he looked at her face he recognized. Everything moved, kissed her, and when she opened her eyes, she said: -You are mine and I am yours, and no one in the world can cambiarlo-. He sent a messenger to the other bride, and entreated to return to his kingdom, for he had a girlfriend, and who found an old, does not need a new one. Then the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again in grace, because he had told the truth.
The twelve brothers	79	451	Italian	Once upon a time a king and a queen who lived happily together and had twelve children, all boys. Then the king said to his wife: "If the thirteenth child which bring into the world is a girl, the twelve boys shall die, because she has great wealth and kingdom may fall to her alone." He caused likewise twelve coffins, already filled with shavings, and in each lay the little pillow; he caused to all in a closed room, then he gave the key to the queen and told her to tell no one of cosa.Ma mother spent all day in great sadness; and the youngest of the children, who always stood beside her and that she had called with the biblical name of Benjamin he said: "Dear Mom, why are you so sad?" - "My beloved, I can not tell you," he replied the queen. But he let her rest until she went and unlocked the room and showed him the twelve coffins ready filled with shavings. Then he said: "My dearest Benjamin, has had these coffins made to your father for you and your eleven brothers, for if you put a child in the world are all to be killed and buried." Then the son said, "Do not cry, dear mother, we will save ourselves, and we'll go." She said, "Go into the woods with your eleven brothers and a higher one is always on the tree guard that you will find, and keep the tower here in the castle. If a boy is born, I will put up a white flag and you can return; if born a female I will put up a red flag, and then fled and may the good God protect you. Every night I will rise to pray for you, in the winter you can warm up by the fire, the heat of summer and you may not faint. " After receiving his blessing, the children went into the woods. They were guarding one after another on the highest oak and looked towards the tower. When eleven days had passed and the turn came to Benjamin, he saw that a flag was being raised, but it was not white, but the blood-red and announced that everyone had to die. When the brothers heard they were very angry and said, "We should die because of a girl! We swear that we will meet one we will retaliate and we will slide his red blood." Then he went deep in the woods where it was darkest, they found a small empty house, but it was haunted. Then they said, "Here we will dwell, and thou Benjamin, who art the youngest and weakest, you will remain to look after the house while we're going to try to eat." They went into the forest and shot hares, wild deer, birds and pigeons, and everything there was to eat; They took them to Benjamin who had to cook because they could feed themselves. They lived together in the house ten years and the time does not appear to them lungo.Nel Meanwhile the little girl that the queen had given birth had grown, it was nice and had a golden star on her forehead. Once, while she was washing, she saw twelve men's shirts and asked his mother: "Whose are these twelve shirts? For Dad are too small." Then the queen answered with a heavy heart, "Dear child, these belong to thy twelve brothers." Said the maiden, "Where are my twelve brothers? I've never heard of." The mother replied, "God knows where they are, they are wandering about the world." Then she took the maiden and opened the room and showed her the twelve coffins with the shavings, and pillows for the funeral. "These coffins," he said, "were aimed at them, but they went away secretly before you were born" and told her what had happened. Then the girl said, "Dear mother, do not cry; I will go and seek my brothers." She took the twelve shirts and went forth, and straight into the great forest. He walked all day and in the evening he came to the enchanted cottage. He entered and found a young boy, who asked, "Where you come from and where are you going?" and he marveled that she was so beautiful, and wore royal garments, and had a star on her forehead. She said, "I am a princess and am seeking my twelve brothers, and I will go as far as the sky is blue I find them." And she showed him the twelve shirts them. Then Benjamin saw that she was his sister and said, "I am Benjamin, thy youngest brother!" She wept for joy, and Benjamin did the same, and they kissed and embraced each other with great affection. Then he said: "Dear sister, there is still a problem: We have agreed that every girl whom we meet shall die, because we had to leave our kingdom for a girl." Then she said, "I will willingly die if so I can deliver my twelve brothers." - "No," he answered, "you shall not die; beneath this tub until our eleven brothers come, and then I will agree with them." She did so, and when it was night the others came from hunting, and dinner was ready. They sat at the table and while eating, they asked: "What's new?" Benjamin said, "Do not you know anything?" - "No," they replied. He continued: "You have been in the forest and I have stayed at home, and yet I know more than you." - "Come tell us!" said the others. He answered, "But promise me that the first maiden who meets us shall not be killed?" - "Yes," they all cried, "she shall have mercy, only he does tell!" Then he said: "Our sister is here." He lifted up the tub and came out in her royal garments with the golden star on her forehead and she was beautiful, delicate and fine. Then they were all rejoiced, and fell on his neck, and kissed and loved her with all the cuore.Ora she stayed at home with Benjamin and helped him with the work. The eleven went into the forest and caught game, and deer, hares, birds and pigeons that they might eat, and sister, and Benjamin thought to prepare them. She sought for the wood for cooking and herbs for vegetables, and put on the fire, so that the dinner was always ready when the eleven came. likewise kept order in the little house and prepared the beds with white clean, and the brothers were always contented and lived in great harmony with lei.Per a certain period of time the two at home had prepared, and when they were all together, sat down and ate and drank and were happy. But the haunted house had a small garden, where there were twelve lilies (also called students flower). One day she wanted to please his brothers, plucked the twelve flowers, and thought to give one to each during dinner. But as she plucked the flowers, and in that instant the twelve brothers were changed into twelve ravens, and flew away over the forest, and the house and garden vanished. Now the poor girl was alone in the wild forest, and when she looked around, was beside her an old woman he said: "My child, you did? Why did you not leave the twelve white flowers? They were your brothers who are now changed into ravens forever. " The maiden said, weeping: "There is no way of delivering?" - "No," the old woman said, "there is but one in the whole world, but it's so hard to not be able to deliver them by it, you must be dumb for seven years, and mayst not speak or laugh, and if you say one word, and only an hour of the seven years, everything is in vain and your brothers will be killed by the one word. "Then the girl said in his heart:" i want to free my brother at any cost! " He went in search of a tall tree, we climbed, and spun neither spoke nor ridere.Ora it happened that a king was hunting in the forest; had a large greyhound that ran to the tree on which the maiden was sitting, and sprang about it, whining, and barking toward the top. The king came by and saw the beautiful princess with the golden star on her forehead and was so charmed with her beauty that he asked her if she would be his bride. She did not answer, but gave a slight nod. Then he climbed up the tree, carried her down, placed her on his horse. The wedding was celebrated with great pomp and rejoicing, but the bride neither spoke nor smiled. When they had lived happily together for a few years, the stepmother of the king, who was a wicked woman, began to slander the young queen, and said to the king: "It 'a common beggar girl whom you have brought into the house, who knows what evil combines in secret! If it is dumb and can not speak, she still might laugh, but who do not laugh have a bad conscience. " The King would not believe her, but the mother insisted so much that he eventually was persuaded and sentenced her to morte.Nel courtyard was lighted a large fire which she was to be burned; and the king, from above, watched with eyes full of tears, because he still loved. And when she was bound to the stake, and tongues of fire was licking at her clothes, that's the last instant of the seven years. In the air there was a whirring twelve ravens came and landed on the ground; and when they had touched the ground they were her twelve brothers freed from her. They tore the fire asunder, extinguished the flames, set their dear sister, and kissed and hugged. Now she dared to open his mouth to speak and told the king why she had been dumb, and had never laughed. The King was rejoiced that she was innocent, and they all lived in harmony until his death. The wicked stepmother was put in a barrel filled with boiling oil and venomous snakes, and died an evil death.
The two brothers	570	567	Italian	Once there were two brothers, one rich and one poor. The rich man was a goldsmith and evil; The poor one supported himself by making brooms, and was good and honest. The latter had twin sons who like each other as two drops of water. The two boys frequented the house of the rich and, occasionally got some of the surplus. One day the poor man had gone into the forest to collect dry branches, he saw a whole golden bird, beautiful as it had never happened to see. He picked up a small stone, threw and managed to hit him, but fell only a gold pen and the bird flew away. The man took the feather and carried it to his brother who examined it and said: -E 'pure gold and in return gave him a lot of money. The next day, the man got into a birch tree to cut some branches when suddenly flew out, the same bird; he looked for and found a nest with a golden egg inside. He took the egg and brought it to his brother that he repeated: -E 'pure gold, and paid him what it was worth. At last the goldsmith said, -I have the bird. The poor man went for the third time in the woods and, again, he saw the bird sitting on the tree; He took a stone struck him down, and took him to the brother who, in return, gave him a great heap of gold coins. "So I can get by for a while '' 'he thought, and went home happily. The goldsmith was crafty and cunning, and he knew very well what kind of bird it was. He called his wife and said the bird -Arrostiscimi gold, but be careful you do not miss even a piece: I want to eat it all intero-. the bird, however, was not a common animal, but it was a rare species, to eat the heart and liver, every morning he was a gold coin under his pillow. she prepared the bird, the speared with a skewer and let it roast. But while the animal was cooking on the stove, the woman was forced to leave the kitchen to attend to the affairs and behold race entering the two sons of the poor manufacturer of brooms, which began before the spit and made him shoot a couple of times. and since, at that time, fell into the pan two pieces, one said: -We well eat these two little bits I have so hungry, and no one will. It ate them. But in that ar Rivò the woman, and seeing that they were eating, he said: -What do you eat? -. -The two small morsels which fell out answered. Must have been the heart and liver-said the woman, quite frightened, her husband did not go angry, she quickly killed a young cock, took out his heart and liver, and put them beside the golden. When it was ready, she carried it to the goldsmith who ate it all. The next morning he thought of finding a gold coin under his pillow, and yet he did not find anything. The two children were unaware of the good fortune that had fallen to their lot. In the morning when they got up, something fell rattling to the ground were two gold coins. They took them and brought them to his father that he said surprised: -How is that possible? -. But when the next day, they found two more, and so every day, he went to his brother and told him the strange story. The goldsmith at once knew how things were, and that children had eaten the heart and liver of the golden bird; then, in revenge, envy and evil as he was told his father: -I your children are in league with the devil; do not take the money and Cacciali from home, because the devil has them in his power and may also lead you to dannazione-. The father feared the evil one, and, as far as he was pitiful, led the twins into the woods and left them with a heavy heart. The two children went to the woods here and there, looking for the way home, but did not find her and always lost more. At last they met a hunter who asked them, whom do you children? -. -We are the poor manufacturer Scope- This locks answered; and they told him that his father had abandoned them because, every morning there was a gold coin under their pillow. The hunter was a good man, and because he liked children and he did not, took them home, saying: -There will do it by father and I alleverò-. Since he learned the art of hunting, and the gold coin that everyone was at the wake it was set aside in case they they had needed in the future. When they were grown up, the adopted father one day took them into the woods and said: -Today you have to shoot yourself, because it can promote you hunter. They went with him and waited a long time, but no game appeared. Suddenly the hunter looked up and saw a group of wild geese flying arranged in a triangle; and he said to one of the boys: -Abbattine one from each corner. He did it, and thus accomplished his trial shot. Soon came another row of wild geese, flying arranged as if the figure two; Hunter also ordered another guy to shoot down one from each corner, and these also passed the test. Then the hunter said, now-you are out of your apprenticeship. Then the two brothers went into the woods together, counseled and planned something. In the evening, when they sat down to supper, they said to the adoptive father: -Do not touch food if we do not have granted us a. -Of what is it? - he asked his father. -Now that we are hunter answered -vorremmo try to see the world. Allow us, therefore, leave! - So the old man, full of joy: -Parlate as good hunters; I did not want the best for you, you go, you're lucky! -. That said, they ate and drank together gleefully. When the appointed day came, the adoptive father presented each with a good gun and a dog; also let him serve at their pleasure spared gold. Then he accompanied them part of the way and, in leave, he gave them a bright knife, saying: -If ever you separate, planted the knife in a tree at the fork; so, when one of you back, can see what happened to his brother, since, the part of the blade facing the direction taken dall'assente rust if he dies; long, live, however, it remains lucida-. The two brothers went and came in such a big forest that it was impossible to cross it in one day. So they spent the night and ate what they had put in his bag. But the next day, despite having walked without stopping, they could not out of the woods. As they had nothing to eat, one said, must shoot something, or we shall suffer the fame-. He loaded his gun and looked around. He saw come of an old hare race and took aim; but the hare cried, dear huntsman, if you let me live, Two little ones darò.-he jumped into the thicket, and brought two small. But the little creatures played so merrily, and they were so pretty, that the huntsmen could not dare to kill them. Thus they kept them with them, and the hares followed on foot there. Soon after, he came a fox; wanted to shoot it, but the fox cried, dear huntsman, if you let me live, Two little ones will darò.-E brought two cubs; and these hunters dared not kill them, they gave them for companions to hares, and all four followed. Soon came a wolf; the hunters were about to shoot him, but he saved his life, shouting, dear huntsman, if you let me live, Two little ones will darò.-Hunters put the two wolves beside the other animals, and they followed behind them. Then came a bear, and he also did not want to trot and cried, dear huntsman, if you let me live, Two little ones will darò.-Hunters put the two teddy bears with the other animals. And in the end who came? A lion. This time one of the two young men took aim but the lion also said, dear huntsman, if you let me live, Two little ones will darò.- now the huntsmen had two lions, two bears, two wolves, two foxes, and two hares they followed them and served them. But, in the meantime, hunger was not appeased; they said to the foxes: -Ascoltate, cunning fellows, provide something to eat, You are crafty and maliziose-. -Not far from here they answered the lies a village where we have already brought many a fowl; we will show you the way there the village, bought something and did well to feed their animals; then they continued. Foxes continued to guide the huntsmen way, as they were the district and where were the chicken coops. Now they traveled for a while ', but they found no place where they could remain together. Then they said: -There is no other solution, we must part. They divided the animals, so each had a lion, a bear, a wolf, a fox and a hare, then they took leave promising brotherly love until death, and stuck the knife into a tree donated by the adoptive father; then one took the road toward the east and the other toward the west. The youngest came with his animals in a city all decked out in mourning. He went into an inn and asked the host if he could accommodate his animals. The innkeeper gave him a stable that had a hole in the wall, and the hare crept out and fetched himself a cabbage, and the fox fetched himself a hen, and when he had eaten, he went to take a rooster. Instead, the wolf, the bear and the lion could not get out because they were too big. Then the innkeeper let them be taken in a meadow where there was a cow, and let you saziassero. After having taken care of his animals, he asked the innkeeper hunter because the city was decked in mourning. The landlord replied: -Because, die tomorrow the only daughter of our re-. -E 'condemned by a disease? - asked the hunter. No, he answered the innkeeper -is very healthy, but must die. Outside the city there is a high mountain on which dwells a dragon who every year must have a virgin, otherwise devastates the country. By now they have been given all the virgins and not just have the princess. There is no hope, he must be delivered -Why done to-morrow, do not kill the dragon? - he asked the hunter. -Ah- said the landlord-already so many knights have tried, but we have brought to life all. To slay the dragon, the king promised to give his daughter in marriage and will do heir regno.- The silent hunter, but the next morning took his animals and went with them on the dragon's hill. A little church stood on the altar, and there were three full cups, with the inscription: Whosoever empties the cups will become the strongest man in the world and wield the sword which is buried before the threshold of the door. The hunter did not drink, he went out and tried the sword in the ground, but was unable to move. Then he emptied their glasses and became strong enough to take up the sword and handle it with ease. When it was time in which the princess was to be delivered to the dragon, the king, the marshal, and courtiers they accompanied her city. From afar she saw the hunter on top of the mountain and, thinking it was the dragon, did not want to go up, but finally had to decide otherwise the whole town would be lost. The king and the courtiers returned home full of grief, and the marshal had to stay to watch the dragon carried away the girl. When the princess arrived on the mountain, he found the dragon waiting for her, but the young hunter. He consoled her by telling her that would save her, then led her into the church, and locked her. Shortly after, the dragon, with seven heads noisily. He perceived the huntsman, he was astonished and said. -What are you doing here on the hill? -. The hunter replied: I want to fight with you-. -Yeah Many knights have left the life-said the dragon -the spunterò also with you! - And threw fire from seven in mouth, set fire to the grass around it and choke the hunter in the heat and smoke. But the animals came running up and out the fire with his paws. Then the dragon was hurled against the hunter, but these resonant brandished sword and cut off three heads. Then the dragon was furious: he rose in the air and spewing flames trying to pounce on the hunter, but he returned to vibrar the sword and cut off three more heads. The monster fell exhausted and yet he wanted to rush upon the young man who, with his last strength he had left, cut off his tail. Then, unable to fight no longer, called up his animals because sbranassero the dragon. After the fight, the huntsman unlocked the church and found the princess lying on the ground, fainted from fear and anxiety. He took her out to make her regain consciousness and when she opened her eyes, he showed her the dragon ripped apart and told her she was free. Happy, she cried -Sarai my beloved, because my father has promised me to him who kills the dragon- Then he took off her necklace of coral, and divided it amongst the animals, and the lion received the golden clasp. Instead, the hunter gave the handkerchief with his name; and he went and cut the tongues from the seven dragon heads and wrapped and preserved them carefully. That done, as was exhausted from the heat and struggle, said to the girl: -We are exhausted both, we sleep a bit '! -. She agreed, lay down on the ground and the hunter said to the lion -Veglia that no one surprises us in our sleep - and both fell asleep. The lion lay down beside them to watch, but the fight had tired him too, so he called the bear and said: Lie down next to me, I must sleep a little '; if anything comes, it wakens. The bear lay down beside him, but he also was tired, and called the wolf and said. Lie down next to me, I must sleep a little '; if something happens chiamami.-. The wolf lay down beside him, but he was tired likewise, and called the fox and said: Lie down next to me I must sleep a little '; if anything comes, it wakens. The fox lay down beside him, but she was tired, and called the hare and said: Lie down next to me, I must sleep a little '; if anything comes, it wakens. The hare lay down beside him, but she was tired, poor, and could not call anyone to guard; and she fell asleep. So the princess slept, the hunter, the lion, the bear, the wolf, the fox and the hare; and all sleeping a sound sleep. But the marshal, who was to look from afar, seeing the dragon flying away with the girl, and since, on the mountain all was quiet, she took courage and went up. Up there he found the dragon lying on the ground and torn apart, not far away, there was a princess and a huntsman with his animals, all deep in a sound sleep. And because he was wicked and godless he took his sword and cut off his head to the hunter; then he is taken into the arm and the maiden brought down from upstream. She awoke and was terrified; but the marshal said, now-are in my hands, you have to say that it was I who killed the dragon. -I can not farlo- said she -was a hunter with his animali.- Then he drew his sword and threatened to kill her if she did not obey; so he forced her to give him his word. Then he led her to the king who was not taken into more joy, reviewing her dear child believed to have been killed by the monster. The sergeant said I have killed the dragon and freed the girl and the kingdom; therefore I demand her as my wife, as was promised. The king said to the damsel: -It 's true what they say? -. Ah yes-answer-but I wish the wedding is not celebrated until after a year and a day, in fact hoped to hear something of her dear huntsman, in that time period. At Mount Dragon animals were still asleep beside their dead master, there came a great bumble bee and lighted on the hare's nose; but the hare wiped it off with his paw and went to sleep. The Hornet went back a second time, but the hare again rubbed it off and slept on. Then came a third time, and stung his nose, waking her. She woke up and immediately called the fox, and the fox, the wolf the bear, and the bear the lion. And when the lion awoke and saw that the girl was gone, and that his master was dead, he began to roar frightfully and cried: Who has done this? Bear, why did not you wake me? -. The wolf asked Bear: -Why do not you wake me up? - the wolf and the fox: -Why do not you wake me up? - the fox and the hare: -Why do not you wake me? -. The poor hare had no answer, and the blame rested with him. They wanted to fall upon him, but he entreated them, saying, -Do not kill me, I will return life to our master. I know a mountain on which a root grows which, when placed in the mouth, heals every disease and injury. But the mountain lies two hundred hours journey from here. The lion said: -In twenty-four hours you have to go and come back with radice-. The hare ran away and returned after twenty-four hours with the root. The lion put his head on the trunk of the hunter, and the hare put in the mouth of the root; the pieces came together instantly, his heart began to beat, and life returned to him. The hunter awoke and, seeing the girl beside s, he thought: "It 'ran away while I was sleeping to get rid of me." In their haste, the lion had put his head on the contrary, without his being aware of it, as he was absorbed in his sad thoughts. But at noon, when he wanted to eat something he saw that his face was in the back, unable to understand why, and asked the animals what ever happened to him while he slept. Then the lion told him that they too had gone to sleep and wake up, they found him dead with his head cut off; The hare had to take the root of life and he, in his haste, had put his head in the wrong direction; but he would repair his mistake. Snatched again, he turned, and the hare stared with the root. But the hunter was sad; he refused to go back to town and went around the world, making her dance in public beasts. It had been quite a year he came back to where he had delivered the princess from the dragon, and this time, the city was scarlet parade. -What do you mean? - he asked the landlord. -A year ago the city was the parade with blacks tapes, why, why today there are red vestments? - The innkeeper replied: -A year ago, the daughter of our king had to be sacrificed to the dragon; but the marshal killed him, and tomorrow will celebrate their nuptials why the town was thus hung with black crape, while today it is the parade red cloth for joy as a sign. The wedding day, the hunter said to the Innkeeper at noon: -We believe, sir host, now I eat bread backgammon? -. -Si- said the host, I would bet a hundred pieces of gold that is not vero.- The huntsman accepted the challenge and played a bag with as many coins. Then he called the hare and said: -It ', you who are jumping right in, and bring a little' bread eating re-. The hare was the smallest of the animals and could not pass the task to another, so he had set off. "Ah," he thought, "if I so alone around the streets, the dogs will all be after me" And indeed he was right: the dogs pursued him to make holes in his fur! But he, in no time at all, leaped and went to hide in a sentry box, without the soldier being aware of it. Then the dogs came out, but the soldier did not grace the affair and struck them with the butt of the gun, till they ran away screaming. The hare was so ahead; ran into the palace, went down under her chair, and scratched her foot. -It 'away! - she said, thinking it was his dog. The hare scratched her foot and she again said, -It 'away! - thought it was her dog. But the hare did not let himself be confused and scratched her for the third time; She looked down and, from the necklace, knew the hare. She took him in her lap, carried him to his room and said -Cara hare, what do you want? -. He answered: -The My master, who killed the dragon, is here, and I ask for a loaf such as eating re-. Full of joy, she summoned the baker and told him to bring a loaf such as was eaten by the king. -But the baker must likewise carry -because said the hare, dogs do not make me nulla.- The baker carried it far as the door; Then the hare sat on his hind legs, he took bread with his front and took it to his master. The huntsman said -Vede, sir host The percent of gold are mine. The host was astonished, but the huntsman: -Yes, sir host, I have the bread, but now I will likewise have the roast of the re-. -I just see- said the landlord, but did not want to gamble. The huntsman called the fox and said my -Volpicina, go 'and fetch me some' roast, what you eat re-. The red fox knew better, slipped here and there without any dog ​​seeing him, went to slip under her chair, and scratched her foot. She looked down and recognized the fox by its collar, She took him into her room and said -Cara fox, what do you want? -. The fox replied: -My Lord, the one who killed the dragon, is here, and I ask for a bit 'of roast that eating re-. The princess sent for the cook who had to prepare a roast such as the king, and take it far as the door; Then the fox took the plate and carried it to his master. -Vede, sir host - said the hunter. -Bread and meat are here but now I want to vegetables, than eating re.- Then he called the wolf and said -Caro wolf, go 'and bring a bit' of vegetables, than eating the king -. The wolf who was not afraid of anyone, he went straight to the palace, and when he came into the room where the princess, tugged the robe because, to turn around. She recognized him by his collar, took him into the room and said -Caro wolf, do you want? -. The wolf replied: -My Lord, the one who killed the dragon, is here, and I ask a bit 'of vegetables, such as are eaten re- Then she sent for the cook who had to prepare vegetables like who ate the king, and bring far as the door; Then the wolf took the plate and carried it to his master. -Vede, sir host - said the hunter. -Now I bread, meat and vegetables, but I also want the cake, as it eats re.- He called the bear and said -Caro bear, you'll gladly ingozzi sweet, go 'and prendimene a little' ones eating re-. The bear trotted up to the castle, and everyone avoided him, but when he came to the guardhouse, pointed against the gun and did not let him pass. Then the bear stood up and claws gave a couple of slaps on the right and left, so that all the guard fell to the ground; Then he went straight to the princess, stopped behind her and grumbled a bit 'She turned, knew the bear, introduced him to his room and said -Caro bear, what do you want? -. The bear said, -My Lord, the one who killed the dragon, is here, and I ask for a sweet, those eating re.- Then she summoned her confectioner, who had to bake confectionery such as eating the king, and bring it up to the tavern; Then the bear stood up on his hind legs, took the plate and carried it to his master, who said -Vede, sir host, now I have bread, meat, vegetables and confectionery, but I also want the re- wine. He called the lion and said -Caro lion, you who drink willingly, goes 'to take a bit' of wine, he is drunk by the re-. The lion went on his journey and the people fled from him; and when he came to the guardhouse, they wanted to bar the passage; but it was enough a roar and they all ran away. The lion went to the throne room and knocked on the door with his tail. The princess came out and saw him, and he almost frightened, but she knew him by the golden clasp of her necklace, led him to his room and said -Caro lion, do you want? -. The lion replied: -My Lord, the one who killed the dragon, is here, and I ask for a bit 'of wine, is drunk by the re-. Then she summoned the butler that it might give the lion a bit 'of wine, what you drank the King. But the lion said -Andrò I control that gives me what good-. He went down with the butler and when they were in the cellar, they wanted to milk the common wine, what they drink the servants; but the lion said -Fermo there before me taste. He spiked the middle and drank it in one gulp. -NO- said -not what buono.- The butler glared at him, but he went to him some out of another barrel which was that of Marshal. The lion said -Fermo there before me taste. He drew half a measure and drank it. -This is better, but still not what buono.- Then the bearer grew angry and said: -What does a stupid animal wine! -. But the lion gave him a blow behind the ears that made him fall down to the ground; and when he stood up and led him silently into a little cellar apart, where he was the king's wine, which no one ever drank. The lion will spiked half a pint, and tasted it he said: -This means that it is good- and ordered the bearer fill six bottles. Now they went upstairs but when the lion came outside, staggering a bit 'tipsy, and the bearer was forced to carry the wine far as the door; Then the lion took the basket and brought it to his master. The huntsman said -Vede, sir host Now I have bread, meat, vegetables, dessert and wine, as the king; now I will dine with my animals. He sat at the table and ate and drank, and gave him to eat and drink also hare, fox, wolf, bear, and the lion, and was joyful, for he saw that the princess loved him still. When he had finished eating, he said: Sir host, I ate and drank as eating and drinking the king; Now I will go to court and marry the princess-. The host asked: -How can, since he already has a boyfriend and get married today? -. The hunter then took out his handkerchief she had given him on the dragon's hill, and in which were folded the monster's seven tongues, and said shall help me what I hold in my hand shall. The innkeeper looked at the handkerchief and said: -I could believe everything, but not this, and I would be willing to stake everything posseggo-. But the huntsman took a bag of gold coins, put it on the table and said: -And I stake. Meanwhile the royal table the king said to his daughter: -What did you all the wild animals that entered and out of my palace? -. She replied: -I can not tell you, but send and have the master: you will do well. The king sent a servant to the inn and invited the stranger, and the servant came just as the huntsman and the host were betting. Then said he: -Vede, sir host The King sends his servant and invites me, but I do not go in. Then he said to the servant: -Of 'the king to ask him to send me royal apparel, a carriage with six horses, and servants to attend me. When the king heard the answer, he said to his daughter: -What should I do? -. She said -Mandatelo to take as desired: you will do well. Then the king sent royal apparel, a carriage with six horses, and servants at his beck. Seeing them arrive, the hunter said -Vede, sir host Fetched as I- I want. Put on the royal robes, he took the handkerchief with the dragon's tongues and went to the king. Seeing him come, the king said to his daughter: -How do I receive it? -. She answered -Andategli meeting: you will do well. Then the king went to meet him and brought him up, with all its animals. She pointed to a spot beside s, and his daughter, and the marshal, as bridegroom, sat on the other side, without recognizing the hunter. Just then were brought the seven heads of the dragon and the king he said: -These has severed heads Marshal, why today I will give him my daughter in isposa-. Then the huntsman stood up, opened the seven mouths, and said: -Where are the seven tongues of the dragon? -. The marshal terrified, and grew pale and knew not what to answer; he said at troubled: -The Dragons have no tongues. -Those who lie ought to have none exclaimed the hunter, but the dragon languages ​​are tokens of the victor untied the handkerchief, lay all seven, and in any language fauce put it fitted exactly. Then he took the handkerchief on which was embroidered the name of the princess, showed it to the girl, and asked her to whom she had given. She answered: -Who killed the dragon. Then he called his animals, each took the necklace and the lion took the gold clasp, and showed them to and asked to whom they belonged. She answered my -I; I divided the necklace among the animals who helped to conquer the dragon-. Then the hunter said, -While I was asleep, exhausted by the fighting, now is the marshal who cut off my head, and took away the princess gave out that it was he who killed the dragon. But he lied, as demonstrated by the languages, and necklace-handkerchief. And he told how his animals had healed thanks to a miraculous root and, with them, had wandered for a year; finally returned, he had learned the treachery of the marshal by the innkeeper. The king asked his daughter: -It 's true that this man killed the dragon? -. Yes, it is true-she answered. Now can I reveal the wicked deed of the marshal, as it has come to light without my help; he had in fact forced me to promise to be silent. That's why I wanted the wedding were not celebrated until after a year and a day, the king summoned twelve councilors who had to decide the fate of Marshal and ruled that it was torn apart by four oxen. The marshal was executed, and the king gave his daughter to the huntsman, and named him his viceroy over the whole kingdom. The wedding was celebrated with great joy, and the young King caused his father and his adoptive father, and filled them with treasures. He does not forget either the landlord; summoned him and said -Vede, sir host I married the princess, so all your have is my- -si- said the landlord right too -would But the young king said -Instead I'll grace he should keep his and gave him the thousand gold coins -. Now the young king and queen lived together happily ever after. He often went out hunting because for him the best fun, and the beasts were accompanying him. Nearby, there was a forest that was haunted those who came did not came out so easily. But the young man had a great inclination to hunt, which he left in peace as long as the old king, these not granted him permission. So he rode forth with a great following, and when he came into the forest, he saw a white doe as snow, and said to her: -Fermatevi here until I return, I want to chase the lovely and he rode into the forest, he followed only by his animals. The men followed him waited until evening, but he did not return; then they returned to the castle and told the young queen: -The young King chased a white doe in the enchanted forest and has not done ritorno-. She was very apprehensive, but he had chased on horseback the beautiful animal, without ever being able to reach; when he thought it was a shooting, there he was again away, until, disappeared altogether. Realizing that he had penetrated deep into the forest, he took his horn and sounded, but he received no answer, his attendants could not hear. And as night and he saw that on that day he could not go home; He dismounted and lit a fire under a tree to spend the night. As he stood by the fire with the beasts lay nearby, he thought he heard a human voice; He looked around but could not see anyone. Shortly after, he again heard a groan as if from above; looked up and saw an old seat, which complained saying: Uh, uh, uh, that's cold! -. He said, come down to warm you up, if you have cold-. But she said, 'No, thy animals will bite me. -Do not do anything, he said nonnina- -Come well giù.- But she was a witch and said: -I will throw down a wand; if you touch them with that on the back, they will not do me no harm. She threw a wand, and with that he struck them, and instantly they lay still and were turned to stone. When the witch had no more fear of animals, he jumped down and touched him also with a wand turning it into stone. Then, laughing, she dragged him with his animals in a pit, where there were already other stones of that sort. The young king did not come back the fear and care grew queen more and more. Now it happened that at that time arrived in the kingdom's other brother who, at the time of separation, had gone to the east. He had tried in vain for a job, then he turned up and down as his animals dance. One day it occurred to him, to find out how he was his brother, to go see the knife that, in parting, they were stuck in the tree. When he got there he saw that, on the side of his brother, the knife was half rusted, and half bright. Scared, he thought: "My brother happened to be a terrible misfortune, but perhaps I can still save him, the knife is still bright in half." And on his journey westward. When he reached the gate of the city, he was met by asking the guard if he had to announce to his wife on her arrival for a couple of days the young queen was anxious about his absence, fearing that had perished in the enchanted forest. The sentry was believed that he was the young king himself so much like him, had wild animals running. Then he saw that it was his brother, and thought: "It 's better to make me go to him, so I can rescue him more easily." It did, to be escorted by the guard at the castle, where he was received with great joy. The young queen thought it was her husband, and he told her that he had lost in the woods without knowing how to get out. The evening was taken to the royal bed, but between him and the young Queen laid a two-edged sword; she did not know why, but dared not ask questions. He stayed there a couple of days trying to find out everything about the enchanted forest; finally he said: -I want to go back to hunt there. The king and the young queen wanted to dissuade him, but he insisted and departed with a great following. When he arrived in the forest white deer saw him too and said to his -Rimanete here and wait until, until I return, I want to chase the lovely and went into the woods followed by his animals. The same happened to the brother could not overtake the hart, and got so deep into the forest that he was forced to stay overnight. When he lit a fire, he heard wailing above Uh, uh, uh, that's cold! -. He looked up and saw the tree witch. -If you have cold- said, come down to warm, nonnina.- But she answered: -No, your animals will bite me. -Do you do But he said. Then she cried: -I throw down a wand; if you touch them with it they will do me no harm. But the hunter did not trust his words and said: -The not touch my beasts; Come down, or I come to get you! -. She shouted: -What do you think? Thou shalt not do anything to me! -. But he said: -If you do not come down, sparo-. She said -Shoot well, the bullets will not do anything-I. He took aim and fired, but the witch was proof to lead; He gave a harsh laugh and cried: -I manage to hit me! -. But the huntsman knew: tore three silver buttons from his jacket and put them in stone because, against them her arts were useless; and when he fired she fell to the ground screaming. Then he said, holding it with one foot: -old witch, if not instantly confess where my brother, I catch and I'll throw you into the fire. Full of fear, begged for mercy and said: -E 'in a pit, and his animals, turned to stone. He forced her to accompany him, saying -Vecchio sea-cat, now shalt thou make my brother and all who are here, or you end into the fire. She took a wand and touched the stones: his brother awoke, with his animals, and so many other people stood up, merchants, craftsmen and shepherds, thanked him for their deliverance, and went home. The two brothers kissed, happy to see each other again. Then they seized the witch, bound her and threw her into the fire, and when she was burnt the forest opened, making clear and bright, so that, you could see the royal castle, a three-hour walk. The two brothers went home together and, by the way, they told each other their adventures. And when the younger of them said to be the lieutenant of the King, the other said: -I have not noticed! When I arrived in the city, in fact, they were mistaken for you and I was treated with all the honors: the young Queen looked on me as her husband, and I had to eat at her side, and sleep in your bed-. On hearing these words, his brother, jealous and angry that he drew his sword and cut off his head. But when lying there dead, and he saw the blood flowing vermilion, he repented and said: -My brother delivered me, and I killed him! - and complained loudly. Then came his hare and said she was going to bring some of the root. He ran away and brought still time: the dead was raised, and knew nothing of the wound. They walked the walk and the young man said: -You have my appearance, wear royal robes and like me, like me, you beasts to your later we will go in two opposite doors and us come together to re-old. They separated, and the old king showed up at the same time, the one door and sentries, and announced that the young King had returned from hunting with his animals. The king said: -It is not possible, the gates lie quite a mile apart. But in that, the two brothers went on opposite sides in the castle courtyard and climbed together. Then the king said to his daughter: Tell me then, what is your husband. It all resembles so much that I could say-no. She was very embarrassed and could not tell when she remembered the necklace he had given to the animals. He saw the neck of one of the lions gold clasp, and exclaimed happily: -The master of this lion is my true husband. The young king laughed and said: -Yes, that's right! -. They sat down together to table, and ate and drank happily. At night when the young king went to bed, his wife said: -Why these last nights you always put in our bed a two-edged sword? I thought you wanted to kill me. Then he knew how his brother had been faithful.
The faithful animals	983	1384	Italian	There was once a man who had little money, and with what little he had left went around the world. He arrived in a village where the children were running together, shouting and making noise. -What are you guys doing? - the man asked. -We took a topographical they replied. -Now we do dance, look what fun! How jumps! - But the man the poor animal was painful, so he said: -Let go of the mouse, children, in return I will give you the money-. He gave them money and those liberated the mouse that ran, as fast as he could, to take refuge in a hole. The man went on his way and came to another village where the boys had taken a monkey and forced her to dance and to do somersaults; They laughed and gave no peace to the animal. Even to them the man gave him money because the monkey free themselves. Finally he came to a third village where the kids would dance a bear and when the growling animal, they are even more amused. Once again the man he released the bear, happy to being able to leave, trotted off. But the man had already spent all the little money he had left and had not a penny in his pocket. Then he said to himself, -The King has so much money he does not use in its treasure trove; you can not die of hunger, so they take a bit 'of his and when they earn the other, the rimetterai in place-. It is then introduced into the treasure room and took a bit 'of money, but in coming was surprised by the faithful of the king who accused him of being a thief and brought him before the court. So he was sentenced to be confined in a crate that had to be thrown into the sea. The lid of the box was full of holes because air could enter, and also gave him a jug of water and a loaf of bread. While sailing on the water, full of fear, he heard the lock creak, squeak and creak; suddenly the lock gave way, the lid is lifted, and you will see the mouse, the monkey and the bear: they were the ones to open the case, wanted to help him because he had helped them. But now they did not know what to do and they advised one another. In the meantime he came floating on a white stone that looked like a round egg. Then the bear said: -Comes in the nick is a magic stone, the one to which he belongs may wish any thing-. Then the man grabbed the stone and when he had in his hand wanted a house with a garden and stables and, as soon as he expressed the desire, immediately found himself in the castle garden and stable, and everything was so beautiful that never ended to marvel. After some time, they went from there the merchants. -Guardate a bit- exclaimed -that splendid castle; the last time we passed through here there was only the sabbia.- As they were curious, came in and asked the man how he managed to build so fast. He replied: -It was not my work, but my stone magically. About what stone is it? - asked those. So he went to pick her up and showed it to the merchants. These would have liked her a lot, and asked if they could not buy it, and they offered him in return all of their precious goods. The man became seduced by the beauty of those things, and because the human heart is fickle, he thought that the precious goods were worth more than his magic stone, so, gave them. But as soon as he had delivered, even he ceased his fortune, and he found himself on the river in a sealed enclosure with a pitcher of water and a loaf of bread. The faithful animal, the rat, the monkey and the bear, seeing his misfortune came again to his rescue, but they could not even open the lock because it was much more solid than the first time. Then the bear said: -We must get back the magic stone, or all is perduto-. As the merchants were still living in the castle, the animals they went together and when they came near, the bear said: -You, mouse, go and look through the keyhole what you can do; you are small and no one will noterà-. The mouse agreed, but soon came back and said: -Nothing to do: I looked into it, but the stone is hanging by a red cord in a mirror and on both sides there are two big cats with eyes of fire that sorvegliano-. Then they said: -Go back inside and wait for the owner to be in bed before sleep, from a hole, Infiltrate in his bed, pizzicagli nose and strappagli the hair-. The mouse went back in and did as others had said. The owner woke up, rubbed his nose, irritated, and said: -I cats do not combine anything; leave that mice I tear my hair! -. He drove them away both of them, so that, the rat had it won. The next night, when the owner was asleep again, the rat is introduced into the castle and chewed the red string on which hung the stone, until, not divided in half and the stone fell to the ground; then he dragged to the door. But now the task was made harder for the poor little mouse, so he said to the monkey, who was already on the alert: -Prendila you the stone with your feet, and take it out! -. The thing was easy for the monkey; so he took the stone and with the mouse came to the river. Once there, the monkey said: -How do we do now to reach the cash? -. The bear said: -E 'easily done: I go into the water and swimming; you, monkey, sit on my back, clinging with strong legs and take the stone in his mouth; You, little mouse, you can put in my ear destro-. They did so, and went down to the river to swim. After a while ', feeling no longer speak, the bear began to chat and said, -Look a bit', monkey, are not we the good comrades? -. But the monkey did not answer and remained silent. Hey! - he said the bear-not you answer me? Who does not respond is a bad companion! - heard this, the monkey opened his mouth, the stone fell into the water and she said, -I could answer, I had a stone in his mouth! Now she went to the bottom and it's your fault! -. -He 'tranquilla- said the -troveremo bear a soluzione.- Then they consulted and decided to call the frogs, toads and all the insects that live in the water; said to them, -He oncoming a terrible enemy; procurateci many stones: you build a wall there and difenderemo-. The animals were frightened and took stones from everywhere; finally he came up from the bottom of an old fat toad in the mouth with the magic stone by the red string. Seeing her, the bear said happily: -Here what we wanted-. He took the stone to the toad, said the animals that was all right, and took his leave. Then the three reached the man in the chest and opened the lid with the help of the stone. They arrived just in time, because he had already eaten bread and drank water and was half dead. But how had the stone in his hand, he wished to be re-fresh and healthy in her beautiful castle with gardens and stables. There lived happily and the three animals remained with him and fared well throughout life.
The Bremen Town Musicians	254	130	Italian	A man had a donkey that had served diligently for many years; but now the forces abandoned him and every day became more and more incapable of working. Then the owner decided to get rid of him, but the donkey noticed that did not pull good wind, escaped and made his way to Bremen: there, he thought, could be part of the municipal band. After walking a bit ', he found a hunting dog lying on the road, gasping like one exhausted from the race. "Why, you blow so?" He asked the donkey. "Ah," replied the dog, "I am old, I get weaker every day and I can no longer go hunting, my master wanted accopparmi, and then I have made to his heels, but now how am I to earn my bread? " - "You know?" said the donkey. "I go to Bremen to make the musician, you also come and facts take in the band." The dog was agreed and moved on. Shortly after they found the street looking as dismal as a cat. "You went something wrong?" He asked the donkey. "How can you be happy leaves half the skin? As I get older, my teeth are blunt, and I would rather sit purring by the stove instead of chasing mice, my mistress wanted to drown me; I escaped, it is true, but now it's a mess: where will I go? " - "Come with us to Bremen, you understand serenading you become town musician." The cat agreed and went with them. Then the three travelers passed by a yard; on the door there was the cock of screaming like crazy. "Screams to break the eardrums," said the donkey, "that's the matter?" - "I announced the good weather," said the cock, "because it is the day when Our Lady washed blouses Baby Jesus and wants to dry them; but tomorrow, which party will be guests and the hostess without any mercy, told the cook that stew, so tonight I have to let me cut your neck. And I cry out loud while I can. " - "Nah, red crest," said the donkey, "instead come with us, we go to Bremen, we will be better than him everywhere death; you have a beautiful voice, and if we are all performing together, will be a beauty!" So the cock consented, and they all left and quattro.Ma could not reach Bremen in one day and in the evening came to a wood, where they determined to spend the night. The donkey and the dog lay down under a large tree, the cat and the cock went up in the branches, but the rooster flew up to the top, where he was most safe. Before falling asleep he looked again in all directions, and he thought he saw in the distance a small light, so he shouted to the comrades, not far, there had to be a home for, shone a light. Then the donkey said, "Let us journey and go, why, here the accommodation is bad." And the dog said, "Yes, a few bones and a little 'meat I should be well!" So they walked to the area from which came the light, and soon saw it shine brighter and bigger and bigger, until they came in front of a house well lit where the robbers lived. The donkey, which was the highest, went to the window and looked inside. "What do you see, Gray-headed?" He asked the rooster. "What do I see?" said the donkey. "A table set with four different things, and robbers who made merry." - "That would just our case," said the cock. "Yes, yes, ah, if we were in there!" He exclaimed the donkey. Then the animals took counsel on how to chase away the robbers, and eventually found the system. The donkey had to lean against the window with front paws, the dog jump on the donkey's back, the cat on the dog, and lastly the cock was to fly up and perch on the cat's head. After that, at a given signal they all began their concert: the donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock crowed; then they burst through into the room to shatter the glass. The robbers fled at the dreadful sound; they thought it was some goblin, and fled terrified into the woods. The four companions sat down at the table, were satisfied with what was left, and ate as if they were to starve for a mese.Quando they were finished, they put out the light and looked for a place to sleep comfortably, each in its own way . The donkey lay down on the manure pile, the dog behind the door, the cat on the hot ashes of the fireplace and the rooster perched on the girder; and as they were all tired from the long journey, they fell asleep immediately. After midnight, the robbers saw from afar that was burning in the house no longer any light, and everything seemed quiet; then the chief said: "We should not have let ourselves be intimidated" and sent one to inspect the house. He found all quiet went into the kitchen to light a candle, and, mistaking the eyes of the cat for burning coals, he held a match to them catching fire. But the cat, not seeing evil and jumped into his face, spitting and scratching. The robber was scared to death and tried to escape through the back door, but there was lying the dog jumped up and bit him in the leg; and when rushing through the yard by the dunghill, the donkey gave him a kick with its hind foot; and the cock, who was awakened by the noise, cried all hale from its beam, "Chicchiricchì!" Then the robber returned to his captain as he could and said: "Ah, at home there is a horrible witch who has blown on me and scratched my face with her unghiacce and on the door there is a man with a knife who stabbed me in the leg, and in the courtyard there is a black monster that I lashed out with a wooden club; and on top of the roof of the judge shouted: 'Bring that rascal!' So I have made to his heels! " From that time forward the robbers never ventured to that house, but the four musicians of Bremen were so well who would not leave. And who last he even told his mouth he has not gunned down.
The four skilful brothers	1222	653	Italian	There was once a poor man who had four sons; when they were grown up said to them -Cari little children, you must now go to the world, I have nothing to give; get in the way and go to a foreign country, learn a trade and try to industriarvi-. So the four brothers took their sticks, bade their father farewell and left the city together. When they had a stretch of road, they came to a crossroads leading in four different countries. The elder then said: -We must separate, but on this day four years we will find ourselves here and in the meantime we will seek our Fortuna-. So everyone went his way, and the eldest met a man who asked him where he was going and what he was intending. -I want to learn a trade, the young man replied. Then the man said: -Come with me, and learn to make ladro-. No, answered -not longer regarded as a reputable trade, and at the end of the song it becomes swing on forca.- -Oh- said the man -the gallows must not be afraid: I will teach you just take what nobody else can catch and where no one can scoprirti.- so the young man was convinced and with the help of the man became an expert thief, and so dexterous that nothing was safe, whatever he wanted. The second brother met a man who asked him the same question, that is what you would do. -I do not know yet replied. Then come with me and be an astronomer; there is nothing better, nothing you nascosto.- He accepted and became such a skillful astronomer that when he had learned everything and wanted to continue on his way, the teacher gave him a telescope and said: With this you can see what happens on earth and in heaven, and nothing can remain celato-. The third brother met a hunter who took her with him and instructed him so well in the art of hunting became an experienced hunter. When he went away, his master gave him a gun and said: -This is never wrong: what you aim at, you hit senz'altro-. Even the younger brother met a man who spoke to him and asked him what he meant to do. -Do you care to do the tailor? - Ah, no- said the young-not like the idea of ​​star hunchback from morning to night, to go up and down with the needle and iron stiro.- - macché,- said the man -from me learn an art well diversa.- So the young man was persuaded, followed the man and learned the art from the beginning. When they parted, the master gave him a needle and said: With this you can sew together whatever it happens, is soft as an egg or as hard as steel; and again become in one piece, you can no longer see SEWING. When he spent the stipulated time, the four brothers found themselves together at the crossroads; They embraced and kissed and returned home to her father. They told him how it had gone, and that each had learned his craft. They stood just in front of the house, under a large tree, and the father said: -I want to test yourself and see what you can do. Then he looked up and said to his second son -Lassù on top of this there is a nest of finches, tell me 'how many eggs there are in. The astronomer took his glass, he looked up and said: -There are five-. -Ora- said his father at the higher -portale down without disturbing the bird that is covando.- The skillful thief climbed up, took the eggs under the belly of the bird, which did not notice it at all and remained quietly smolder. He brought them to his father that the sockets, placed them on the table, one at each corner and the fifth in the middle, and said to the hunter: -Colpisci eggs in one hit and break them in mid-. The hunter took aim with his gun and shot the eggs as he wanted his father, all five with one shot. -Now it's up to you- said the father to fourth child. -You must patch up the eggs and the young birds that are inside, so that by the shot does not harm loro.- The tailor brought his needle, and sewed, as he had been ordered. When he was done, the thief had to bring them back in the nest on the tree and put them back under the bird without her noticing. The bird sat her full time, and a few days later came out small, and they had a red line round their necks where the tailor had sewn together. -Si- said the old man to his children -you used your time well, and learned to duty. I can not say which of you is to be preferred: you will see when you'll get to use your arte.- Not long after the country was in turmoil, because the princess had been kidnapped by a dragon. The king tormented day and night and made it known that, whoever brought her back should have her in marriage. The four brothers said: -It would be an opportunity for us to conoscere- and decided to go and rescue the princess. -Where is, I will know subito- said the astronomer; He looked in his telescope and said: -The wait is on a rock in the ocean, far from here, and next to her is the dragon to make them the guardia-. Then he went to the king, and asked for a ship, and his brothers and went to sea with them until they came to the rock. There the King and the dragon was lying asleep on her lap. The hunter said: -I can not shoot him, kill the beautiful fanciulla-. -So try I- said the thief, and took the princess from the dragon, but so quietly and dexterously, that the monster did not notice anything and continued to snore. Full of joy, they hurried off the ship and set sail. But the dragon, who when he awoke had found no princess, and he pursued them snorting angrily through the air. It was circling above them, and about to descend on the ship, when the huntsman shouldered his gun and struck him in the heart, killing him. The monster fell down, but it was so big that his fall shattered the whole ship, and they were kept afloat at sea, clinging to a few boards. But the tailor, not idle, took his wondrous needle, sewed the planks together with a few stitches, he seated themselves upon and picked up all the pieces of the ship. Then he sewed these so skilfully that soon the ship was once more seaworthy, and they could go home. The joy was great when the four brothers reconducted the daughter of the king, and they said to them: -One of the four of you will have in marriage, but you decide who should be-. Then they began to quarrel, and the astronomer said: -If I had not seen the princess, all your arts would have been useless, so it is my-. The thief said, -A I needed to see her, if I had not taken away from the dragon? And 'So my-. The hunter said: -But you'd all been eaten by the monster and the princess, if I had not hit him, so it is my-. The tailor said: -And if I, with my art, had not sewn the ship, you'd be all drowned miserably, so it is my-. The king declared: -Have all equal right, and because you can not have all of the girl, the will not have any; a prize but I will give to each half of a kingdom-ref. The brothers said: -It 's better that way, rather than being in contrast-. The king gave them half the kingdom for each one, and they lived happily with his father.
The six that make their way to the world	673	513A	Italian	There was once a man who was of all art; he served as a soldier, behaving so brave; but, after the war, he was discharged and gave him three compensation money. -Wait a bit- I said-not so easily deceived: if I find the right men, the king will give me the riches of the whole paese.- Full of anger, he went into the woods and saw a man who had uprooted six trees as if they were ears of corn. He said: -Do you want to be my man and follow me? - -si- replied that-but first I want to bring my mother that pile of legna.- then grabbed one of the trees, and tied it round the other five, and taking the bundle on his shoulders , he took her away. Then he came back and he set out with his master, who said -We two have to make our way in the world-. When they had gone a stretch of road, they met a hunter who, kneeling, had loaded his gun and was aiming. The man told him: -What do you want to shoot, hunter? -. He replied: -A two miles from here there is a fly on the branch of an oak tree; I want cavarle the left-eye. Oh, come with me said the man -we three together we will street in mondo.- The hunter went with them and they came to seven windmills, whose wings turned quickly even though there was no wind and not even a leaf moved. The man said: -I do not understand what to do to move the mills, there is not a breath of air! -. He continued his journey with his servants, and when they did two miles, they saw a man sitting on a tree, holding one nostril and blowing with the other. What are you doing up there? - he asked the man. He replied: -A two miles from here are seven windmills; you see? I am blowing them girare-. Oh, come with me he said the man -we four together we'll have the road in mondo.- Then that blew down from the tree and went with them. After a while 'saw one that was standing on one leg had been taken off the other, and if it was to be with. -Do you're wearing comfortable to rest! - he exclaimed the man. -I'm a corridore- he answered -and what not to run too fast, I pulled a leg; In fact, if I run with both, I go faster than a bird that vola.- Oh, come with me, the five of us together we will make it way into mondo.- He went with them and after a while 'met someone who wore a hat that covered his whole ear. Then the man said: -What pretty! But you put in place your hat: you look like a fool! -. -Do posso- replied that -if you straighten up, is very cold and the birds that live in the open freeze and fall to the ground morti.- Oh, come with me -we said the man you are, all together, we will street in mondo.- the six arrived in a city where the king had announced that whoever would compete with her daughter in the race, if he won the race he would marry her, but if he lost, he would lose his head. The man introduced himself and said -Faro run my servant for me-. The king replied: -So you also have to commit his life, so, head and yours will be the pledge of victory-. After agreeing, the man attacked the runner the other leg and said, now be quick and help me, that we can vincere-. She was decided that he would win the one who, for one, had brought water from a distant source. The runner and the princess had both a pitcher and began to run at the same time; But in an instant, while the princess had traveled only a short distance, no one could see the runner, past fast as the wind. In the short time he reached the brook, the water spout into the jug and came back. But halfway through I was overcome with weariness, setting down his pitcher, he lay down and fell asleep. He rested, however, the head of a horse's skull, to sleep on the hard and wake up early. Meanwhile the princess, who was running well even her, but as an ordinary person, had arrived at the source, and they came back with a pitcher of water. When she saw the runner lying on the ground asleep, she said happily: -The enemy is in my hands-. The he emptied the jug and ran. All would be lost if the hunter, with his sharp eyes, had fortunately not seen it all from the top of the castle. -The it must not be vinta- said; then he loaded his gun and fired with such dexterity to take away the skull beneath the head of the runner without hurting him. The runner awoke, jumped up and saw that his pitcher was empty and the king already very far. But do not lose heart, he took the jug, fill it returned to the source and managed to still get ten minutes before the princess, winning the race. -Vedete? - he said -Finally, I used my legs, because before you could just talk about race! - But the king was depressed, and her daughter even more the idea of ​​being taken away from any soldier on leave, and they plotted together how to get rid of him and his companions. The king said: -I found the system; do not be afraid, they will not return more-. And they said, now you need to party, eat and drink all together-. He led them into a room which had a floor and the iron door and windows closed by iron bars. In the room there was a table on which there was every gift of God, and the king said -Income and enjoy it! -. And when they arrived, he bolt the door. Then he called the cook and ordered him to light a fire under the room so that the iron is red hot. The cook did so, and the six as they sat at the table, began to feel a great heat, and they thought it was due to the food; but as the heat grew more and, when they wanted to found the doors and windows fastened, then they realized that the king had bad intentions and wanted to suffocate them. -But will not win! - said the man with the hat -Faro come so cold, that the fire should be ashamed and nascondersi.- He cocked his hat and immediately was such a cold which extinguished any heat and began to freeze foods in dishes. He spent a couple of hours and the king thought that the heat had stifled them, he opened the door and went to see for yourself. But when the door opened, they were there all six fresh and healthy; and said they were happy to be able to go out to warm up, because, with the great cold that was in the room, the food froze in the dishes. Then, full of anger, the king went to the cook and scolded him, and asked why he had not done more carefully what he had been ordered. But the cook replied: -Of hot enough there, go and see for same-. And the king saw that under the iron room an immense fire burning and realized that with those six would not have checked. Then he began again to think about getting rid of those unwelcome guests; he called their boss and said: -If accept gold and in return, you forfeit the rights you have on my daughter, I'll give you what want-. -Yes, he said maestà- -if you give me what can bring my servant, give up your figlia.- The king was pleased, and that went on -Tornerò to take it in fifteen days-. Then he summoned all the tailors in the kingdom, which for fifteen days, they had to sit to sew a lot. When it was ready, what rooting up trees he took it on his shoulders and go along with the head of the king. The king said: -What kind of madman is this that carries on his shoulder a lot of giant canvas! - terrified to think how much gold he would carry off. Then he brought a ton of gold, which they had to carry sixteen of his strongest men; but the strongman took it with one hand, put it in the bag and said: -Why, do not you bring some more? This just covers the fondo-. So, little by little, the king had to bring all his riches; the man drove into the bag that was not filled even halfway. -Portatene more- shouted -the crumbs not riempiono.- So they were forced to gather in all the kingdom, seven other wagons filled with gold; and to put them in the bag along with the bulls that were attacked. -I am doing the hard- he said -prendo what happens, just to fill the sacco.- How everything was in, there would have been even more, but he said: -Just as well: you can tie a lot although it is not entirely full-. Then he loaded him onto his back and walked away with his companions. The king, seeing that man take away all the riches of the country, became angry and ordered his cavalry to saddle up and follow after the six men to take the sack. Soon the two regiments joined them and shouted: -You are prisoners, put down that bag with gold, or be cut -. -What? - said the man who blew. -We prisoners? First you'll have to dance in the air all quanti.- It closed one nostril, while the other blew against the two regiments that were dispersed in the air, over the mountains, one here and another there. A quartermaster begged for mercy, saying he had nine wounds and was a brave and that, therefore, he did not deserve to be punished. The man blew a little 'less strong, so that the soldier fell to the ground without injury; then he said, now back to the king and tell him to send even the other cavalry soffierei even those in the air! -. The king, when he heard the message, he said: -Lasciateli go, have the devil in him! -. So the six comrades carried home their treasure, divided it among themselves and lived happily until his death.
The six swans	463	451	Italian	Once a king hunting in a great forest, and he pursued a wild animal so eagerly that none of his people could follow him back. Finally, unable to find the way back, he realized that he had lost. Suddenly he saw approaching an old curve, with shaking head was a witch. The king spoke to her, telling her: -Indicatemi the way to cross the Bosco-. Oh yes, she answered maestà--but on condition that marry my daughter making her a queen, otherwise you will be forced to stay here and starve because, without my help, you will never get out of the bosco.- king, who was dear life, afraid agreed, and let himself be led by the girl. She was very beautiful, but the king did not, and could not look at her without feeling an intimate disgust. The witch led them both on the road that led to the castle, and when they arrived, the king had to keep his word and marry the girl. The king had been married and had had his first wife, six boys and a girl, whom he loved better than anything else in the world. Fearing that the stepmother might hurt them, he took them to a lonely castle standing in the middle of a forest. The road to get there was so hard to find that he himself would not have found if a magician had not given him a ball of thread that, thrown to the ground, was carried out by himself and pointed the way. But the king is so often went by his beloved sons, the queen ended coll'accorgersene and, curious, wanted to know what was going to make the king alone in the forest. He managed to bribe the servants, and these revealed the secret. First, she took possession of the ball with cunning, then made seven small little shirts and went on his journey. The ball showed her the way and the six children, when they saw someone, thought it was their father and they were joyfully ran to meet him. Then she threw a little shirt on each one, and as soon as it touched their bodies, they were changed into swans, and flew away over the forest. The queen went home convinced to be rid of her stepchildren; but the girl had not run encounter with the brothers, and her stepmother did not know of its existence. The next day was the king but found no one but the little girl who told him that he saw from his window, flying out of her dear brothers transformed into swans; and she showed him the feathers that they had dropped in the yard and she had collected. The king was deeply distressed, but did not think she was the queen to take the curse and, fearing that also they kidnapped the girl, he wanted to take her with s. But she was afraid of her stepmother and begged his father to let her spend a night in the forest castle. When it grew dark, the girl fled into the woods. He walked all night and the next day without stopping, until he could no longer continue, overcome by fatigue Then he saw a hut, went and found a room with six beds and, not daring to lie down in any of them, he is expelled below, lying on the floor for the night. At sunset he heard a whirring and saw six swans come flying through the window. They alighted on the ground and blew on one another, until his fall all the feathers off, and the swan skin took off like a shirt. The girl looked at them and saw that they were his brothers; So full of joy, he emerged out of bed. The brothers were not less glad when their sister, but soon grew sad and said: -Here you can not stay, this is a den of thieves, if they come home and find you, I uccideranno-. -You can not protect me? - she asked the little sister. -NO- answered -only for a quarter of an hour each evening can we lay our swan skins and keep our human form; but then we become nuovamente.- -And I can not deliver you in any way? - asked the little sister. Ah no- they answered -would too hard: for six years can not speak or laugh, and in the meantime you have to sew for us six little shirts of stars. If you utter a word, everything is perduto.- said, the quarter of an hour had elapsed, and the brothers returned to turn into swans. But the girl said to herself, -I want to free my brothers at any cost, even if it costs the life-. The next morning he went to collect the stars, went to sit on a high tree and began to sew. He could not talk to anyone No, he wanted to laugh: he sat and did nothing but work. It had already been a long time, when the king of the country was hunting in the woods, and his huntsmen came to the tree on which the maiden sat. They cried out to: -Who are you? Come down!-. But she did not answer, just shook his head. They tormented her and she threw down to them her gold chain thinking to oblige. But they would not leave off, threw their belt, and when that was no good, her garters, and finally everything she had on and could possibly spare, so that at length he was poached. But the hunters were not satisfied, climbed the tree, carried the girl and took her to the king. The king asked: -Who are you? Where has it been? - and he asked her in every language she knew, but she did not answer and remained quiet as a mouse. She was so beautiful, that he had never seen any woman of equal attractiveness and fell in love passionately. So he wrapped up in his cloak, put it on his horse and brought her to the castle. Then he caused rich clothing, so that she seemed to blaze in its beauty as the light of day, but they failed to make her talk. At table, he made her sit beside him and was so impressed by the modesty and his grace which he said: -This is my wife, and no other in the world! -. And, a few days later, they were married. But the king had a wicked mother, who was not happy with this marriage and spoke ill of the young queen. -Chissà where does the bad girl who can not speak! - he said. -It is not fit for a king! - After a year, when the Queen gave birth to her firstborn, the old woman carried it away and rubbed his mouth with blood. Then he went to the king and accused her of being an ogress. But he would not believe her, so great was his love, and he allowed the torcessero a hair. And the queen went on quietly sewing the shirts and caring about anything else. The second time she gave birth to another baby boy, and the wicked mother-in-law used the same trick; but the king pot, bring himself to give credence to his words and said: -E 'dumb and can not defend themselves, otherwise manifest its innocenza-. But when the old woman stole away the newborn for the third time, and accused the queen, who said not a word in her defense, the king was forced to hand it over to the court that condemned her to suffer death by fire. The day on, that's also spent the last day of the six years during which she had not been able nor laughed, talking to free her dear brothers from the power. The six shirts were ready, except one which wanted the left sleeve. When they brought her to the stake, he took with s, and while they were about to start the fire, looked up and saw six swans coming flying through the air. Then her heart leapt in my chest with joy and said to himself, Ah, God, this last time so hard coming to an end! -. With a whirring, the swans came to rest next to her, so that she could, throwing upon them the shirts: how they were touched, the swan-skins fell: and they stood before safely; only the youngest in place of his left arm had a swan's wing attached to his back. They embraced and kissed, and the queen went to the king who looked on in astonishment. Dearest sposo- said -Finally, I am allowed to speak and I can tell you that it has been accused ingiustamente.- And she told him how old he had slandered so execrable and held hidden his three children. Then they were sent to take the great joy of the king, and, as a punishment, the wicked mother-in-law was tied to the stake and burned to ashes. The king, the queen and the six brothers live long happily ever after.
The six servants	1272	513A	Italian	At one time he lived an aged Queen who was a sorceress, and had a daughter who was the most beautiful girl in the world. But the old woman did not think of was to attract men to destruction; and when a wooer, said that those who wanted his daughter, must first perform a task or die. Many tried their hands, dazzled by the beauty of the girl, but did not accomplish what the old woman enjoined them, and then there was no mercy: they had to kneel down and struck off his head. Now it happened that a prince had he heard of the great beauty of the girl, and said to his father: Dear father, let me go, I want to ask her tampering. -Never, ever! - said his father. -If parties, go to the meeting morte.- Then the prince went to bed sick unto death, and remained so for seven years, no physician could help him. When the father saw that he had no hope, he said, full of sadness: -It 'then, and try your luck: I do not know how to help altrimenti-. On hearing these words, the son got up, healthy as a horse, and went merrily on their way. He happened to pass a heath, from a distance he saw something lying on the ground; approaching, pot, understand that it was the belly of a man lying; but it looked like a mound. The fat man saw the traveler, stood up and said: -If you need one, take me to your service-. But the prince replied: -What can I do with a man so fat? -. Oh! - said the other-that's nothing! If I spread myself at all, are three thousand times more grasso.- -If so- said the prince-perhaps you can help me: come with me.- So the Stout followed him; after a while 'they found another lying on the ground with grass ear. -What do you do? - he asked the prince. -Ascolto- the man replied. -And what do you listen to? - -That's going on in the world, why, I hear everything, even the grass that cresce.- The prince asked: Tell me a bit ', what do you feel at the court of the old queen, who has a beautiful daughter? -. And he said -Sento whistle the sword that cuts the head of a pretendente-. The prince said: -You can help me, come with me. They walked, and suddenly saw a pair of feet and a stretch of the legs, but they could not see the end; after traveling quite a distance, they came to the body, and finally the head. Hey! - he said the prince-that a tall rascal! - -Oh- said the other-that's nothing! If I lay good are three thousand times longer and taller than the highest mountain on earth. I will serve you willingly if I volete.- -Vieni- said the prince -You myself utile.- continued and found that a sitting by the side of the road, blindfolded. The prince said: -You are blind or have poor vision, she can not stand the light? -. No, he answered the man-not I can take off the bandage, for whatsoever I look at, breaks, such is the strength of my gaze. If this may help, I will serve volentieri.- -Come with me- he said the prince -You myself of aiuto.- onwards and found a man who, under the blazing sun, shivered and trembled with cold. -How did you shiver when the sun so hot? - asked the prince. -Ah- -more said the man is hot and I feel cold, and the cold penetrates me to the bone; and the colder it is, the hotter I am in the middle of the ice can not stand the heat, and the fire can not resist for freddo.- -You're a weirdo! - said the prince. -But if I want to serve, come with me.- They went and saw a man stretched his neck, turned his eyes and looked around beyond the mountains. He told the prince: -What looking at so eagerly? -. The man replied: -I have such sharp eyes, I can see through fields and forests, mountains and valleys throughout the world-. The prince said: -If you want, come with me: I miss someone like you-. Then the prince went with his six servants in the city where he lived the beautiful and dangerous girl; He went from the old queen and said: -If you want to give me your daughter, I'll do what I ordinate-. -Si- replied the sorceress -ti give you three tasks: if they'll run all three, you will be my lord and husband figlia.- -What is the first? - asked the prince. -You must take me back the ring that I dropped in the Sea Rosso.- Then went home to his servants and said: -The first task is not easy to be got out of a ring in the Red Sea. Consigliatemi you-. Then the man with the sharp sight said -Guarderò dov'è-. He looked down into the sea and said: -E 'there, next to a stone-. -I would pull out, if only the vedessi- the Tall said. Oh, I'll help you! - cried the Stout. He lay down with his mouth water: the waves they entered and he drank all the sea, which was as dry as a meadow. Then the Tall bent a little and took the ring with his hand. All happy, the prince took him to the old. She watched amazed and said: -Yes, that's what. The first task you've performed, but now comes the second. See, there on the lawn in front of my castle graze three hundred fat oxen are feeding; you have to eat them with the hair, horns and bones; and down in the basement there are three hundred casks of wine, you bertele all; But if one hair of an ox or a drop of the wine, match it with life-. The prince said: -I can not invite some guests? Without the company's no fun to eat-. The old woman laughed maliciously and said: -To you can invite one for the company, but no more-. Then the son went to his servants and said to Grassone: -Today you will be my guest, and for once eat to sazietà-. So the Stout One stretched himself out and ate the three hundred oxen without leaving one single hair, and wondered if there was another after breakfast; He drank the wine straight from the casks without need of a glass, and the last straw if licked the finger. At the end of the meal, the prince went to the old and said that the task was performed. She was astonished and said: -A much had never reached anyone, but still remains the third compito-. And he thought: "I do not will escape, and wilt not keep your head !." -Stasera- said -ti port my daughter in the room, let your arms; but be careful not to fall asleep! I will come at the stroke of twelve, and if she is no longer in your arms, you're perduto.- "Oh," thought the prince, "the task is simple, keep your eyes open." Nevertheless he called his servants, told them what he had said the old woman and said -Chissà what treachery lurks behind! It 'good to be cautious: keep watch, and take care that the maiden does not go from the camera-. When night fell, the old woman came with her daughter and pushed her into the arms of the prince; then the Tall curled around them and the Stout stood at the door, so he could not get a soul. If they were both there, and the girl did not say a word; but, through the window, the moon lit up her face, and he could see his wonderful beauty. The prince did nothing but look at her, in love and full of joy, and his eyes were never tired. It lasted until eleven o'clock; then the old woman cast a spell on all of them that, they fell asleep, without being able to defend; and, at that same instant, the girl disappeared. They slept soundly until a quarter to twelve; then the spell ceased and they awoke. Oh, misery and misfortune! - he said the prince -Now I am lost! - the faithful servants also began to lament, but the Listener said -State shut up! I listen-I want. He listened for a moment, then said: -It is on a rock, three hundred leagues from here, and mourns her fate. You can do it, Tall: If you perk up, you're with two passi-. -Si- answered the Tall -But must also come to wipe out the eye of Sharp rupe.- So he took up the one blindfolded, and in a flash they were on the enchanted rock. The Tall One immediately took the bandage from the other's eyes; He looked around and the rock shattered. Then the Tall picked up the girl, in a moment took her home, she came back to take even his friend and before the clock struck twelve, they were all back there, cheerful and happy as before. When twelve struck, came slowly the old witch with a malicious face, as if to say: -Now is mine! - and it was believed that her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues away. But when he saw her in the arms of the prince, she was alarmed and said, -Here one who knows more than me-. She dared not make any opposition, and had to give him his daughter. However she said in her ear: -E 'a shame for you to have been won by the servants, not to choose a husband to thine own liking! -. Now the girl who had the proud heart, full of anger, heaping did, the next day, three hundred stacks of wood and told the prince that the three tasks were performed, but that she would not marry until some not he was put in the middle of the wood, and bear the fire. She thought that, as devotees, none of the servants would be left burning for him, and for his sake he would go to the Prince, and so she would be free. But the servants said: -We all did something, only the Frosty has not done anything! -. They took him, put him in the middle of the pile, and set fire. The fire broke out and burned for three days, until, consumed all the wood; and when the flames were extinguished, the Frosty One was standing amid the ashes, trembling like a leaf, and said: -I have never felt such a cold in my life! If you still lasted, I would assiderato-. Now there was just no escape: the beautiful girl had to marry the prince. But when they went to church, the old woman said: -I can not endure the disgrace - and made them chase by his soldiers, who were to annihilate anyone who opposed them, and bring back her daughter. But the Listener had been listening and had heard all that the old woman had said. He said that the Grassone vomited a few times behind the carriage; and here formed a large lake, which the warriors were caught and drowned. Not seeing them return, the sorceress sent his cuirassiers, but the Listener heard, removed the bandage from one eye of Sharp eyes; He stared for a moment the enemies, who went to pieces as if they were glass. So they continued undisturbed, and when the couple had been blessed in church, the six servants took leave and said: -We want groped luck around the world-. A half an hour from the castle there was a village, near which a swineherd tended his herd; When they arrived, the prince said to his wife: -You know who I really am? I'm not a prince, but a swineherd, and is there with that herd, it is my father, and now we have to help us also to guard maiali-. Then they went down together at the inn, and secretly told the innkeepers to take away at her royal apparel during the night. In the morning, when she awoke she had nothing to put on, and the landlady gave her an old dress and a pair of old wool socks, with the air of it a great present and said: -If it were not for your husband I should have given you anything-. Then the princess believed that he really was a swineherd, and tended the herd with him and thought, "I deserved it with my pride!". This lasted for eight days, and she was tired, because her feet were covered with sores. Then came the people who asked her if she knew who was her husband. -Si- said -is a swineherd; It is just out to sell a little 'nastri.- But they said -Venite, we will take from him-. They took her to the castle, and when she entered the room, her husband was there in royal robes. But she did not recognize him until the prince took her in his arms, kissed her and said: -I have suffered so much for you, and you also have to suffer for me- So the wedding was celebrated, and who told , it would have been there.
The Seven Ravens	234	451	Italian	A man had seven sons, and not one daughter, however much he wished. Finally the wife found herself pregnant again and gave birth to a daughter. However, although very beautiful, she was small and frail and so weak that they had to baptize her immediately. The father sent one of the boys rush to the spring to fetch water for the baptism, but the other six went with him. And because each wanted to be the first to draw water, the jug fell into the well. Then they stood there confused, not knowing what to do, and no one dared to go home. Meanwhile, the father feared that the child would die without baptism, and did not understand why, so the boys were late. -Sicuramente- he said -you will be forgotten it for some game! - and when they continued not to come, angry, railed saying: -I wish you all turned into ravens! -. He had just uttered these words before he heard a whirring in the air above his head: he looked up and saw seven ravens blacks such as coal, fly up and disappear. The parents could not recall the curse, and however sad they were at the loss of their seven sons, they still to some way with their dear little daughter, who soon grew strong and every day more beautiful. For a long time she could not even have had brothers, because parents looked to mention it in front of her; until one day he heard by chance that yes, it was beautiful, but after all was responsible for the disaster touched his seven brothers. Then she was much troubled, and went to his father and mother and asked if she had brothers and where they ended up. Parents, as well, could no longer keep the secret, but they said that it was the will of Heaven, and that her birth had been the innocent cause. But if the girl scolded him every day, and was firmly convinced that she must deliver his brethren. He had no rest or peace until one day he left in secret and went around the world in search of his brothers to release them at any cost. She took nothing with her but a little ring belonging to her parents, a loaf of bread for hunger, a little pitcher of water for thirst, and a little chair for fatigue. Journeyed, he came to the edge of the world. He went to the sun, but it was too hot and terrible, and devoured little children. He escaped in a hurry and ran to the moon, but it was too cold and too cruel and bad, and when it saw the child, he said: I smell, I smell human flesh! -. She then ran away quickly and came to the stars, which were kind and good to her, each seated on his chair. The morning star arose, and gave her a chicken drumstick and said: -No quest'ossicino you can not open the glass mountain where are your little brother. The maiden took the drumstick, wrapped it carefully in a handkerchief and walked until she came to the glass mountain. The door was shut and she wanted to take the drumstick; He undid the cloth, but it was empty: she had lost the good star. What to do? He wanted to save his brothers and had no key to the glass mountain. The good sister took a knife, cut off the little finger, put it in the lock and the door opened easily. As soon as he entered he went to meet a dwarf who said: My child, you are looking for? -. -Cerco my brothers, the seven ravens, she replied. The dwarf said lord ravens are not at home, but if you want to wait until they come, Pure-enters. Then the dwarf carried the ravens' dinner on seven seven seven cups and saucers, and she ate a morsel from each plate and drank a small sip from each glass; last she dropped the ring he had brought with him,. Suddenly she heard a whirring in the air and passed like a breath of wind, and the dwarf said to lord ravens are flying home! -. They came, they wanted to eat and drink, and looked for their plates and their shots. Then, one after another, they said: Who has been eating off my plate? Who has been drinking from my glass? It 'was a human mouth! -. And when the seventh came to the bottom of the glass, the ring rolled down. Looking at it he realized it was a parent ring and said -Volesse God that our sister may be here! We would liberati-. Hearing these words, the girl, who was listening behind the door, stepped forward, and all the ravens were restored to human form. They embraced, kissed and went joyfully home.
The seven Swabians	1128	1321	Italian	There were once seven Swabians: the first was Mr. Schulz, the second Jackli, the third Marli, Jergli the fourth, the fifth Michal, the sixth Hans, the seventh Veitli; And all the seven wanted to travel the world in search of adventure and big business. But to go safe and well armed, thought it best to do a spit take, but one very loud and long. This spear all seven together in front walked the boldest and strongest, and these had to be Mr. Schulz, were then the other in a row, and the last was Veitli. One July day had come a long way, and I still had so much to go to get to the village where they wanted to spend the night when on a meadow at sunset, a giant beetle or hornet flew in from behind a bush not far from them, and he buzzed threateningly. Master Schulz was so terrified that nearly dropped the spear, and with fear, sweat ran down your whole body. -Ascoltate! Listen! - he shouted to his comrades. -God! I hear a drum! - Jackli, who held the spit behind him, and perceived some kind of smell, he said: -He definitely something going on, for I taste powder and matches! -. At these words Master Schulz took flight and in less than no time jumped over a hedge; but as he just on the teeth of a rake remained there after the hay, the handle struck him in the face and gave him a nice hit. -Poor me! Poor me! - she cried Mr. Schulz. -Prendimi prisoner! I give up! I give up! - The other six all leapt over, one after another shouted: -If you surrender, I surrender too! If you surrender, I surrender too! -. Finally, because there was no enemy who wanted to tie them up and take them away, they realized that he had been mistaken; and why, the story might not be known, and not to be mocked and ridiculed, they all swore to keep his mouth shut, until one of them had not opened. Then they went on their way. But the second danger which can not compare to the first. A few days later, the road led them across a fallow field; where a hare was sitting sleeping in the sun, with erect ears and big eyes staring glassy. At the sight of that terrible beast it got scared everyone and took counsel about which was the least dangerous. In fact, if there was fled to fear that the monster would pursue them and swallowed in one bite. So they said: -We must support a great and dangerous battle, fortune favors the bold! -. And all seven grasped the spear, Master Schulz in front and Veitli last. Mr Schulz wanted to keep the spear back, but Veitli, queuing, had grown bolder, wanted to attack and shouted -Animo Swabians, you have to strive together, or you will be lame here! -But Hans knew how to sting him to the quick, and said, Ah! Heck! You own a pretty mean, you, you're always the last to act! -Michal shouted: Sure there is no doubt! And 'the devil's in front of you! -Then fell to Jergli, who said: -If he's not, brother or mother would be, what there would be no doubt! -Marli had a bright idea and told Veitli: -Coraggio Veitli, guide us! I behind everyone else quaggiù.-Veitli But did not give him a straight and Jackli said -Schulz will be the leader, it is a great honor but proud! -So Mr. Schulz took courage and said solemnly: -Orsù with value we go to the fight, the or each must show courage! -And all together they attacked the dragon. Mr. Schulz made the sign of the cross and prayed for God his help; But as all this was to no avail and he was getting closer and closer to the enemy, he cried out, full of fear: -Auh! Auh! Auh! Auh! -. This awakened the hare woke up, got scared and ran away. When Mr Schulz saw off the pitch, shouted, full of joy: -Del monster, Veitli, tell us a bit ', to' as in hare-trasformò. The gang of the Swabians went in search of other adventures, and came on the banks Mosel, a mossy river, calm and deep; there are many bridges that cross it, and you often have to be ferried by boat. As the seven Swabians did not know, they called a man who worked beyond the river, to know how you could switch sides. Because of the distance, and also because of their dialect, the man did not understand what they wanted, and his trevirese: - "Wat? Wat?" - (What? What?). Mr. Schulz understood: - "Wade, wade" - (Guada, wading); and since it was the first, he started to enter the Moselle. He was not long to sink into the mud, and the waves swept; but the wind blew his hat on the other shore, and a frog sat down beside it and croaked -CRa, CRA, CRA. The other six, heard the other side and said: -Our comrades, Master Schulz is calling us; if he could wade across, why can not we? -. Then everyone, nimble, jumped into the water and drowned, and that was how a frog killed six, and of the Swabian allies ever reached home again.
The three surgeons	1118	660	Italian	Three surgeons were traveling the world, thought they knew their art perfectly, and came to an inn where they wanted to spend the night. The host asked where they came from and where they went. -Giriamo the world by exercising our arte.- -Fatemi a bit 'to see what you can do said the host. The first said he would cut off his hand and the next morning he would go-around; the second said that her heart would be ripped and in the morning he would put in its place; the third said that he would be gouged out his eyes, and in the morning would have healed them. But they had a salve, and they rubbed it, joined parts together; and always carried with the little bottle that contained it. Cut the hand, heart and eyes, as they had said, they put them on a plate and gave it to the innkeeper; and the innkeeper gave it to a girl because, I shut the closet, and serbasse carefully. But the girl understood it secretly with a soldier. When the innkeeper, the three surgeons and everyone else in the house were asleep, the soldier came and wanted something to eat. The girl opened the cupboard and brought him some food, and her love forgot to shut the cupboard door; sat at the table next door, and they chattered together. As he sat there happily, not expecting trouble, he came creeping cat, found the cupboard open, took her hand and heart and eyes of the three surgeons and ran away. When the soldier had finished eating and the girl was taking away and shut the cupboard, he noticed that the innkeeper had given her flat in custody had disappeared. Frightened, the lover said: Ah, poor me, I'll never ?! The hand is gone, and so is the heart and eyes! What will become of me tomorrow! -. -He 'tranquilla- he said the soldier -ti I'll help. Just give me a sharp knife on the gallows hangs a thief, I'll cut your hand; Which hand was it? - -The destra.- the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he went and cut her hand to the poor sinner and took it to him. Then he grabbed the cat and put both his eyes; now he is missing only the heart. -I might have been killing, and the pork meat in the cellar? - -si- said the girl. -Benissimo- said the soldier; He went down and fetched a pig's heart and gave it to the girl. She put everything into the pot, put it back in the closet, and when the love was gone, began quietly to bed. In the morning, when the three surgeons got up, they told the girl she was to take the pot in which the hand, heart and eyes. She went to pick him up in the closet, and the first put his hand of the thief, and smeared it with his salve, and it grew to his arm directly. The second he puts the cat's eyes, and the third a pig's heart. The innkeeper stood there admiring their art, and said he had never seen such a thing would have made great praise, and would recommend to all of them. Then they paid their bill, and traveled farther. As they walked, the one with the pig's heart did not stay with them, but ran to every corner rooting as pigs do. The others wanted to keep him on the tail of his coat, but it was no use: he freed himself and ran wherever the dirt was. The second also behaved very strangely; he rubbed his eyes, and said to -Camerata, what happens to me? These are not my eyes, I see nothing; I need someone to guide me because, no cada-. Then with difficulty they traveled on till evening, when they reached another inn. They came together and in one corner there was a rich man sitting in front of a table, counting money. The one with the thief's hand walked around him, flinched a few times, and finally, when the stranger turned away, he snatched at the pile and took a handful of money. One of them saw this and said -Camerata, do you? You must not steal shame! -. -Ah- he said-not can not help it: it is a start that I have in hand and forcing me to steal, though not voglio.- Then he lay down to sleep, and when they were lying in bed was so dark that we do not he could see in his own hand. Suddenly, the one with the cat's eyes awoke, aroused the others and said: -Fratelli, look up ', do you see the white mice running over there? -. The other two up, but they could see nothing. Then he said: -Here's something wrong: we did not have what we had; we must return to the innkeeper who ingannati- there. So the next morning they returned, and told the host they had not regained their first had a thief's hand, the second the eyes of a cat, and the third a pig's heart. The innkeeper said that the fault was certainly the girl and wanted to call her; but that, having seen the three coming surgeons, had escaped from the back door and never returned. Then the three said he must give them much money, or they would set fire to the house. He gave them everything he had and was able to scrape together, and with that money the three went away. Their was enough for a lifetime, but they would rather have their stuff.
The three children of fortune	663	1650	Italian	A father once called a s, his three sons, and first gave a rooster, the second a scythe, and the third a cat. -I'm already old- he said -and my death is near, before my end I want to be able to take thought for you. Money I have not, and what I now give you seems to have little value; actually you only have to use it wisely: look for a country where these things are still unknown and will be your fortuna.- After his father's death, the eldest of the brothers went home with his cock, but in any city he went, already from afar saw, the towers, the rooster turn in the wind; in the villages he heard singing more than one, and no one wonder at the creature, so, it did not seem right that he should make his fortune. But in the end he happened to arrive on an island, where people do not know what it was a rooster and ignored even understand how to divide the day. They knew, it is true, when it was morning or evening, but at night, not sleeping, no one knew what time it was. -Guardate- he said-that superb animal, has a ruby-red crown upon his head, and wears spurs like a knight; Night calls you three times at fixed hours, and the last time when it is about to rise the sun. But if it crows by broad daylight, then there will certainly be pioverà.- To the people were well pleased; he did not sleep for a whole night, and listened with satisfaction the rooster shouting it aloud at two, four and six. He asked if the animal was on sale and how much he wanted. -Tant'oro what can bring a asino- said -A modest price for such a precious creature! - cried unanimously, and willingly gave him what he had asked. When he came home with his wealth his brothers were astonished, and the second said, -I will put myself on the way to see if I can sell just as well my falce-. But it did not look, because everywhere he met the peasants who carried on their shoulders a scythe as his. In the end, however, he chanced upon to find an island where people had never seen a scythe. When the corn was ripe there, they took cannon out to the fields and felled by dint of gunfire. But it was rather an uncertain shot right over, others hit the ears of the stem and away, whereby, much grain was lost, and moreover there was a lot of noise. So the man set to work and mowed it down so quickly and quietly that people gasped in amazement. The gladly gave the price asked and he received a horse laden with gold, as it could carry. And now the third brother wanted to find someone to sell her cat. He too did not fare differently: as long as he stayed on the mainland there was nothing to do, Every place had cats, and there were so many that small, newly born kittens were generally drowned. Finally he sailed on an island, and there he happened lucky that they had never seen a cat; and the mice flourished to the point that danced on tables and benches, there was or not the landlord. People gave in to despair, and the king himself could not get away from the plague: in every corner of the mice squeaked, and gnawed whatever they could put in their mouths. Then the cat began her chase, and soon cleared a couple of rooms, and the people begged the king to buy the wonderful beast for the country. The king willingly gave what was asked, a mule laden with gold; and the third brother came home to more treasure of all. In the castle, the cat merry with the mice, and killed so many that could not be counted. In the end, by dint of work, he was hot and thirsty, so he stopped, raised his head and shouted: -Miau Mew! -. When I heard this strange cry, the king and his courtiers were frightened and ran all at once out of the castle, full of fear. The king held a council to do, and finally it was decided to send a herald to order him to leave the castle, if he did not want would use force. The councilors said-rather prefer the scourge of rats, which we are accustomed, than give up our lives in the grip of the mostro-. A page was sent to ask the cat if he intended to leave the castle. But the cat, who had yet thirst, replied simply: -Miau Mew! -. The page he realized: -Absolutely not! - and took this answer to the king. -If they said the so- -cederà advisers to the force! - were stationed cannon and fired, causing a fire in the castle. When the fire reached the room where the cat was sitting, she sprang safely out of the window; but the besiegers did not leave off until the whole palace was reduced to a pile of rubble.
The three brothers	1172	654	Italian	There was once a man who had three sons, and nothing else but the house in which he lived. Each of the sons wished to have the house after his death, but he loved them all the same way and did not know how to do no wrong to anyone; He did not want to sell it because it was the home of his forefathers, else he would split the money between them. Finally he had an idea and said to his sons: -Go around the world and challenge yourself; each of you learn a trade and, when you return, who makes the best masterpiece shall have the home-. The children agreed; and the eldest determined to be a blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing master. They established when they would all come home and left. It so happened that they all found skilful masters, who taught them their right. The blacksmith had to shoe the King's horses and thought, "Surely you home." The barber only shaved great people, and he also thought that the house would be his. The fencing master he caught several blows, but he clenched his teeth without losing heart because, he thought: "If you are afraid of a blow, you'll never get home." When he spent the stipulated time, three brothers came back home; but, not knowing how to find the best opportunity for showing their skill, so and consulted together. As they were sitting there, suddenly came a hare running across the field. Hey! - said the barber -is right way! - He took the basin and soap, and lathered away until the hare was very close, then travel the lathered and made a pointed beard, not even cut anything No, twist a hair. -I like! - he said the father-if others do not do anything special, the house is tua.- Soon after, a man came into the carriage, and the horse was in a gallop. Now you shall see, Dad, what are able to do- said the blacksmith; ran after the carriage, he took the four irons to the horse, and galloped, and put him four more. -You're in gamba- he said his father -You do well your job as your brother; I do not know who I should give house.- Then the third son said -Babbo, let me try anch'io- and, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword and brandished hitting out sideways over his head, so fast that not a drop; and when the rain became more dense and ended with the roar as if overthrew in buckets from heaven, he brandished his sword faster and faster, and remained as dry as if it were covered. When they saw him, the father was amazed and said: -You have the masterpiece, the house is yours. The other brothers were satisfied, as they had promised; and, as they did very well, they were all three together in the house, followed their trades; and knew him so thoroughly, clever, they earned much money. So they lived happily together until late in life, and when one of them fell ill and died, the two others were so saddened that sickened and died too. And because they were so clever, and had loved one another so much, they were buried together in the same grave.
The three apprentices	1137	360	Italian	There were once three apprentices who had decided to travel together and to always work in the same city. But, after a while 'time, the work stopped, so they were in rags, and had nothing to live on. Then one said: -What do we do? We can no longer remain together; the next will be the last city in which we will go if we do not work there too we agree with the staff and each of us will write you where he's gone, so that we can always have news of each other; then we will separate. And that seemed the best solution. While they were talking, they were met by a man sumptuously dressed and asked who they were. We are apprentices looking for work; for now we were together, but if work does not find more, there separeremo.- -Do temete- said the man-if you do what I tell you, you will not miss No, No money, work; become great lords, and drive in your carriages One said: -I will we do if this does not compromise our souls and salvation be. No, answered the man-with you I do not c'entro.- But the other had looked at his feet and, catching sight of a horse's foot and a human foot, he did not have anything to do with him. The devil, however, said easy, I is not about you, but the soul of another, which is half my own already; Now you just have to run full. They are secure, they consented, and the devil told them what he wanted: the first was to answer each question: All three of us; the second: For money; the third and quite right. They must always speak one after the other, but without saying a word more; and if they disobeyed. all money would disappear at once; if obeyed, however, they would have the always full pockets. For starters, he at once gave them as much as they could carry, and told them to go into the city, in an inn so and so. They entered and the host came up to them and asked if they wished to eat something? -. The first he replied: All three of us. -Si- said the host -l think bene.- The second For money -You understand! - said the host. The third and quite right. -Of course I was right! - said the host. They ate and drank very well and were served with care. After lunch it was time to pay, and the innkeeper gave the bill to the one who said: All three of us. And the second: For money. And the third and quite right. Indeed it is right said the host. All three of us pay, and I can give nothing but they gave him more than what he asked for. The other guests looking on, said -must be pazzi-. -Yes, you are- said the landlord have-not all venerdì.- The three boys were in the inn for some time and said nothing else but All three of us, -for money-, -and quite right. But they saw and knew everything that was happening there. One day came a rich merchant, load of money, and said: Sir host, take care of my money are three crazy could rubarmelo-. The landlord obeyed; As he was carrying the suitcase in his room, he felt it was full of gold. Then he gave the three apprentices a lodging, while the merchant went upstairs in a separate room. When it was midnight, and the host thought that all were asleep, he went with his wife; They had an ax and struck the rich merchant; and having done the murder, they went to bed again. When morning came, there was a great outcry; the merchant lay dead in bed in a pool of blood. All the guests ran together, but the host said: -They were the three crazy apprentices have done. Customers confirmed and said, -I can have been no one else. The innkeeper had them called, and asked them: you killed the merchant? -. All three of us said the first; and the second: For money. And the third and quite right. -Sentite? - he said the host -l confess it themselves So they were taken to prison to be judged. Seeing that things were bad, they were frightened; but during the night the Devil came and said -Resistete still a day and do not miss the good fortune; They do not wring one hair. The next morning they were to trial, and the judge said: -You are you the murderers? -. All three of us Why did you kill the merchant? - For money -Sciagurati! - said the judge-not have been afraid of sin? - And quite right have confessed, and are still stubborn, ! - said the judge. -Conduceteli immediately So they were taken out and the landlord had to circle with other people. When aides Executioner took them and brought them to the stage where he was the executioner with his sword drawn, suddenly he came a carriage drawn by four blood red horses ran so fast that fire flashed the stones, while the window someone waving a white cloth. The executioner said -Arriva the grazia-. And the coach shouted -Grazia! grace!-. Got out the devil with the look of a gentleman, richly dressed and said: -You three are innocent, you may now speak, make known what you have seen and heard. Then the old man said: -We did not kill the merchant; the murderess is there in the circle. He pointed to the innkeeper. -If you want proof, go into his cellar, where are hung many others, murdered by lui.- Then the judge sent the aides of the Executioner, and things were just as he had told the boy. When they told the judge that he ordered the innkeeper to be led up and was beheaded. Then the devil told the three: "I have the soul I wanted, you are free, and have money for a lifetime."
The three languages	310	671	Italian	Once upon a time in Switzerland an old count who had an only son, but so stupid, and could learn nothing. Then the father said, -Listen, my son, as I do I can not get nothing into thy head. You must get out of here; great masters will try to do what I have potuto-. The youth was sent into a strange town, and remained a teacher for an entire year. After this period, he returned home and his father asked: -Well, what did you learn? - The son replied: Father, I have learned what they say-dogs. -God forbid! - exclaimed the father-is that all? You have to go to another town, to another master The young man went away and, again, he stayed a year. When he returned, the father said: -Well, what did you learn? -. The son replied: Father, I have learned what the birds say. Then the father became angry and said -Sciagurato. You have lost the precious time and learned nothing, and not ashamed to appear in front of? I will send you to a third master, but if this time you do not learn anything, I will no longer be your father-. So the young man was brought by a third master from whom he remained another year. When he finally returned home, his father asked: -Well, what did you learn? -: -Caro babbo- replied -quest'anno I learned what I croak rane.- Then the father fell into a rage, he jumped up, he called his servants and said, This man is no longer my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take in the forest, and kill him. They took him and led him out, but when they kill him took pity and let him go. Then they tore a gazelle eyes and tongue and took them to the old man as proof of his death. The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he begged for a night. -Si- said the warden. -If you want the night down there in the second tower, go 'as well, but I warn you that you risk your life is full of wild dogs that bark and bark without stopping, and at certain hours, you have to give them a human being they once devour Therefore, in the area, everyone was in mourning and great sadness, but without knowing what to do. The young man said, let me go down to the barking dogs, and give me something to throw to them; to me they will not do anything-. Since this was his intention, they gave him some 'food for the animals and brought him down to the tower. When he entered, the dogs wagged their tails around the amicably without hurt one hair and ate what he set before them. The next morning, to the astonishment of all, came out safe and sound from the tower and told the warden: -I dogs have revealed to me in their language because, if they are here to prejudicial damage to the country are bewitched, have a great treasure in the tower and not cheteranno until it is unearthed. Their conversations also revealed how I do-. At these words all rejoiced, and the warden he said: -If you can retrieve the treasure, and I will make my bride daughter-. The young man accepted the Company, and the howling of the wild dogs disappeared. So he married the beautiful maiden and they lived happily together. After a certain period of time the two took their journey to reach Rome. Because they passed a pond where frogs croaked. The young man understood what they were saying, and it was sad and pensive, but he said nothing to his wife. Finally they arrived in Rome: the pope had just died and, among the cardinals, there was great uncertainty as to who should be appointed as successor. Finally he agreed that he was elected pope who should be a miraculous sign of divine will. They had just made that decision when they entered the church, the young count, and suddenly two snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The ecclesiastics recognized therein the token and, without further ado, he asked him if he would be pope. He was hesitant and did not know if he were worthy, but the doves counseled him to do and said yes. Then he was anointed and consecrated, and so was fulfilled what, with such consternation, he had heard from the frogs on the street, who would become the Pope. Then he had to sing a mass, and did not know a word, but the two doves sat on his shoulders and suggested every word he had to say.
The three men of the woods	119	480	Italian	There was once a man whose wife was dead, and a woman whose husband was dead; the man had a daughter, and the woman as well. The two girls were friends and going to play together sometimes one day, at the home of donna.Ella said the man's daughter: "Listen, of 'your father that I will marry him then every morning you wash in milk and drink the wine and my daughter to wash in and drink water. " The girl went home and told her father what the woman had said. The man said, "What should I do? Marriage is a joy and also a torment" Finally he took off his boot and said, "Take this boot, it has a hole in the sole; go into the attic, hang it on the big nail and pour water into it. If it holds, I will take back his wife, but if the water, so no I'll take it. " The girl did as she was told; but water the hole together and the boot was full to the brim. Then she told her father how it went; he went up into the attic and when he saw that it was true he went to the widow, asked in marriage, and were celebrated nozze.La the next morning, when the two girls got up, the man's daughter milk to wash and wine to drink while in front of the woman's daughter was no water for washing and water to drink. The second morning there was water for washing and water to drink both before one o'clock is ahead of the other. On the third morning there was water for washing and water to drink for the man's daughter, and milk for washing and wine to drink for the woman's daughter; and so it was good. The woman hated her stepdaughter, and never knew how to make her feel worse every day. And she was jealous because her stepdaughter was pleasant and pretty, while her real daughter was ugly and antipatica.Una once, in winter, it was freezing hard, and the mountain and the valley were covered with snow, the woman made a dress of paper, called her stepdaughter, and said, "Here, put this dress goes' into the woods and fetch me a basket of strawberries: I want to." - "Good God," said the girl, "winter does not grow strawberries, the ground is frozen and snow covered everything. And how can I go with the paper dress? Outside it's so cold that your breath freezes, the wind will blow through and the thorns will tear it off. " - "Would You disagree?" said the stepmother. "Go away and do not get to see if you have not filled the basket of strawberries." Then she gave her a little piece of hard bread and said, "So you have to eat all day." And he thought: Out freezes over and die of hunger: I shall never more before occhi.La girl obeyed, put on the paper dress and went out with the basket. Everywhere there was nothing but snow and even a green thing. When he entered the forest, he saw a little house with three little men peeping. She wished them good morning and knocked on porta.Essi shouted: "Come in!" and she entered the room and sat on the bench by the stove; to warm herself and eat her breakfast. The dwarfs said, "Give a little 'to us." - "With pleasure," she said; He divided in two of her piece of bread and giving them half. They asked: "What are you looking in the winter forest, little thin frock?" - "Ah," she answered, "I have to fill up a basket of strawberries, and I can not go home if you do not find them." When she had eaten her bread they gave her a broom and said, "Sweep away the snow in front of the back door." When she had gone, the three little men said to each other: "What shall we give her as she was so kind and good, and has shared her bread with us?" Then the first one said: "It gets more beautiful every day." He said the second: "that fall from her mouth gold coins every word he says." the third said, "a king shall come and marry her." the girl with the broom of the dwarves, swept away the snow behind the small shed, and down there was all red with beautiful ripe strawberries. Then, with great joy, she hastened to fill the basket, thanked the little men, shook hands with them and ran home to bring strawberries to matrigna.Quando came in and said: "Good evening!" She fell from her mouth a gold coin. Then she related all that had happened in the woods, and every word he said came out of the mouth of the gold coins, so that soon the whole house was full of it. But the sister became jealous and insisted at length with her mother why, send him into the woods. This, however, did not want to and said, "No, my dear child, it is too cold, you freeze." But since the daughter kept insisting and not leave her alone, he yielded, but first sewed a magnificent fur jacket, I'll put them and gave her bread, butter and cakes to eat on the way. The girl came in their forest where was the casetta.Anche this time the three little men peeped out, but she greeted them and entered the room without delay, sat down next to the stove and began to eat his bread buttered and its focaccia. "Give us some '," cried the little men, but she replied: "not enough for me, how could I give to others?" When he had finished eating, they said, "Here's a broom, sweeping the front door behind the house. " - "Yes, sweeps you," he replied, "I'm not your servant!" When he saw that they did not give her anything, she took the gate. Then the little men said to each other: "What shall we give her as she was so rude and a bad heart and envious, uncharitable?" The first said, "It gets uglier every day." The second said: "That out of your mouth a toad every word he says. "the third said," She shall die a miserable death. "the girl was looking outside for strawberries, but not as she found none, she went sulkily home. And when he opened his mouth to tell his mother what had happened in the forest, each word a toad sprang out, so that everyone had disgusted her. Then the stepmother was angry even more and only thought to haunt the daughter of her husband, which, however, every day became more beautiful. Finally she took a kettle, set it on fire, and scalded some yarn. When it was ready he gave to the poor girl with an ax, it was to go to the frozen river and break a hole in the ice and rinse the filo.Ella obeyed, went and made a hole in the ice; and while endeavored the ax, he came a splendid carriage in which sat the king. He stopped and asked: "My child, what are you doing here?" - "I am a poor girl, and the wire." The king relented and seeing that it was so beautiful, he said: "Will you come with me?" - "Ah, yes, with all my heart," she replied; for she was happy to leave his mother and thus sorella.Salì carriage and drove off with the king, and when they reached the castle the wedding was celebrated with great pomp, as the little men had foretold. A year later the young queen gave birth to a child, and when the stepmother had heard of her great good fortune she touched, she came with her daughter under the pretext to visit her. But once the king was not home, and there was no one else, the bad woman took the Queen by the head, and her daughter grabbed his feet, lifted her off the bed and threw it in the river from window He flowed beneath it. Then the woman put her ugly daughter in the bed and covered it over his head. When the King came back and wanted to talk to his wife, the old woman cried: "Shut up, shut up, not now: it's all in a sweat, you have to leave it for now." The King dreamed of nothing wrong, and came again in the morning later, and when he spoke to his wife and she answered him, there jumped each time out of a toad, and usually fell a gold coin. Then he asked what it was, but the old woman said that it was the effect of her great weakness, and then everything would scomparso.Ma that night the kitchen boy saw a duck swam along the gutter and water drain who he said, "that at this time my Sire? Vigil or has already gone to sleep?" And, as he made no reply, he added: "My guests stan doing?" The kitchen boy answered: "At this time they are sleeping." He asked: "And my little baby, how does it do?" He replied: "In his bed sleeping already!" Then she took on the appearance of the queen, nursed her child, she shook the bed, covered him and swam away down the gutter with the duck looks. Similarly he was for two nights; the third said the kitchen boy, "Go and 'the king to take his sword and on the threshold brandish three times on my head." The kitchen boy ran to tell the king; he came with his sword and brandished it three times over, and the third time appeared his wife, alive and healthy as prima.Il King was happy but he kept the queen hidden in a room until Sunday, the day when the child was to be baptized. After the baptism, he said: "What do deserve someone who drags another out of bed and throws it in the water?" - "Ah," said the old woman, "it is put in a barrel lined with nails, and rolled down the hill into the water." Then the king sent for such a barrel, and did you put in the old, and his daughter; Then they hammered down, and made her tumbling down the slope, from which rolled into the river.
The three lazy	1435	1950	Italian	A king had three sons whom he loved in equal manner, and did not know who might appoint his successor after his death. When he was on his deathbed, he called them to s, and said -Cari children, I thought one thing I want to tell you: the laziest of you will become king to my death-. Then the eldest said -Babbo, the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if I lie and I want to sleep, and I drop one drop in the eye, I do not open it that addormentarmi-. The second said -Babbo, the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if I sit by the fire to warm me, I let myself burn the soles of the feet, rather than pull back legs-. The third said -Babbo, the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if they were to hang myself and had the rope already around his neck, and a man would give my hand a sharp knife with which I might cut, I rather leave it hanging that raise the tampering. On hearing the father said: -You will be my successore-.
The three birds	910	707	Italian	Over a thousand years ago in this country nothing but small kings, and one of them who lived on Mount Keuter and he liked to hunt. Once, as she left the castle with his huntsmen, at the foot of three girls they were watching their cows; and when they saw the King with all those people, the more he shouted to the other two, indicating the King: Hey, hey! If I do not get that, I do not want anyone! -. The second answer, the other side of the mountain, indicating the person who was at the king's right: Hey, hey! If I do not get that, I do not want anyone! -. Then the youngest cried, pointing to the person who was on his left: Hey, hey! If I do not get that, I do not want anyone! -. And these were the two ministers. The King heard all this, and when he returned from hunting, he caused the three girls and asked them what they had said the day before at the foot of the mountain. They did not say it, but the King asked the eldest if she wanted for her husband. She said yes, and her sisters married the two ministers, because they were all three fair and beautiful of face, especially the queen who had hair like flax. But the two sisters had no children; and once the king had to leave, he invited them to attend the queen, who was pregnant. She gave birth to a boy with a red star. Then the two sisters together to throw in the water that beautiful child. When they had thrown him in (I believe it was the Weser), flew a little bird who sang: -Prepared for the death of up to change the fate, among the bunches of lilies you are one of my children? - heard that, the two sisters were frightened and fled. When the King came home she told him that the queen had given birth to a dog. And the king said: -What God does, is well done-. But near the river he lived a fisherman, who pulled out of the water the baby still alive, and as his wife had no children, they reared him. A year later, the king had to absent himself again, and the queen gave birth to another boy; the two false sisters took him and threw him into the river, and again flew the bird who sang: -Prepared for the death of up to change the fate, among the bunches of lilies you are one of my children? - and when the king came back, they told him that the Queen had once given birth to a dog, and he again said, -What God does, is well done-. The fisherman pulled out of the water this too, and reared him. The king left again, and the queen had a little girl and also the false sisters threw into the water. Again flew the bird who sang: -Prepared for the death of up to change the fate, among the bunches of lilies is one of my children? -When the King came home they told him that the Queen had delivered of a cat. Then he became angry and put him in prison, where he remained for many years. In the meantime the children had grown; once more went fishing with other boys, but would not have him with them and said -Vattene away, you son of nobody! -. He was deeply troubled, and asked the old fisherman if that was true. She told him that once, fishing, had pulled out of the water. Then he said he wanted to go look for his father. The fisherman asked him to stay but he was not dissuaded, and the fisherman ended up giving him permission. He set out on foot and walked for days; finally he came to a wide river where there was an old woman fishing. -Good day, mother - said the young man. -Mille thank you! - -I think you will have to stay here long before you catch a fish! - -And you seek long enough ', before finding your father! How do you cross the river? - the woman said. -Yeah, God knows! - Then the old woman took him on their shoulders and carried him on the other side; and he spent a long time but could not find his father. When he spent a year, the second went to look for his brother; He came to the river and everything went the same way. Now at home he had been only the girl, much lamented the lack of brothers that she finished by praying the fisherman to let her go, because he wanted to look for them. She also came to the big river, and said to the old woman -Good day, mother -. -Mille thank you! - God help you in fishing! - On hearing these words, the old became quite friendly, he took her on the other side, gave her a wand and said, always -Continue on this road, my daughter, and when you come to a big black dog, you have to go silently and boldly, without either laughing or looking at it. Then you come to a great high castle, on the threshold you have to drop the wand; and, going straight through the castle and come out the other side. There is an old fountain out grew a large tree which hangs a cage with a bird; Take likewise a glass of water from the well and returns back to the same road. On the threshold take back the stick and when you again pass by the dog, strike him in the face, but be sure to hit him; finally back to me-. The maiden found everything as he had told the old, and on the way back she found her two brothers, who had over half the world. They went together to where he was the black dog; She hit him on the face, and it turned into a handsome prince who went with them to the river. The old woman was still there, and was very glad to see them again; He took them on the other side and then also left her because now she was freed. The others went to the old fisherman and all were glad that they had found. The cage with the bird hung on the wall. But the second son could not settle at home; He took a bow and went hunting. When he was tired he took his flute and played a tune. But the king was hunting and heard; He went and when he met the young man said: Who has allowed you to hunt here? -. Oh, no! - -Who are you? - -I am the son of pescatore.- -What does not figli.- -If you do not believe us, come with me.- The king went and questioned the fisherman who told him everything; and the bird, the wall began to sing: -The mother sits alone, there is no one to comfort her. Noble Sire, powerful king, behold your children in front of you! Two evil han all warp, children kidnapped. Then have cast them into the water, he, by chance, he pescati.-All horrified them; The king brought with s, the castle of the bird, the fisherman and the three children. He took out of prison but his wife was ill and weak. Then the daughter gave her to drink water from the well, and she became strong and healthy. The two false sisters were burnt, and the daughter married the prince.
The Emperor's New Clothes	2052	1620	Italian	Many years ago there lived an emperor who loved so much always have beautiful new clothes to use all his money to dress elegantly. He did not care for his soldiers, nor to go to the theater or a walk in the woods, except to show off new clothes. He had a coat for every hour of the day and as usually it is said that a king is to the board, so he always said, "And in the locker room!". In the great city in which he lived was very gay; every day many strangers and once came two swindlers did you go to weavers and claimed to know how to weave the finest cloth than ever imaginable. Not only the colors and the design were extraordinarily beautiful, but the clothes made of their material possessed the wonderful quality of being invisible to any man who was unfit for his office or very stupid ones. "That must be wonderful clothes! " He thought the emperor. "With these I could find out who in my kingdom is not to the task he has, and recognize the clever from the stupid. Yes, this cloth must be woven for me immediately!" and gave the two swindlers a lot of money, so that they could begin to lavorare.Questi up two looms and pretended to work, but they did nothing whatever on the frame. They asked for the finest silk and the most precious gold, they filled the bags and worked at the empty looms till late at night. "I'd like to know how work is continuing on the cloth," thought the emperor, but in truth you he felt a little 'uneasy when he remembered that he who was not fit for his office could not see the cloth. Of course he not feared for himself; however, he preferred to send somebody else first to see how matters. Everyone in town knew what a remarkable quality the stuff possessed, and all were anxious to see how bad or stupid their neighbor. "I will send my good old minister to the weavers," thought the Emperor "will certainly see him as better than the others is coming the fabric, since it has common sense and there's nobody better than him in doing his work. "the old minister went into the room where the two swindlers were working with two empty frames. "Heaven preserve us!" he thought, and opened his eyes, "I can not see anything!" But not disse.Entrambi swindlers requested him to come near, and asked whether the colors and the design were not beautiful. Meanwhile they pointed to the empty looms, and the poor old minister tried his very best, but could not say anything, because there was nothing. "Lord!" she thought "maybe I'm stupid? I never thought but you never know. Maybe I'm not fit for my office? I can not tell you that I can not see the cloth!" "Well, she does not say anything!" exclaimed one of the weavers. "It's beautiful! Very nice!" He said the old minister looking through his glasses. "That designs and colors! Yes, yes, I will tell the emperor that I like it!" "We are very happy!" They said the two weavers, and described to him the various colors and gorgeous design. The old minister listened attentively could say the same after returning from the emperor, and so in fact fece.Gli swindlers asked for more money, silk and gold, required for weaving. They kept everything in your pocket; on the chassis he never came to anything, and they continued to weave on looms vuoti.L'imperatore sent shortly after another honest to see how continued the work, and they were getting the fabric was ready. He was succeeded by what had happened to the minister; looked carefully, but there was nothing to be seen but the empty looms, and in fact saw nothing. "It is not a beautiful piece of cloth?" asked the two swindlers, showing and explaining the magnificent pattern, which was not there at all. "I am not stupid," said the man "is therefore the position that I am not fit to me? It seems strange! Anyway no one should notice it!" and he praised the cloth he had not seen, and expressed his joy that the colors and the fine pattern. "Yes, it's magnificent" then told all'imperatore.Tutti in town talked about the precious stoffa.L'imperatore wanted to see it himself while it was still on the loom. With a number of courtiers, including the two who had already been there, he went to the two clever swindlers, who now worked as hard, but without wires. "Not èmagnifique?" They exclaimed the two talented officials. "Your Majesty must admire the drawing, what colors!" and pointed to the empty looms, for they imagined the others could see the cloth. "What is this?" He thought the emperor. "I do not see anything! It's terrible! Is maybe stupid? Am I unfit to be emperor? It's the most terrible thing that can happen to me." - "Oh, it's beautiful!" exclaimed, "he has my full approval!" and he is nodding contentedly he looked at the empty loom; He did not mean that he could not see anything. All his attendants looked at carefully, and did not discover anything more; They said they all equally emperor: "It is beautiful" and advised him to dress with that wonderful new fabric and wear it for the first time in the parade that was to take place shortly. "Emagnifìque, beautiful, excellent," they cried to each other, and a lot of their words rejoiced. The emperor gave the fraudsters the Knight's Cross to hang in his buttonhole, and the title of Noble Tessitori.Tutta the night before the procession was to take swindlers raised with sixteen candles. So people could see that they had to do to prepare the Emperor's new clothes. They pretended to take the cloth from the loom, cut the air with big scissors, and sewed with needles without thread, and finally announced: "Now the dress is ready." Came the Emperor himself with his illustrious knights, and the two swindlers raised a arm as if they held something and said, "These are the trousers; and then the jacket - and finally the coat!" and so on. "The fabric is light as a spider's web! You could almost believe that he had nothing on, but it just that its value!." "Yes," confirmed all the knights, but they could not see anything, since there 'it was nothing. "He wants to His Imperial Majesty deigned to undress now?" They said the scammers "so just put the new clothes here in the mirror." The emperor undressed, and the swindlers pretended to hand him the various parts of the new suit, which were finishing to sew; they took him for life as if it were something to tie it tight, it was a train, and the emperor veered in front of the mirror. "How well they look! How well they fit!" they all said. "What a design! What colors! It's a magnificent suit of clothes!" "Out here came the bearers of the canopy, which was to be carried His Majesty during the parade!" announced the master of the ceremonies. "Yes, I am ready," he replied the emperor. "It's just fine, right?" It rolled over once again before the mirror, as if contemplating her tenuta.I chamberlains who were to carry the train pretended to grab it off the ground and started taking the air, because they could not make them understand that they did not see so niente.E the emperor marched in the procession under the beautiful canopy, and people who were on the street or at the window said: "what the emperor's new clothes! what a long train door! How well it fits !." No one wanted to make it clear he saw nothing, because otherwise it would prove to be stupid or not up to its task. None of the emperor's clothes had ever had such a success. "But he has nothing on!" said one child. "Lord, you hear the voice of innocence!" replied the father, and one whispered to another what the child had said. "It has nothing on me! There is a child who says that he has nothing on!" "It does not have anything on me!" He cried at the end of all the people. And the Emperor shivered because he knew that they were right, but he thought: "Now I must bear up to the end." And so we still greater dignity, and the chamberlains followed him carried the train that was not there.
The willful child	1109	779	Italian	There once was a willful child who never did what her mother wished. For this reason God was displeased and made him ill, so much so that no physician, save it and soon he lay on his deathbed. When he was lowered into the grave and covered with earth, all of a sudden popped out her little arms and stretched up; They put him in and returned to cover it with fresh earth, but it was useless: the arm kept coming back out. Then the mother herself had to go to the grave, and beat him on the little arm with a rod; when he had done for the arm and drew back the baby was finally peace in the land.
The experienced hunter	1050	304	Italian	There once was a boy who had learned the trade of locksmith, and told his father he would go into the world and seek his fortune. "Yes," he said the father, "I 'pure' and gave him a bit 'of money for the trip. So he went shooting here and there. After a bit 'of time, his job could him no and he did not more genius; wanted, instead, to learn to hunt. On the way he met a huntsman dressed in green, who asked him where he was from and where he was going. The youth said he was a locksmith's apprentice, but that the trade no longer pleased him and he wanted to learn to hunt, would he as an apprentice? "Oh yes, if you want to come with me." So the boy followed him, remained in his service for some years, and learned the art of hunting. Then he wanted again to test themselves, and the hunter gave no other compensation than a blunderbuss; But it had hit its mark without fail whenever he shot. He went away and came into a great forest, and one day I could not see the end. In the evening he climbed a tall tree to shelter from the wild beasts. Around midnight he seemed to see a distant light shine; He looked through the branches and watched carefully where he was. Then he took his hat and threw it down to the light, for, when he fell, a sign to show him the way. He got down and went to his hat, put it back in the lead and went straight ahead. More walking and bigger grew light, and when he arrived, he saw that it was a large fire; three giants were sitting by who were roasting an ox on the spit. One said: "I have to taste the meat to see if it is almost cooked." He broke off a piece and was about to put in your mouth when the huntsman shot it out of his hand. "But look a little '" said the giant, "the wind has not blown the flesh!" and he took another piece. He was about to bite into it, when the hunter carried it away with another coup; then the giant slapped the one who was sitting beside him and shouted angrily: "Why do I take away my piece of meat ?." - "I have taken you away," said one. "It must have been a shot musket." The giant took another piece, but could not hold it, as the hunter made him fly off again shooting. Then the giant said: "It must be a good shot to shoot off the very mouth, a guy like that could be useful." And they cried aloud: "Come out, sharpshooter, sit by the fire and eat at your will; we will not do anything to you, but if you do not come and take you by force, you're lost." Then the young man came up and said he was a skilled hunter and everything he aimed at with his gun hit her without ever wrong. Then they said that if he went with them, he would be fine; and they told him that outside the forest there was a great river, beyond which there was a tower where there was a beautiful princess, that they wanted to kidnap. "Yes," said he, "it is easily done." The other they added: "There is still one thing: there is a dog that barks when someone approaches, and now to wake up all the court, which is why we can not get in. You'll have the courage to kill the dog? . " - "Yes," he "will be a game to me." Then he climbed into a boat and crossed the river, and it was almost to shore when the little dog came running; He was about to start to bark, but the huntsman took his gun and shot and killed him. At the sight of the giants they rejoiced, and thought they already had the King in their power. But the hunter told them to stay out there until he called them. Then he entered the castle where reigned a dead silence and everyone was asleep. When he opened the first room, on the wall here is a made of pure silver, with a gold star above and the name of the king; Next to it was a table on which there was a sealed letter. He opened it and read it with the sword could kill anyone who opposed him. Then he took the sword from the wall, hung it at his side and went on; he entered the room where he slept the princess, and it was so beautiful that he stopped to look at her and held her breath. He looked around and saw that under the bed was a pair of slippers: on the right was his father's name with a star on the left her own name with a star. She had a big silk shawl with gold embroidered neck. Then the huntsman took a pair of scissors, cut the right corner off, and put it in his backpack, then he also took the right slipper with the one that bore the name of the king. The girl slept on, quite sewn into his shirt; then he cut a morsel of his shirt and put it together with the rest, but he did all without touching her. Then he was gone, leaving her sleep; When he reached the door, the giants were still standing outside waiting for him, and thought he had brought the princess. But he cried out, and they entered the girl was already in his hands; He could not, however, open the door for them, but there was a hole through which they had to pass. Then the first he approached, and the huntsman wound the giant's hair round his hand, pulled the head and cut it off with a saber; then he pulled him inside at all. Then he called the second and cut off the head even to him, and likewise the third; and he was happy to have freed the beautiful maiden from her enemies. He cut out their tongues and put them in your backpack. Then he thought: "I'll go home to my father and show him what I did, then I'll go around the world: the good fortune that God has destined me, I will not miss." But in the castle when the king awoke, he saw the three giants lying there dead. He went into the chamber of his daughter, awoke her, and asked who could have killed the giants. She said, "Dear father, I do not know: I was sleeping." But when she arose and would put on her slippers, the right one was gone; and when you looked at her neck, saw that he was cut and was missing the right corner; and when he looked at his shirt, a piece was cut. The king summoned his whole court, the soldiers and all the others, and asked who had set his daughter and killed the giants. Now he had a captain who had only one eye and it was ugly; He said that it was he. Then the old king said that he had accomplished this, he should marry his daughter. But the girl said, "Dear father, rather than marry him, I prefer to leave to the world, as far as I bring my legs." The king said that if she would not marry him she should take off her royal garments and wear peasant dress and go to a potter, to trade in earthen vessels. So she put off her royal garments and went to a potter and took the dishes on credit, with the promise to pay it in the evening, when he had sold. The king told her to start selling in the corner, then ordered that the chariot you would pass in the middle and everything should smithereens. When the King's daughter had placed her stall in the street, they came the carts broke everything. She began to cry and said: "Ah, God, how will I pay for the pots !." But in this way the king had wanted to force her to marry the captain; but instead it was restored by the potter and asked him if he would lend to her yet. He said no, first he had to pay for the stuff as last time. Then she went to her father and cried and lamented and said he wanted to leave the world. He told her to go in the woods would have built a small house where she would be all his life and he would cook for every one, without ever taking money. So he built the little house in the woods, the door hung a sign that said: "Today for free, pay tomorrow." There she remained a long and fun word spread that in the woods there was a girl who fed him for free, as a sign said out the door. He also learned the hunter and he thought: "It 'just what it takes for you that you are poor and have no money." He took his gun and backpack in which there was still all he had taken from the castle as he went into the forest, and found the hut with the sign: "Today for free, pay tomorrow." He had put on the sword with which he had cut off the head of three giants; thus he entered the hut and he asked for something to eat. He was charmed by the sight of this girl, as beautiful as the sun. She asked him where he was from and where he was going, and he replied, "Around the World." Then she asked him where he got that sword, on which was the name of his father. He asked if it was the king's daughter, and she said yes. "With this sword," said he, "I cut off the heads of three giants." And as evidence taken from the bag languages ​​and also showed her the slipper, and the corner of shawl and the shirt piece. Full of joy, she said it was her liberator. Then they went along the old king; the girl led him to his room and told him that the hunter was the one who had really set her free from the giants. And when the old king saw all the evidence, he could no longer doubt, and he said that he agreed, and that the girl was to become his wife; and she was heartily glad. Then they dressed him as if he were a foreign lord, and the king made a great feast imbandire. A table, the captain sat on the left of the princess, while the hunter sat on the right, and the captain thought he was a foreign lord came to visit. When they had eaten and drunk, the old king said to the captain who had to solve a question: if one claimed to have killed three giants and he were asked where the languages, and then had to find that the heads not there were none , how was it possible? The captain said: "I do not have had." - "Such as!" said the king. "Every animal has its own language." And he likewise asked what punishment deserved that one. The captain replied, "He deserves to be torn to pieces." The king said he had pronounced his verdict: the captain was put in prison and torn to pieces, while the princess married the hunter. Then he brought his father and mother, who lived happily with him, and took the reign of the old King's death.
The Dog and the Sparrow	551	248	Italian	A mastiff had a master that made him go hungry. When tired out, more, went away all sad. On the way he met a sparrow that said, "Brother dog, why are you so sad?" - "I'm so hungry," she said, "and I have nothing to eat." Then the sparrow said, "Dear brother, come with me to the city: you sfamerò." So they went together into the town, and as they passed by a butcher's shop, the sparrow said to the dog: "Stop here I peck you down a piece of meat." He rested on the bench, looked around in case anyone was watching, and by dint of pecks and tugs managed to drop a piece that was on the verge. The dog snapped and ran into a corner and devoured it. "Now come with me to another shop," said the sparrow. "I want to be able to tear off another piece, so you sated." When the dog had devoured the second piece, the sparrow asked, "Brother dog, you had enough now?" - "Meat, I've eaten enough," replied the other, "but I have not had bread." And the sparrow: "You'll have that too, come with me." She led him up to a bakery and with his beak he rolled down a couple of sandwiches; Then, as the companion he wanted more, she took him to another shop and dropped more bread. When the dog had eaten, the sparrow asked, "Brother dog, have you had enough now?" - "Yes," he replied, "let's go a bit 'for a walk outside the walls." So he went out upon the road. It was hot and after a while 'the dog said, "I'm tired and would sleep happy." - "Very well," said the sparrow, "do in the meantime I will perch on a branch." The dog lay down on the road and fell fast asleep. While he slept a trooper arrived on a cart with three horses loaded with two casks of wine. But the sparrow saw that was not going to deviate from the track where the dog lay and cried "Carter did not do it, otherwise I will make in misery!" But the carter, grumbling to himself ': "You will not be sure you bring me in misery." He snapped the whip and drove his cart on the dog, which was crushed by the wheels. Then the sparrow cried, "You killed my dog ​​brother, will cost chariot and horses." - "Yes, wagon and horses!" said the Carter. "For what harm can you do me?" and he went on. Then the sparrow crept under the cover of the cart, and pecked at the bung of one of the two barrels until, he managed to take it off and all the wine is poured without the carter seeing it. When she finally turned around, he saw that the cart was dripping; He examined the barrels and found that it was empty. "Oh, poor me!" exclaimed. "Yes, but not yet enough!" said the sparrow; He flew on the head of a horse and put both his eyes. At this sight, the carter pulled out his hatchet to hit the bird, but it flew and the carter struck on the head the horse fell down dead. "Oh, poor me!" exclaimed. "Yes, but not enough!" said the sparrow; and when the carter continued with the two horses, she again crept under the blanket of the wagon and began to peck at the cap of the second barrel, so that, all of the wine is poured on the way. When the carter saw this, he shouted again: "Oh, poor me!" But the sparrow replied: "Yes, but not enough!" And she perched on the second horse head and put both his eyes. The carter came to raising ride a sickle, but the sparrow flew, and the blow took the horse collapsed. "Oh, poor me!" - "Yes, but not enough!" said the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse's head and put both his eyes. Wagoner, furious, threw himself on the sparrow, blindly, but failed to hit it and fell instead also his third horse. "Oh, poor me!" he shouted. "Yes, but not enough!" said the sparrow. "Now I'll take the misery in the house!" and he flew via.Il carter was forced to abandon the cart and went home full of anger and rage. "Ah," he told his wife, "what a misfortune happened to me! The Wine spilled on the street and died all three horses!" - "Ah, husband," she answered, "a wicked bird is installed in our house! He mustered all the birds of the world, and you are thrown on our wheat, in the attic, and if you are eating it!" He went up to the attic and found thousands of birds that had eaten up the grain; and the sparrow was in their midst. Then the carter exclaimed: "Oh, poor me!" - "Yes, but not enough!" said the sparrow. "Wagoner, will also cost you your life!" and he flew via.Il carter had lost all his possessions; He stepped into the room and sat down behind the stove, very angry. But the sparrow sat on the window sill and cried, "Wagoner, will also cost you your life!" The carter seized his hatchet and pulled her behind the sparrow, but it missed broke the window glass. The sparrow now hopped into the room and came to rest on the stove shouting "Carter will also cost you your life!" Crazy and blind with rage, the man smashed the stove and, as the sparrow flew from place to place, all its furnishings: mirror, chairs, benches, table, and then the walls of the house; but he was unable to hit him. But eventually he came to catch him. Then his wife said: "I have to kill him?" - "No," she cried he, "it would be too easy! Must die a much more cruel: I'll eat it." She swallowed it in one bite. But the sparrow began to fluttering in the body, and the flitting back in his mouth, stuck his head out and shouted, "Carter will also cost you your life!" Wagoner then gave his wife the hatchet and said, "Wife, kill the bird in my mouth." The woman struck, but missed her and hit her husband on the head, so that, they fell down dead. But the sparrow flew away.
The stolen farthings	1465	769	Italian	Once, at noon, a man sat at the table with his wife, his children and a friend who had come to visit them. While they were there, at the stroke of twelve o'clock, the stranger saw the door open, and a very pale child dressed in white. The baby did not look around and said nothing, but went straight into the next room. Soon after he came back and walked out the door, still in silence. The second and the third day he came back. At last the stranger asked the father to whom the beautiful child that came into the room at noon. -Do I have seen- replied the father-and do not know to whom sia.- The next day, when the boy came back, the guest showed it to his father, but did not see it, No, I saw the mother and children. Then the stranger got up, went to the room door, opened and looked inside. And he saw the child sitting on the ground, digging and seeking his fingers into cracks in the floor, but when he saw the stranger disappeared. Now he told what he had seen and described the child exactly; then the mother recognized him and said: Ah, it is my dear child who died a month ago! -. They took up the floorboards and found two farthings which the child had once received from its mother, he might give them to the poor. But, he had thought: "You can buy thyself a biscuit!" and he had kept the money hiding in the cracks in the floor. So he had no peace in the grave, and at midday was always looking for them. The parents gave the money to the poor, and that the child was never seen again.
Nail	1751	2039	Italian	A merchant had done good business at the fair; he had sold all his wares and his bag was full of gold and silver coins. Because he wanted to travel to get home before it was night, closed the money in the suitcase, he loaded it behind the saddle and mounted his horse. At noon we stopped in a town and, when you leave, the groom said, "Lord, to his horse missing a nail into the back left iron." "Well," said the merchant, "iron held for six leagues They have left to do. I'm in a hurry. "in the afternoon he dismounted to eat a bit 'of bread to his horse. The groom said, "Lord, his horse has no iron left rear paw. It should take him to the blacksmith." "No, for two leagues I have left to do, the horse can walk as is," replied the merchant . "I'm in a hurry." Just got back and left. But shortly after the horse began to limp, then stumble and not long after that he fell and broke his leg. The merchant was forced to leave there the beast, remove the suitcase, caricarsela shoulder and walk towards the house, where he arrived late at night. "All because of that damn nail," he said to himself. "It is the cause of all evils." When you hurry, take your time!
The shows	397	332	Italian	A poor man had so many children that he had already asked everyone to be the godfather; so, when the last born, she did not know who to turn to. Then all sad he went to bed and fell asleep. He dreamed that he must go to the door and invite him to be godfather the first person he met. When he awoke the man did what he had seen in his dream and he who met and that His godfather gave him a bottle of water saying: -With this water can heal those who are sick, but on condition that Death is the bedside of the sick; if it is at the foot of the bed, the patient must die-. Once he was the king's son, and the man pot, cured it, Death was standing at his bedside; so too was the second time; but the third, Death was at the foot of the bed and forced to die. Then the man would visit the godfather to tell him what happened, but when he arrived at his house he found a strange establishment. The first-floor broom and shovel if they gave a thrashing. He wondered where the godfather live broom replied: -At plan supra. When he came to the second flight, he saw a pile of dead fingers lying. Then he asked again where the godfather live finger and said: -At plan supra. On the third floor there was a large amount of dead heads, which they said again: -On the floor supra. The fourth saw fish on the stove frying and baked themselves. They, too, said: -On the floor supra. And when he came to the fifth floor he found himself in front of a room; He peeked through the keyhole and saw the godfather who had a pair of long horns. When he went in, the godfather got into in a hurry on the bed and covered her. The man said: -compare, when I arrived on the first floor, I saw a broom and beating each pallet of holy reasonable. -What fool! - he replied appears -they were the boy and the maid talking together.- -At the second flight I saw dead fingers lying to earth.- -What you're stupid! were roots of scorzonera.- -On the third floor was a pile of morto.- -Stupido heads! cabbages were cappucci.- -At the fourth, I saw the fish in the pan, sizzling and baking from soli.- He had just uttered these words that appeared fish, and they set out from s table. -And the fifth floor, I looked through the keyhole and saw that you, buddy, you had a couple of long horns long! - -But no that's not true! -
The little peasant	580	1535	Italian	There was a village where all the peasants were rich, but one they called the little peasant. He did not even have a cow, much less money to buy it; and say that he and his wife would so wish to have One day he said, "Listen, I have a good our gossip the carpenter will make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, you look like a calf like the others, and in time will grow into a cow." The woman also liked the idea, and appears carpenter formed and piallò for good calf, and painted it as befitted and did so with his head down like he was mangiando.Il morning, when they led the cows to pasture, a peasant called the pastor and said, "you see, I have here a calf, but is still too small and you have to take it." - "Is fine!" said the pastor; She picked him up, carried him to the pasture and left him on the lawn. The calf always remained standing like one which was eating, and the pastor said: "Soon will be able to run alone, just look how it eats!" In the evening, when he was going to drive the herd, he said to the calf, "If you stand here and rimpinzarti, you can also go with your legs; I no longer want to take you home in my arms." But the peasant stood in the doorway, waiting for her calf; when he saw the cows through the village, and the calf was missing, he said. The pastor replied: "It's still there eating, he would not stop and come with us." But the peasant said: "Stories! I must have my beast." They returned to the meadow together, but some one had stolen the calf, and it was gone. He said the pastor, "If he is gone." But the peasant said, "Do not drink it!" and he brought before the mayor the pastor who was convicted for his negligence him to give the peasant a cow for the calf smarrito.Finalmente the little peasant and his wife had the coveted cow; they were heartily glad, but they had no food and could not eat, so it had to be killed. They salted the meat, and the peasant went into the city to sell the skin, with the proceeds to buy a new calf. Along the way, he came to a mill, and there sat a raven; pity he took and wrapped in skin. But the weather was so bad, the wind blew and the storm raged, so he could go no farther, he returned to the mill and asked alloggio.La miller's wife was alone in the house and said to the peasant: "Lie down on the straw," and gave him a bit 'of bread and cheese. The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him The woman thought, "He is tired and sleeps." In the meantime came the priest, and the woman received him well, said: "My husband is not there, we can have a feast." The peasant listened, and when he heard about it withered away that he had to make do with bread and cheese. Then the woman served up four different things, roast meat, salad, cake and wine. They had just sat down at the table and were going to get to eat, there was a knocking outside. "Oh, God, it's my husband!" She quickly hid the roast in the pan, the wine under the pillow, the salad on the bed, the cakes under the bed and in the closet priest. Then he opened to her husband and said, "Thank God, you're here!" The miller saw the peasant lying on the straw, and asked, "What do you want this?" - "Ah," said the wife, "came during the storm and asked admission; then I gave him some bread and cheese and I told him to lie down on the straw." The man said: "I have nothing against it, just give me something to eat." The woman replied: "I only have bread and cheese." - "From 'as well," the man replied. He looked at the peasant and said, "Come and eat with me!" The peasant did not need to say it twice, got up and ate with him. Then the miller asked, "What have you got there in the skin?" The peasant said, "There is inside a soothsayer." - "you can also guess for me?" He asked the miller. "Why not?" He answered the peasant, "but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to himself." The miller was curious, he said: "Do guess." Then the peasant pinched the raven croaked on the head and that doing 'krr, krr'. "What he said?" He asked the miller. The peasant said, "First you said that there is the wine under the pillow." - "It will be the devil's stuff!" cried the miller, he went and found the wine. "Keep on!" he added. The peasant made the raven croak again, and said: "Second, he said that there is some in the pan." - "It will be the devil's stuff!" cried the miller, he went and found the roast. The peasant still questioned the soothsayer and said -Third, he says that there is some salad on the bed-. -It will be things of the devil! - cried the miller, went and found the salad. Finally, the peasant pinched the raven once more till he croaked, and said -Quarto: he said that there are some cakes under the bed. -It will be things of the devil! - he cried the miller, and went and found the cakes. The two sat down together at the table, but the miller's wife was frightened to death; She went to bed and took s, all the keys. The miller would have gladly fifth thing, but the peasant said: -Before quickly eat the four things, for the fifth is sgradevole-. They ate and then they bargained how much the miller for the fifth prophesy, until they agreed on three hundred crowns. Then the peasant once more pinched the head of raven croaked loudly. The miller asked, What did he say? -. The peasant answered: -He said that out of the closet hallway there is hidden the hell-. The miller said, -The Devil must go out -. He flung open the door, he asked for the keys to his wife and the peasant unlocked the closet. The parson ran out as fast as they could, and the miller said, -I have seen the black rascal -. At dawn the little peasant slunk off with three hundred crowns. At home the small peasant gradually launched built a beautiful house, and the peasants said: -The peasant has certainly been the gold where it snows and you bring it home to palate- Then he was called by the mayor to give an account of his wealth. He said: -In the city I sold the cow skin for three hundred scudi-. Hearing this the farmers also took advantage and ran home, killed all their cows and skinned to sell the skin dearly city. The mayor said: -First go my serva- When this came to the city from the merchant, do not give her more than three crowns for a skin, and when the others came, he did not give them so much, saying: -What I I do with all these skins? -. Then the farmers got angry because the peasant had taken them around; They wanted revenge and denounced him for fraud before the sindaco.Questi peasant condemned to death had to be thrown into the water in a perforated barrel. He was led out and brought a priest who had read him to the Office of the Dead. The others all had to get away and when the peasant looked at the priest he recognized the man who was the miller. So he said: -I will freed from the closet, you set me free from the barrel-. In that passed by a shepherd with his sheep; The peasant knew long ago that he wanted to become mayor, cried out: 'No, I do not do it! Even if the whole world wanted to, I do not, no! -. The shepherd hearing came up and asked: -What do you mean, what do not you want to do? -. The peasant said -Vogliono me Mayor, if the barrel, but I do not do it! -. The shepherd said: -E 'all? To become mayor I would get into subito-. The peasant said: -If you enter also becomes sindaco-. The shepherd was willing, and got in, and the peasant shut the top; then he took the flock and led him away. The parson went on to say that the mass had been said. Then they came and rolled the barrel into the water. When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd cried: -I am pleased to be mayor! I'm glad to be mayor! -. All believed that it was the peasant and said: -I believe we too, but first you have to take a look down there! -. And they rolled the barrel into the water. After that the peasants went home, and when they reached the village, they saw the little peasant who, happily, was leading a flock of sheep peacefully. The peasants were astonished and said -Contadinello where you come from? From the water perhaps? -. -Certo- answered the peasant -are went down, down, until I hit rock bottom. I broke down the barrel with a kick and slipped out: there were some beautiful meadows, where many lambs grazed, and I brought the flock with me.- The farmers said: -There are still? -. Oh, yes answered the peasant-more of your fabbisogno.- They went together to the river and clouds in the blue sky there were those who call themselves sheep and they were reflected in the water. The peasants cried already -Vediamo sheep on the bottom! -. The mayor came forward and said -Scenderò first to take a look; if all goes well will chiamerò-. He dived and water made "plump !." They believed that he called them shouting-Down! - and they all rushed back in a hurry. So the village was dead, and the peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.
The crow	882	401A	Italian	There was once a mother who had a little girl and still had to carry her. One day the child was restless; Mom could say what she wanted, but she would not be quiet. Then she became impatient, and as, the ravens were flying around the house, opened the window and said: -I wish you were a raven and would fly away, so I would tranquilla-. He had just spoken these words that the child was changed into a raven and flew from her arms out the window. He flew away, and no one could reach her, and took refuge in the depths of a forest, where he remained a long time. One day a man was passing through the forest and heard the raven crying, and followed the voice; When he approached the raven said: -I am a princess of the royal family, but I was haunted, and you can liberarmi-. -What do I do? - the man asked. -It 'in that house over there; there is an old woman who will offer you food and drink. But you take nothing, because the drink contains the sleeping pill and you can not break free. In the garden, behind the house, there is a large pile of peat: you have to be up there waiting for me. I'll come at two in the afternoon in a carriage drawn by four white horses; but if you sleep rather than watch, I will not be liberata.- The man promised that he would do all she asked, but the raven said, Ah, I know that thou wilt not deliver! You accept something from the woman-. The man once more promised that he would not touch anything either to eat or to drink. But when he entered the house the old woman came up and said, Oh, how faint you Come and refresh yourself, eat and bevete-. No, he answered the man-not want No, Drink No, mangiare.- But she gave him no peace, and said. -If you do not want to eat at least drink a sip from the glass; one is nothing number-. He was persuaded, and took a sip. In the afternoon, about two o'clock, he went out into the garden, the heap of tan, and he wanted to wait for the raven. As she stood there suddenly felt very tired; He did not want to lie down, only she could not help it and had to do it for a while; But he did not fall asleep. But as soon as he was lying down, the closed eyes, he fell asleep and slept in a sleep so deep that nothing in the world could wake him. At two o'clock the raven came into the carriage with four white horses, but it was very sad and said: -I know already that dorme-. And, when he went into the garden and saw him lying on the pile of peat, asleep. When he was in front of him, he got out of the carriage, began shaking him and calling him, but he did not wake. Finally, by dint of shouting, he managed to wake him up and said, -I see well that today you can not break free, but tomorrow I will return again in a carriage drawn by four lizards; But I beg you not to take anything that offers the woman, No, No to eat, from drink-. No, he replied certamente-. But Crow said: Ah, I know that you take something! -. The next day, around noon, the old woman came and asked him why he had not eaten or drank anything. He answered! -I do not want No, no eating, drink-. But the old woman brought some food: put the dish under your nose, so that the scent went up at his nostrils, and even managed to convince him to take another sip. At two o'clock the man went into the garden to the tan heap and wanted to wait for the raven, but once felt so tired that his limbs no longer support him; There was nothing to do, he had to lie down and get some sleep '. When the raven in the carriage with four brown horses, she was very sad again, and said: -I know already that dorme-. When he came before him, he found him asleep; got out of the carriage, she shook him and tried to wake him; It was more difficult than the previous day, but in the end he succeeded. Then the crow said, -I see well that today you can not get rid of; tomorrow afternoon at two o'clock, I will return one last time; my horses and my coach will be blacks. But you do not accept anything from the old, n, to eat, or anything to drink-. -No, certamente- he said. But Crow said: Ah, I know that you take something! -. The next day the old woman came and asked why he had not eaten No, drank nothing. He said, -I do not want No, no eating, drink-. But the old woman said she had to at least try something, it was so good! Did he die of hunger? So he let himself be persuaded and even took a sip. When it was time, he went into the garden to the tan heap and waited for the King; but he became still more weary than on, hold on, lay down and slept like a stone. At two o'clock the raven came a carriage drawn by four horses blacks, and even the coach was black and so is everything else. But he was very sad and said: -I know that he is asleep and can not liberarmi-. When he arrived he found him asleep. He shook him and called him but could not waken him, still sleeping. Then he stood beside a bread could eat as much as he wanted without seeing decreases; then a piece of meat: this could also eat as much as he wanted without subside; Finally he puts next to a bottle of wine he could drink as much as he wanted without the diminished wine. Then he took off the gold ring on his finger and put it in to him, there was engraved his name. Lastly, she laid a letter beside him wherein was written what she had given him, and that you could never eat; it was also written -I see very well that here you can not get rid of; but if you still want to do it, come to the golden castle of Stromberg; there you will free me, I know of certo-. After giving him all these things, he got into the carriage, and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg. When the man awoke and saw that he had slept, he was sad at heart, and said, -Of course passed out here and I have not liberata-. His eyes fell on things beside him, and read the letter wherein was written how things went. Then he got up and went out to go to the golden castle of Stromberg, but he did not know where he was. After he had walked part of the world, when he arrived in a dark forest, and walked for fourteen days without finding the way out. It was once more evening, and he was so tired that he lay next to a bush and fell asleep. The next day he went on his way and in the evening, when he wanted to lie down again next to a bush, he heard screams and moans and not pot, sleep. And when was the time when people light the candles, he saw one glimmering, got up and went towards it. He came to a house which seemed very small, there was in front of a large giant. He thought, "If I go likely cost me my life, but try it the same-. He walked over and when the giant saw him, he said: -Come own way, I have not eaten anything for a while: you'll eat for dinner! -. - Leave stare- said the man-if you want to eat, I have something that's good for te.- -If you said the so- -I giant goes bene.- entered, sat down at the table and the man took out the bread, wine and meat that never end; so both of them ate to his heart. Then he said to the giant: -Do you tell me where the golden castle of Stromberg? -. the giant replied -Andrò to see my map, on which are all cities, villages and case-. he brought out the map which he had in his room and looked for the castle, but there was not. -I said-above import , in a closet, I have some still larger maps: I'll see if I can find là.- They went to see, but to no avail. He wanted to continue his journey, but the gigant and begged him to wait a few days, until his brother came back, he was gone for something to eat. He had a map, they tried one more time together, and surely they would find the castle. The man waited and when the giant's brother returned he said he did not know exactly, but still believed the golden castle of Stromberg it were on paper. All three still ate once their fill, then the second giant said -Vado to see if there is on my paper-. But there was new. Then he said that above had a room full of maps, and had to go and see there. When he brought down, they began again to search and finally found the golden castle of Stromberg; but it was a thousand miles away. -How will I get there? - the man said. -I have two hours of time-said the giant. -I take you from nearby, but then I have to go home to nurse our bambino.- The giant took roughly a hundred hours from the castle and said, now I have to go back, the rest of the road can do you- . Oh yes! - the man answered very well -I can! - Before taking leave, the man said again, -Sfamiamoci for good-. They ate together, then the giant greeted him and he returned home. But man went night and day forward, until she came to the golden castle of Stromberg. But the castle was on a glass mountain, on which he saw the young girl haunted by carriage; he wanted to join her, but every time he tried always slipped down. So he was saddened and thought to himself, -The best thing you can do is to build yourself a hut here; food and drink There is a lack not you. So he built himself a hut and stayed for a year; and every day saw the King's carriage on top of the mountain, but could not climb up to her. One day he saw three giants who were fighting and called them -God be with you! -. At that cry they stopped but, seeing no one, began to beat with great ferocity. He cried out again May God be with you! -. Those stopped again, looked around, but as they saw no one they went on fighting. Then he cried for the third time May God be with you! - and thought, "I must go and see that intentions have those three." He went to them and asked why they were beaten up. Then one said that he found a stick with it if it was beating on a door, it swung open; the second said he had found a cape whenever he put it, he was invisible, but the third said he had found a horse with which you could go on the glass mountain. Then the man said: -I want to trade with you three things; really money I have not, but I have other things more. But first I must try to see if you told the truth-. Then they put him on horseback, they put the coat on him and the staff in your hand; and when he had everything, they could no longer see him. Then he loaded them beaten and yelled, -Now you're happy? - and rode on the glass mountain. When he came to the castle he found it closed; Then he struck the door with his stick, and soon the door opened. He came in, went up the stairs, and into an upper room, where the maiden had before s, a wine full of golden cup; But she could not see the man because he was wearing the coat. And when he was in front, he drew from his finger the ring she had given him, and threw it into the cup so that it rang. Then she cried -E 'my ring! There must be, therefore, the man who will rescue me! -. They searched the whole castle, but did not find him, because he had come, he sat on the horse and thrown off the mantle. When they came out the door, they saw him and shouted for joy. He dismounted and took the princess in his arms; and she kissed him and said, now you really freed me! -. Then they celebrated the wedding and they lived happily together.
The beloved Orlando	533	1119	Italian	There was once a woman who was a witch and had two daughters, one ugly and wicked, was his daughter; the other, good and beautiful, it was her stepdaughter. And she loved so much the first, he hated the second. One day the stepdaughter had a beautiful apron liked each other, so that the latter, jealous, she went to her mother and said: -That apron must be mio-. -He 'quiet, my child, I avrai- said the old woman. -Your sister has deserved death for some time, and this night, while sleeping, I will come and cut off her head. Bada just lie down behind it and push it very well on davanti.- The poor girl would be lost if, by chance, he had not found in a corner from which pot, hear everything. When it was time to go to sleep, he left to sit down before the bad sister, and that he put behind, as he wished; but as this was sleeping, he lifted her up and put her on the front near the edge of the bed, taking her place on the other side. During the night came sneaking the old: in his right hand had an ax, while fingering the left if there was someone at the front; then he grabbed the ax with both hands and cut off his head to his daughter. When she was gone, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, whose name was Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, he said: -Listen, my beloved, we have to get away as quickly as possible: the stepmother wanted to kill me, but he hit his daughter. When you day and sees what he has done, we perduti-. Orlando said: -But we have to take away the magic wand, otherwise, if c'insegue, we can not salvarci-. The girl took the magic wand, then grabbed the head of the dead and dropped to the ground three drops of blood, one in front of the bed, in the kitchen, on a scale. And she eloped with her lover. In the morning, when the witch got up, he called his daughter to give her the apron, but that did not come. Then he shouted: -Where are you? -. -Here on the scale, sweeping! - said a drop of blood. The old woman went out but saw no one on the stairs and shouted again: -Where are you? -. -Here in the kitchen that I warm! - the second drop of blood. The old woman went to the kitchen, but found none; then he cried for the third time: -Where are you? -. Ah, I'm here in bed fast asleep! - said the third drop of blood. She entered the room and went to bed. And what did he see? His daughter was bathed in a pool of blood, and she cut her head. The witch flew into a rage, rushed to the window and, as he could see far away, he saw the girl who ran away with his beloved. -Do you have already done quite a bit of road-cried-but it will not help: I ​​will join the same! - He put his seven-league boots and, after taking a couple of steps, had already reached them. But the girl, knowing that it would pursue them, with the magic wand transformed his dear Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck swimming on the lake. The witch stood on the bank and tried to lure the duck throwing bread crumbs; but it does not let himself be seduced and in the evening, the old had to go home without having accomplished anything. The girl and her lover resumed their human side and went all night until daybreak. Then she turned into a beautiful flower in the midst of a thorn hedge, and dear Roland into a fiddler. It was not long before the witch came striding and said to the musician, violinist -Caro, I can capture that beautiful flower? -. -Certamente- he said -intanto I suonerò.- And while the old was introduced fury among thorns trying to achieve the flower, who knew the violinist began to play, and she, like it or not, had to dance, because, It had an enchanted dance. He continued to play, and the witch was forced to dance incessantly; the thorns tore the clothes off, the pricked and flayed, until at last she lay down dead. Freed witch, Orlando said: -Now go to my father to prepare the wedding albums. -Intanto I will stay here to aspettarti- said the girl -and because no one recognizes me, I want to turn into a stone rossa.- Orlando So he left, and the girl remained in the field waiting for him, turned red stone. But when Orlando came home, he was fascinated by another and forgot his real girlfriend. The poor long-expected, but saw that he was returning, he became sad and turned into a flower, thinking that someone would trampled. But it happened that one pascolasse shepherd with his sheep in that field; past the flower and, for she was so beautiful, she caught him, took him by s, and put it in his closet, saying: -I have never found a flower so nice-. But from that day they befell the beautiful home of the pastor! When he got up in the morning, all the household chores were already offerred: the room was swept and dusted, the fire lit, filled the bucket in its place; and at noon, when he came home, the table was already served a nice lunch. He did not understand how it was possible, since he did not see ever living soul; and although he liked to be served so well, he ended coll'impaurirsi and went to seek advice from a fortune teller. She said: -There is under a magic tomorrow morning, at dawn, looks good if no movement in the room; If you see something, throw on a white cloth in a hurry: the spell is romperà-. The shepherd did as he was told, and the next morning he saw open up the closet and the flower come out. On a leap he threw a white cloth over. Immediately he stopped the magic: in front of him was a beautiful girl, the one who had taken care of his house. And it was so beautiful that the pastor asked her if she would be his bride, but she refused because she wanted to remain faithful to the dear Roland; but he promised not to go away and continue to take care of the house. Meanwhile approaching the day when Orlando was married and, according to ancient custom, were felt all the girls in the country, why they are present, to sing in honor of the couple. The faithful maiden, when she heard that her dear Roland was about to marry another, grieved so much that he thought the heart would break, and he did not go there; but eventually he was forced there. When he touched her singing, she pulled back, until he found himself to be the last; then he could no longer escape and sang. But hearing it Orlando jumped up and shouted: -This is the true bride and do not want any other! -. He had recognized the voice, and all that he had forgotten he had returned to the heart. Thus the faithful girl married her dear Roland, and grief turned to joy.
Dr. Knowall	928	1641	Italian	Once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with two oxen a load of wood into town and sold her to a doctor for two shields. As he was being paid the doctor was sitting at the table, and the farmer saw that he ate and drank so well that there was to leave the heart, and could have done a doctor too. So he stayed there a little while and then asked if he could become one. Oh, yes! - he answered the doctor-is easily done. First you have to buy a spelling book, that is a book with a rooster on the title; then sell the wagon with oxen and with the proceeds bought clothes and everything you need in a doctor; Finally, have a sign painted with the words: "I am Dr. Satutto- and let it hang high above the doorway of the house tua.- The peasant did everything that he had been advised. He had not begun to be much to do doctor, when they stole the money to a great lord. These heard about doctor Knowall who lived in this village, and he had to know where was the money. Then the lord made ready the carriage, went to the village and asked if he were Doctor Knowall. Yes, it was. Then he had him and bring back the stolen money. Yes, he said, but would also be his wife, Grethe. the gentleman agreed and, putting them in a carriage, and they set out together. When they arrived the noble castle, the table was ready, and the doctor had to sit down and eat with them. Yes, he said, but also his wife, Grethe, and sat down at the table with her. When the first servant came with a heaping tray of food, the farmer he gave it to his wife elbow and said -Ghita, this is the first-. And he meant that was what brought the first dish. The servant, however, thought he wanted to say: "It 'the first ladro- and since he really was, he was afraid, and said to his comrade outside -The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill said that I was the first! -. the second would not go in, but I was forced. When he entered the dish, the peasant nudged his wife and said: -Ghita, this is the second-. the second was frightened and hurried out. the third did not fare better, for the peasant again said -Ghita, this is the terzo-. the fourth had to bring a covered dish, and the landlord told the doctor he had to demonstrate his skill, and guess what was beneath the shrimp. the farmer looked at the dish, not knowing what to say, exclaimed: Ah, poor Crabb -. heard that, the man shouted: -Look, I know! Then you know also who has the money! -. the servant was terribly frightened and sign to the doctor to come out for a moment. Outside, the confessed all four of stealing de naro they were willingly restore it and give him a large sum in addition, if he betrayed them: it was their life. Then they took him where he had hidden the money. The doctor agreed, came back and said, -Sir, now I want to try in my book where hidden the money-. But the fifth servant crept into the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. These opened his spelling book and flipped through it here and there, looking for the rooster. Since it did not find him right away, he said: -Eppure you are there, you have to get out! -. What was in the stove thought that he was talking with him, he jumped out in fear and cried -Quest'uomo knows everything! -. Dr. Knowall showed to the landlord where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it; He was rewarded by both sides much money, and became a famous man.
Faithful John	49	516	Italian	Once upon a time an old king who was ill and thought, "This will be my deathbed!" Then he said: "Bring my faithful John." Faithful John was his favorite servant, and was so called because he was faithful all his life. When he was at his bedside, the king said: "My faithful John, I feel my end approaching, and have no fear for my son. He is still at an age where often do not know which path to choose, and if you do not promise to teach him all he needs to know, and to be his guardian, I can not close my eyes in peace. " Faithful John replied, "Do not forsake him, and will serve him with fidelity, even if it costs my life." Then the old King said, "I die in comfort and peace." He added: "After my death, thou shalt show him the whole castle: all the rooms, the halls, the underground and the treasures that are in it. Only one room you celargli: the one where the picture of the princess from the roof d ' gold, if he accidentally saw her, felt for her a burning love, would fall unconscious and go through great danger you have to preserve it from that. " And when Faithful John had once more given his promise, the old king was silent, but laid his head on the pillow and morì.Quando was grave, Faithful John told the young man what he had promised his father on his death bed and said: "I will keep and certainly I will be faithful, even if it costs my life. " The young man exclaimed crying: "I also will never forget your loyalty." When the mourning, Faithful John said: "It 's time for you to see your good things; I want to show the father's castle." It took him about everywhere, up and down, and let him see all the riches, and the magnificent apartments, not only he opened the room that contained the portrait. The portrait was placed so that opening the door you looked straight; He was so admirably painted to seem alive and there was nothing in the world more charming or more beautiful. But the young king noticed that Faithful John always walked past this one door, and said, "Why, never open this one?" - "There is something inside that would scare you," she replied the servant. But the king replied: "I have seen all the palace, and I will know what's in here." He went to the door and tried to open it by force. Then Faithful John held him back and said, "Before he died, I promised your father that you would not see that which is in the chamber, it might bring the greatest misfortune." - "No," he replied the young King, "if it will be my ruin, I will have no rest day or night until I will have not seen; I will not leave here until you will not have opened." Faithful John then saw that there was nothing more to do, and with a heavy heart and many sighs, sought out the key from the great bunch. Then he opened the bedroom door and went in first, thinking that the king could not see the portrait; but he was too curious, stood on tiptoe and looked over his shoulder. And when he saw the image of the girl, so beautiful and shining golden, he fell to the ground unconscious. Faithful John lifted him up, carried him to bed worried and thought: "The misfortune occurred, Lord God, how will it?" Then he reinvigorated with wine until, he recovered, but the first thing that the young King said was, "Oh, who are those beautiful portrait?" - "It 's the princess of the Golden Roof," answered faithful John. Then the king said: "My love for her is so great that if all the leaves on the trees were tongues, they could not declare it. Despite the win her risk my life, you are my most Faithful John, you must help me." The faithful servant thought hard how to act, since, reaching the sight of the King was something very difficult. At length he thought of a way, and said to the king: "Everything about her is of gold: tables, chairs, plates, cups, bowls, and household furniture. Among your treasures are five tons of gold; please make work one of the goldsmiths of the kingdom, who make all manner of vessels and utensils, all sorts of birds, fairs and shows, with these things we will go and will try their luck. " The King ordered all the goldsmiths and made them work day and night, until at last the most splendid things were prepared. Faithful John took everything was stowed on a ship, put on the dress of a merchant and did so well the king so as to make it unrecognizable. Then they sailed and sailed long for the sea until they came to the town wherein dwelt the princess of the faithful oro.Il roof John said to the king to stay on the ship, and wait. "Maybe," he said, "I will bring the princess with me, so see that everything is in order, have the golden vessels set out and the whole ship decorated." Then he gathered together in his apron all kinds of gold objects, landed and went straight to the royal palace. When he entered the courtyard of the castle, there was to a beautiful girl, who had two golden buckets in her hand, drawing water. When she turned to carry away the sparkling water she saw the stranger, and asked who he was. Then he answered: "I am a merchant," and opened his apron, and let her look in. Then she cried, "Oh, what beautiful gold things!" He deposed the buckets and began to examine them one after another. Then he said, "The princess must see, the gold objects like them so much that it will buy you everything." She took his hand and led him to the upstairs, for it was the maid. When the princess saw the wares, quite he delighted and said: "It 'so beautifully worked, that I will buy them all." But Faithful John said, "I am only the servant of a rich merchant, what we have here is nothing compared to what my master has in his ship, and there will is the most artistic and most valuable ever He worked in gold. " She wanted to have everything brought to her, but he said: "To do this it takes many days, because there is a great deal of merchandise; it takes many rooms expose that your home would not be enough." Then her curiosity and longing were still more excited, until he said: "Lead me to the ship, I will go there myself, and behold the treasures of your master." Delighted, faithful John led her to the ship and the king when saw, believed that the heart would burst and pot, resist fatigue. She boarded the ship and the king led her inside, but faithful John remained with the helmsman and ordered the ship sailed: "Explain sail, till it fly like a bird!" However, the King showed her all the gold items one by one: the dishes, glasses, bowls, birds, and wild beasts and monsters. Several hours passed and she was seeing everything with such joy did not notice that the ship had left. When he looked at the last, she thanked the merchant and wanted to go home; but, come on deck, he saw that the ship was running in full sail on the high seas far from land. "Ah," cried frightened, "I have been betrayed! Are in the hands of a merchant: I'd rather die!" But the king took her hand and said: "I am not a merchant, but a king, not inferior to you by birth. If you've kidnapped by ruse was only for the great love I have for you. When I saw your portrait the first time, he fell to the ground unconscious. " On hearing these words, the princess of the Golden Roof was comforted; and he was inclined unto him, that she willingly consented to be his moglie.Ma while sailing on the high seas, the faithful John, who sat in the bow making music, saw three ravens in the air that came flying towards them. He stopped playing and listened to what they said, because he well understood. One cried, "Ah, it brings home the princess of the Golden Roof!" - "Yes," he replied the second, "but he has not!" And the third said, "But yes, it is with him in the ship!" Then the first began again: "What good will that do? When they land, the leap forward to meet a sorrel horse, then he will want to mount and if the horse will run away with him and rise up into the air, so that he will never see again his girl. " The second said: "There is no escape?" - "Oh yes, if one who is riding takes out the pistol which is tucked into the bridle of the horse and kills him, the young King will be saved, but who knows? Who knows it and tells it to him, turned to stone from the toe to knees. " Then the second said, "I know more than that even if the horse be killed, the young king did not keep his bride! When you go into the castle, find on a tray at a bridal garment will look like woven gold and silver but it will not be that of pitch and sulfur: if he put it burns to the bone. " The third said: "There is no escape?" - "Oh yes," replied the second, "if one grabs the shirt with gloves and throws it into the fire and burns it, the young King will be saved. But what good is it? Who knows it and tells it to him, become stone from knee to the heart. " Then the third said, "I know more than that even though burning the wedding shirt, the young King will still not have his bride! When, after the wedding, when the dancing begins and the young queen is dancing, will suddenly turn pale and fall down as dead. and if someone does not lift her up and draw three drops of blood from her right breast and spit them out again, she will die. But if someone knows and reveals it, he would become stone, from head to toe. " When the ravens had spoken of this together, they flew onwards, and Faithful John had well understood everything; but from that moment on was quiet and sad, for if he concealed his master what he had heard, these would be unfortunate, and if he had revealed it to him would have to sacrifice his life. Finally he said to himself ': "I will save my master, even if it bring destruction on myself." When they arrived on land, it happened that the raven had predicted, and a magnificent chestnut leaped before them. "Oh," he exclaimed the king, "bring me to my palace," and was about to mount; but the faithful John got before him, jumped quickly on it, drew the pistol from the holster, and shot. Then the other attendants of the King, who did not like the faithful John, cried: "What shameful to kill the beautiful animal that was to bring the king of the castle!" But the king said, "Be still and let him do is my most faithful John, he will have a good reason." Then they went to the castle and in the hall there stood a dish the bridal garment had settled, that it were made of gold and silver. The young king stepped forward to take it, but Faithful John pushed him away, seized it with gloves on, threw it into the fire and burned. The other attendants again began to murmur, and said: "Look, now even burning the King's bridal garment!" But the young king said: "It will have a good reason, let him do, is my most faithful John." Then the wedding was solemnized; The dance began, and the bride also took part. Faithful John was watchful and looked into her face. Suddenly she turned pale and fell to the ground as if dead. Then he ran to her, picked her up and took her to a room; He laid her down, and knelt and sucked the three drops of blood from her right breast, and spat them out. Immediately she breathed again and recovered herself, but the young King had seen this, and being ignorant why Faithful John had done it, was angry and cried: "Throw him in jail!" The morning Faithful John was condemned, and led to the gallows, and when he was up there and was about to be executed, said, "He must die, can speak again before its end; I also have this right?" - "Yes," he replied the king, "you have given." Then Faithful John said, "I am unjustly condemned, and have always been true." And she told him how she had heard the speech of the sea crows and decided to save his master; for this he had to do all what he had done. The king exclaimed, "Oh my most faithful John Grace! Grace! Take him down." But faithful John, barely spoke the last word he had fallen down lifeless and become a pietra.Il King and the Queen suffered great anguish, and the king said: "Ah, how ill I have requited great fidelity!" He lifted the stone statue and placed in his bedroom beside his bed. Every time he looked, he wept and said: "Oh, I could give you back your life, my faithful John!" Some time passed and the Queen bore twins, two sons who grew fast and were her delight. One day the Queen was at church and the two children played with his father, the king looked at the stone with great sadness, sighed and said: "Oh, I could give you back your life, my faithful John!" Then the stone began to speak and said: "Yes, you can give me your life if you are willing to give what you hold most dear." Then the king said, "To you I will give everything I have in the world!" The stone continued, "If your hand cut off the heads of thy two children and sprinkle me with their blood, I regain my life." The King was terrified when he heard that he himself must kill his dearest children, but he thought the great loyalty of faithful John, who had died for him, drew his sword and his hand cut off the children's heads. And when he had smeared the stone with their blood, life returned to it, and Faithful John stood once before, fresh and healthy. And he said to the king: "I want to reward your loyalty," and the children's heads taken, put them on again, and rubbed the wounds with their blood. In a moment the children came back healthy and resumed jumping and playing as if nothing had happened. The king was happy and when he saw the Queen coming he hid Faithful John and the two children in a large closet. When she entered, he said: "You have prayed in church?" - "Yes," he said the queen, "but I always thought of Faithful John who was so unfortunate for our fault." Then he said, "Dear wife, we can give him his life, but at the cost of sacrifice of our sons." The Queen turned pale, and the blood froze, but said, "We owe it to his great fidelity." And the king was rejoiced that she thought as he; He went and opened the cupboard, and brought forth children and faithful John. The king said, "Thank God he is delivered, and we still have our little sons." And he told her everything that had happened. Then they lived happily together until death.
The robber boyfriend	378	955	Italian	There was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter; and when she was of marriageable age she thought: "If a suitor as it should and the wife asks me, I will give it to him, in order to fix it." Now it happened that there came a suitor who seemed very rich; and the miller, finding nothing to say, he promised his daughter. But the girl did not love him as we must love a boyfriend, and was horrified at heart every time I looked at him and thinking of him. One day he said: -You are my fiancée and never come trovarmi-. The girl replied: -I do not know where your home-. -My house is out there, in the thick of Bosco- said the boyfriend. Then she began to make excuses and said: -Do not be able to find the road-. And he said: -You must come to me next Sunday, I already invited and why, you can find your way to strew of cenere-. On Sunday, when the girl was about to get in the way, she was very frightened. It fills the chickpeas and lentils pockets: the entrance of the forest had spread the ashes, but she followed her every step threw a few peas on earth right and left. He walked most of the day until they came to an isolated house in the thick of the forest. Inside there was none; He reigned the most profound silence. Suddenly a voice called out: -Scappa, bride, here live many ferocious and fearsome brigands! -. The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird locked in a cage. And again he cried: -Scappa, bride, here live many ferocious and fearsome brigands! -The beautiful bride went from one room into the house, but it was all empty and could not find a living soul. Finally he came in the cellar; there sat a decrepit old woman. -You can tell me if my boyfriend lives here? - asked the girl. Ah, poor bimba- said the old -six ended up in a den of murderers; your wedding will be your death: the robber will kill you. See, I had to put on a great kettle full of water. If you fall into their hands, they break you down, then make you boil and eat you. If you do not rescued six lost! - so the old woman hid behind a great cask and said: -He 'placid and do not move or you are doomed! We will escape when the robbers sleep: for a while it was waiting for the occasione-. He had just spoken these words that the robbers came home dragging with another girl; They were drunk and paid no attention to her cries and its cries. They made her drink three glasses of wine, one white, one red and one yellow; and her heart crashed. Then they tore off her beautiful clothes, put it on a table, they hacked the body beautiful and sprinkled with salt. The poor bride behind the barrel was terrified, afraid of having to suffer the same fate. One of the criminals noticed that the killed wore a gold ring on a finger and, failing to remove it immediately, took an ax and cut off the finger. But that squirted into the air and fell behind the barrel, just in the bride's lap. The robber took a light and went to look for him, but not pot, find. Then another said: -Have you looked behind the great cask? -. But the old woman cried -Venite to eat, you try tomorrow; the finger can not run away -. The robbers stopped to search and set about eating and drinking; but the old woman had paid them a sleeping potion in wine, so that they lay down ready-cellar, fell asleep and began to snore. Hearing them, the bride came out from behind the barrel, but had to step over all the sleepers lying in rows on the floor and had a great fear awaken any of them. But with God's help he managed to pass, went up with the old, and together they fled from the house of the killers. The wind had blown away the ashes, but the peas and lentils had sprouted and the moonlight showed them the way. They walked all night and came to the mill the next morning. The girl told her father everything that had happened. When it was the day of the wedding, the bridegroom also appeared; and the miller had invited all his relatives and friends. At the table each one had to tell a story. Then the bridegroom said: -Do you have nothing to tell, my heart? It tells something even you-. She answered -Racconterò a dream. I was walking through the woods and came to a house. Not a soul, but only a bird in a cage, who cried twice, "Run, bride, here live many ferocious and fearsome robbers!" - My Love, is but a sogno.- -Attraversai but all the rooms were empty. At last I went to the cellar, where I found an old decrepit. "I live here my husband?" I asked. But she replied: "Oh, poor child, you end up in a den of murderers! The boyfriend will kill you, will make you into pieces and then turn you cook and eat you." - -Amor My, is not that a sogno.- - But the old woman hid me behind a great cask, and as soon as I returned hidden bandits dragging with a maiden. They made her drink three varieties of wine: white, red and yellow; and her heart schiantò.- -Amor My, is not that a sogno.- -Then tore off her beautiful clothes, and, on the table, tore apart the beautiful body and sprinkled sale.- -Amor mine, it is not that a sogno.- -One of the robbers saw that she wore on his finger a gold ring, and since he could not pull it out, he took an ax and cut the finger. But that squirted into the air and fell behind the butt, right in my lap. And there qui.- So saying, he pulled it out and showed it to those present. The robber, who during the story had grown deadly white with fear, seeing would have escaped, but guests stopped him and handed him over to the court, where he was executed with all the bandwidth on its infamy.
The oven	1202	425A	Italian	In the days when wishing was still of some use, a prince was bewitched by an old witch, and shut up in an iron stove in a forest. They passed many years and no one could help him. One day happened in the forest, who had lost herself, and could not find her father's kingdom had wandered about for nine days, and then had come to be in front of the iron chest. Then he asked: -Donde come, and where are you going? -. She replied: -I lost the road that goes to the kingdom of my father and I can not go home again. Then a voice inside the iron stove said: -I will help you to get home quickly if you promise to do what I ask you. I am the son of a powerful king of your father, and you will marry. She was horrified and thought, "Good God, what do I do with this oven ?." But as she wanted to return home to her father, she promised to do what he wanted. The prince said: -You must return here with a knife and make a hole in the iron-. Then he gave her a companion who walked near her in silence, and took her home in two hours. The castle was great joy when she returned the princess, and the old King embraced her and kissed her. But she was very distressed and said: Dear father, what happened to me! I would not be back home by the great wild forest, if I had not stopped near a furnace; I had to engage me with him to return to rescue him and sposarlo-. The old King was terrified and was close to passing out because they had but this one daughter. So they decided to send in his place the miller's daughter, it was beautiful. The led in the woods, they gave her a knife and said to scrape the oven. So she scraped for twenty-four hours, but could not bring off one bit '. At daybreak, a voice in the oven: -I seem to begin to albeggiare- out. She replied: -It seems to me, as I hear my father-mill. -So you are the daughter of a miller: get out now and it 'come the principessa.- Then she went and told the old King that the fellow in the woods did not want her but her daughter. The old king was terrified and the princess cried. But there was the daughter of a swineherd, who was even prettier than the miller; they decided to give her a gold coin, because, to come instead of the princess. So they were taken thither and she also had to scrape for twenty-four hours, with no result. When day broke, a voice in the oven: -I seem to begin to albeggiare- out. She replied: -It seems to me, I fancy I hear the phone to my father-. -So you're the daughter of a swineherd: get out now and it 'come the princess; and tell her I will have what I promised; but if it is, in his kingdom and ruin everything fall apart, and it will not remain stone on pietra.- heard this, the princess began to cry: there was no other solution was to keep the promise. He took leave of his father, he pocketed a knife and went into the woods. As he arrived he began to scrape, iron gave way and, after two hours, he had already made a small hole. Then she peeped in and saw a beautiful young man; ah, she liked everything glittering gold! She went on scraping, and made the hole so able to get out. Then he said: -You are mine and I am yours; You are my bride and I have liberato-. But she begged him to let her go once again to her father; Prince let her long, not to say more than three words and then come back to him. She went home, but he said more than three words: the iron stove disappeared immediately and was taken far away over glass mountains and sharp swords. But the prince was set free, and was no longer a prisoner. She took leave from his father, he took some money, but not so much, went back into the woods and tried the oven, but was unable to find it. He looked for him for nine days and was so hungry that she did not know how to do, because he had nothing to eat. When it was evening, he climbed a tree, and her mind to spend the night because he was afraid of wild beasts. When midnight drew near, he saw a small light far away and thought, "Ah, there I should be saved!". Then he got down and went towards the light, and meanwhile prayed. He arrived in an old house, all around had grown grass, and before there was a pile of firewood. "Ah, whither have I come!" I think. He looked through the window and inside he saw nothing but big and little toads; but there was a table set with wine and a tempting roast meat, and plates and glasses were of silver. Then she took courage and knocked. Immediately the toad Queen shouted: Oh Donzelletta green and tiny, from dry dog ​​paw haggard, hey just you, listen to me who's out there I have to say! -You stepped forward and opened the door a rospina. When she entered, they all welcomed him and told him to sit down. They asked -Donde come? Where are you going?-. She related all that had happened, and that having failed to obey only say three words, the furnace had disappeared, and now she was about to seek him over hill and dale until, he had not found. Then the old queen said: -Oh Donzelletta green and tiny, from dry dog ​​paw haggard, hey just you, listen to listen to just the box you have to carry me! -The beast went and brought the box. Then they gave food and drink to, and took her to a nice bed already, which felt like silk and velvet, she lay down there, and slept. When daylight came, he got up; the old queen took three pins from the big box and gave them to him, because, take them with s; It would need to cross a high glass mountain, three sharp swords and a great lake; If she did, she would get her husband. Then she gave her three objects that had the greatest care of, namely, three large needles, a plow-wheel, and three nuts. So she went away and when he came to the glass mountain which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first behind her feet, then went and got over, and there hid them in a place that kept in mind. Then he came to the three piercing swords, jumped on the wheel, and rolled over. Finally he came to a great river, and after crossing it, in a big, beautiful castle. She went and asked: was a poor girl, and would have service. But he knew that there was the prince that she had freed from the oven in the great forest. Then it was taken as a servant for a miserable wage. Now the prince had another beside her and wanted to marry her, he thought that she had died long ago. In the evening, when he had finished washing up, she put her hand in his pocket and found the three nuts which had given the old toad. She cracked one with her teeth and wanted to eat the kernel; but look! There was a stately royal gown. When the bride heard, he came and offered to buy it: it was not a suit that befitted a servant. She said no, she would not sell; however if you would let her sleep one night in the room of the groom, he would give it to him. The bride gave her permission because he never had a dress so beautiful. When evening came, he said to her boyfriend: -That silly girl will sleep in the room tua-. -If you're happy, are anch'io- they said. But she gave him to drink wine, when he had put a sleeping pill. So the two spent the night in the same room, and he slept so soundly that she could not waken him. She wept the whole night, shouting: -I released in the wild forest of the oven, for you I walked over a glass mountain, three sharp swords and a great lake; and now that I found you, you do not want to hear me. The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night, and in the morning informed their lord. The next evening, when she had washed, she opened the second nut, and inside was a far more beautiful dress; when the bride saw that she wanted to also buy this. But the girl would not take money, and begged that she might once again sleep in the prince's bedroom. The bride, however, gave him a sleeping pill and he slept so soundly that he could hear nothing. The maid wept all night and cried: -I released in the wild forest of the oven, for you I walked over a glass mountain, three sharp swords and a great lake; and now that I found you, you do not want to hear me. The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night, and in the morning informed their lord. And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the third nut, and inside was a beautiful dress which was gold. When the bride saw that she wanted to have it, and the girl gave it to him on condition of being able to sleep for the third time in the prince's bedroom. But the prince stood in guard, and threw on the ground sleeping pills. And when she started crying and shouting -Amor mine, I delivered you from the wild forest oven-Prince jumped up and said: -You are mine and I am your-. And that same night got into the carriage with her, and the false bride took away his clothes so that she could not get up. When they came to the great river, they crossed it by boat, in front of the three piercing swords went up to the plow-wheel, and the glass mountain they thrust the three needles. So finally they came to the old house; but, as they entered, he turned into a great castle: toads, freed from the spell, were princes and princesses, and they were in a big party. They were married, and they remained in the castle, which was much larger than that of the bride. But since the old king complained of having to live alone, they went to take it, and so they had two kingdoms and lived happily together.
The man made young again	1396	753	Italian	At the time when our Lord still walked this earth, one evening stopped with St. Peter by a blacksmith, and was well received. Now it happened that entered into the house of a poor beggar, hardly pressed by age and infirmity, and begged alms of the smith. St. Peter had compassion and said, -Lord and Master, if you please, cure his bad, because, can earn a living from s,-. The Lord said gently -Fabbro, lend me thy forge, and put coal: I want to rejuvenate the old infermo-. The blacksmith was ready, St. Peter blew the bellows, and when the beautiful high flames flared up, our Lord took the little old man and pushed him in the forge in the midst of fiery red, so that he glowed like a rosebush, and praised God with a loud voice. Then the Lord went to the quenching tub, put inside the little man red-hot, so that the water covered them, and when he was gunned down for good, gave him his blessing. Immediately the little man sprang nimbly out, straight and healthy as if he had twenty years. The smith, who had watched everything closely and attentively, invited them all to dinner. He had a hump old mother-in-law and half blind, who went to the youth and with great earnestness asked if the fire had burnt him much. He answered that he had never been so well: the flames had been in cool dew. These words echoed in the ears of the old all night and early in the morning, when the Lord had gone on his way after thanking the blacksmith, they believed he could he make his old mother-in-law, as he had watched everything right, and then it came to things within its competence. So he asked his mother-in-law if she even wanted to jump like a girl of eighteen. -Of all my heart - she said, because out of it so well. So the smith made a great fire, and thrust the old woman turned herself this way and that, and uttered terrible cries. -He 'quiet! because, screaming and jumping about that? Now I blow for good! - It pulled back until the bellows, were burnt all the rags. The old woman cried out without ceasing, and the smith thought, "There's something wrong !." He pulled it out and threw it in the tub. Then she screamed so loudly that the above heard the blacksmith's wife and his daughter they both ran down the stairs and saw the old woman screamed and screamed, all cramped in the tub, with wrinkled face, full of wrinkles and distorted. Thereupon the two, who were both with child, they were so terrified that that very night, gave birth to two creatures who did not look like men but apes; They ran into the woods, and the race of apes descended from them.
carnation	720	652	Italian	There was once a queen who could not give birth to children by the will of our Lord. Every morning she went into the garden to pray that God would make her a gift of a son or a daughter. And behold, an angel came down from heaven and said, -Rallegrati, you will have a son whose wishes will be realized: anything in the world he wants, the avrà-. She went to the king to announce the happy news, and when it was time, she gave birth to a son with great joy of the king. Every morning she went to wash in the park with your child, and one day, when he was already a bit 'grown up, she happened to fall asleep as she had in her arms. On that came the old cook; He knew that the wishes of the child would be achieved and kidnapped him. Then he took a chicken, and the slew of blood splashed her apron and the robe of the queen. Then he took the child in a hidden place where she did breastfeed by a nurse, and ran to the king to accuse the queen left esserselo swept away by the wild beasts. The king, seeing the blood on his apron, believed it and was furious to the point that he built a high tower, where no light penetrated; there locked up his wife by walling the door. She had to stay there seven years without food nor drink, and die there of hunger. But God sent two angels from heaven in the form of white doves, which flew to her twice a day, to bring them food until the end of the seven years. But the cook thought, "If some child's wish come true and I'm here, I might be ruined." He left so the castle and went to the child who was old enough to talk. -Desidera a beautiful castle-said-with a garden and all that occorre.- And, as the child had expressed the desire, here appear the castle. After a bit 'of time, the cook said, -Do not okay that you're so alone, you want a nice girl like compagna-. The Prince expressed the desire and the girl appeared before him, as beautiful as no painter could paint it. The two young men played together loving each other tenderly, and the old cook went out hunting like a gentleman. But it occurred to him that the prince could have wished to be with his father, thus plunging it into great embarrassment. Then he went home, took from the girl and said: -This night, while the boy is asleep, go into his bed, piantagli a knife in the heart and bring me his liver and his tongue; If you are going you will lose the life-. Then he left and when he returned the next day, she had not done it and said, -Because, would I shed the blood of an innocent man who has never harmed anyone? -. The cook came back to say: -If you do not, it will cost the life-. And she did bring a doe, he killed, he took out his heart and tongue, put them on a plate and when he saw the old man, said to the young -Mettiti to bed and cover yourself with the blanket! -. In that he entered the thief and said: -Where are the heart and the boy's liver? -. The girl handed him the plate, but Prince threw off the blanket and said -Old villain, why did you want to kill me? Now I will pronounce your sentence: you will transform into a poodle with a gold chain around his neck and eat hot coals so that the flames will flare up from throat-. And as she said these words, the old man turned into a poodle with a gold chain around his neck, and the cooks had to bring hot coals that he devoured, so, the flames came out of the mouth. The prince remained there for some time, and he thought of his mother, if ever he were still alive. Finally he said to the girl: -I want to return home; if you come with me I'll think mantenerti-. -Ah- she answered-he is so far away! and then I would do in an unfamiliar country? - So as not allowed to accompany him, and yet did not want to leave, he wished the girl to become a beautiful carnation and took it with him. He left, and the poodle had to follow him. Arrived at home, he went straight to the tower where he had locked his mother, and since the tower was so high, he wished a scale that come to the top. He went up, looked in and shouted: -Carissima mother, yet you live or are you dead? -. She replied: -I just ate and still sazia- believing there were angels. He said. -I am your dear son, whom the wild beasts would kidnap you, but I'm still alive and soon you salverò-. Then he got out and went to her father by being proclaimed as an alien hunter who asked him to enter his service. The king replied that he could come if he was skilful and could get him the game; but throughout that area he had not ever seen. The hunter promised that he would bring as much game as much suited to a royal table. Then he summoned all hunters and ordered them to follow him into the woods. They went and, once they arrive in the woods, he did have them in a circle shape, open on one side, then entered it and began to be desired of the game. And here's race enter the two hundred and wildest animals circle, and the hunters had to kill them. Then they loaded all of sixty wagons and took him to the king that, finally, pot, decorate your table with game, after private essersene for so many years. Delighted, the king decided that the next day the whole court would have lunch with him and gave him a great feast. When they were all assembled, he said to the hunter: -View your skills, you will sit next to me-. And he said -Sire, Your Majesty, forgive me, I'm just a principiante-. But the king insisted, saying: -You must sit next to me- as long as he obeyed. When he sat down she thought of her beloved mother, and wished that at least one of the courtiers would begin to talk about her, wondering how she was in the tower, if he was still alive or had died of starvation. He had just formulated this thought, that the Marshal began to say -Maestà, we here banchettiamo happily, but how is Her Majesty the Queen in the tower? Is he still alive, or died of hunger? -. But the king said: -I do not want to hear about her, left tear my dear son from feroci- beasts Then the hunter stood up and said: -My noble father, the queen still lives, and I am his son; I have not been kidnapped by wild beasts, but by that infamous old cook who took me away from her lap while she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a chicken-. He grabbed the dog with the golden collar, and said, -Here the villain! - and he brought the hot coals that the dog had to eat in front of everyone, until the flames came out from the jaws. Then the young man asked the king if he wanted to see the chef in his true form; He formulated the desire and here he is appearing with white apron and hanger by his side. Seeing him, the king flew into a rage and ordered him to be thrown into the deepest prison. Then the huntsman: My -Father, you also want to see the girl who educated me lovingly, and that was to kill me, but he did not? -. The king replied: -Yes, I will see volentieri-. The son said: -My noble father, I will show in the form of a beautiful fiore-. He pulled out his carnation, and placed it on the royal table, as beautiful as the king had never seen. Then the son said: -Now I want to show it in its true Appearance-. He wished ridiventasse a maiden, and she stood there so beautiful, more beautiful that no painter could paint it. The king then sent two maids and two servants to the tower, because they were going to take the queen and conducessero to the royal table. But when he reached the queen did not eat and said -Iddio gracious and merciful, who has kept me alive in the tower, it will release soon-. She lived three days, he died peacefully. The burial accompanied the two white doves that had brought the food in the tower, and were angels of heaven; and it came to rest on his grave. The old king had cut up the cook, but he also did not endure the pain. The son married the beautiful maiden who had carried in your pocket in the form of flower; and if you still live God knows.
juniper	443	720	Italian	Long ago, it saran two thousand years, there was a rich man who had a beautiful and pious wife; They loved each other, but they had no children. They wished them a lot but, as she prayed to the good Lord day and night, the children were never. In front of their house, in the yard, there was a juniper tree. One day in winter the woman was standing beneath it, and paring an apple and pared it she cut her finger, and the blood fell on the snow. -Ah- she said with a sigh, and the whole sad, watching the blood -avessi a child as red as blood and as white as snow! - And as she said these words, he rejoiced in his heart, as if he had a premonition. He went home and spent a moon disappeared and the snow; after two moons the land returned to turn green; in three months the flowers sprang; after four moons the trees in the forest were filled with sap and green branches intricarono thick: the birds chirping as to resonate all the forest and the flowers fell from the trees; past the fifth moon, the woman was standing under the tree and the smell of the plant was so sweet that her heart was bursting with joy, and she fell to her knees for great happiness; when the sixth month the fruit was, and she held his tongue; the seventh month she juniper berries and ate them eagerly, and became sad and became ill; passed the eighth moon, and she called her husband and said, weeping: -If I die, bury me under the ginepro-. Then he consoled himself and went back to rejoice, until, spent the ninth moon, was born a child as white as snow and red as blood, and when she saw him, her joy was so great that he died. Then her husband buried her under the tree and wept bitterly; after some time began to calm down and wept some more ', then stopped and despair, after another bit', his wife said. From the second wife he had a daughter, while the first had a son, as red as blood and as white as snow. When the woman looked at her daughter loved her very much; but when he looked at the child, he felt cut to the heart, and it seemed that he was preventing her in everything. He was always thinking about how to get to his daughter all the inheritance; inspired by the Evil One began to hate the guy, and drove him from one corner, and beat him, so that the poor child was always so afraid; when he went to school he had no peace. Once the woman had risen in the room; There also came shortly after the daughter and said: -Mom, give me a Command-. -Yes, baby my- she said and pulled out of the chest a beautiful apple. The chest had a great heavy lid with a lock of coarse and sharp iron. -Mamma- said my brother-even child will be able to get one? - The woman is irritated, but said: -Yes, when he returns to school-. And, when they saw him coming through the window, as if possessed by the evil one, she snatched the apple of her daughter and said: -Do you have it before your brother also. Then she threw the apple into the chest and closed. When the baby came, possessed by the devil, he said simulating sweetness: my-child, you also want an apple? - and looked at him with a shocked face. -Mamma- said the boy -you have a face that is frightening! Yes, give me an apple! - She thought she owed him do spirit. -Come with me- he said, and lifted the lid -Take a mela.- And when the boy bent down, the devil, and advised her, she closed paff !, bang the lid, so that the head shot away and went to fall between red apples. Then she was seized with fear and thought, "If I could move it away from me !." He went upstairs in his room and taken from the top drawer of his dresser a white handkerchief, laid his head again on the neck and bandaged with a handkerchief, so that could not be seen at all; He sat the child at the door with apple in hand. Shortly after Marilena went into the kitchen by his mother who was standing before the fire stirring a pot of hot water. -Mamma- said Marilena -my brother is sitting in front of the door and it's all white and has an apple in his hand; I asked him if he gave me, but gave me no answer; then I spaventata.- -Vacci still- said the mother-and if you do not respond back, give him a slap! - Marilena Then he went and said -Fratello, give me the apple! - but these remained silent and she She gave him a slap, and tumbled head on the ground. Terrified, she began to cry and sob, and ran to his mother to tell her: Ah, Mom! I unplugged my head to my brother! -. And he cried and cried and did not rest. -Marilena- -cos'hai said her mother did! But calm yourself that no one notices, so you can not help it: I'll cook in sauce agra.- The mother took the child and tore it to pieces, put it in the pot and cook him vinegar. Meanwhile Marilena stood nearby and cried and cried and the tears ended all into the pot and there was no need for salt. When the father came home, he sat down at the table and said: -Where is my son? -. Just then the mother took a great big dish full of meat in sour sauce, and Marilena could not refrain wept. Then the father again said, -Where is my son? -. -Ah- said her mother-if he went in the country, the great-uncle; He wants to stop a bit 'là.- -What are you going to do? And without even saying goodbye! - -Be 'he wanted to go and asked if he could stay six weeks. It'll be fine là.- -Ah- said the man -I just sorry! It's not fair, it should at least tell me goodbye! - That said, began to eat and said -Marilena, why are you crying? Your brother ritornerà-. Ah, wife- he added -which is this good stuff, give me more! - And the more he ate, the more he wanted and said -Datemene yet, and you do not eat it: it's like my- stuff. And he ate and ate, throwing all the bones under the table, until he had finished. Marilena meanwhile went to get her best silk handkerchief from the last drawer of his dresser, he picked all the bones and the bones that were under the table, tied them up in silk handkerchief and took them outside, crying bitterly. He put them in the green grass under the tree, and as he did he felt better and did not cry anymore. Then the juniper tree began to move, the branches marked a departure and then came together again, like when one is happy and does so with his hands. Then came a cloud from the plant and it seemed that the cloud was burning a fire, and the fire flew out a beautiful bird singing beautifully and got up flying through the air; and when he was gone, the juniper was as before, and the handkerchief with the bones had disappeared. And Marilena was happy and content, just as if her brother were still alive. He went back merrily into the house, he sat down and ate. The bird had flown meanwhile, had settled over the house of a goldsmith, and he began to sing: -My mother has killed me and my father ate me. Marilena, my sister, the bones in pieces found; a handkerchief she, and under the almond tree. Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird has sung here! -L'orefice was in his shop and was working a gold chain when he heard the bird singing on his roof, and found that beautiful song. He got up to go out and lost a slipper, but he would still go on the road, even though he had a slipper and one sock. He was wearing his leather apron and in one hand he held the golden chain, in the other tongs; and the sun shone, illuminating all the way. He stopped to look at the bird. -Uccello- said -as you sing; Sing once again your canzone.- No, answered the bird-not sing it twice without a reward: if you give me the gold chain you will sing of nuovo.- -Eccotela- said the goldsmith -and now still sings! - Then the bird came down to take the gold chain, took it with his right paw, rested in front of the goldsmith, and sang: -My mother has killed me and my father ate me. Marilena, my sister, the bones in pieces found; a handkerchief she, and under the almond tree. Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird has sung here! -Then the bird flew to a shoemaker, landed on the roof and sang: -My mother has killed me and my father ate me. Marilena, my sister, the bones in pieces found; a handkerchief she, and under the almond tree. Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird has sung here! -The shoemaker heard it and ran at the door in his shirt sleeves. He looked on the roof and had to shield his eyes with his hand because the sun does not abbagliasse. -Uccello- said -as you sing; - And he called the door-wife, come down, there is a bird that sings so well! -. Then he called his daughter, the children and the hired servants, the servant and the servant, and they all went into the street to see the bird. How lovely! Its feathers were red and green, and around her neck seemed all of gold, and the eyes glittered like stars. -Uccello- said the shoemaker -cantami again your canzone.- No, answered the bird-not sing it twice without a reward: you have to give me qualcosa.- -Moglie- said the man -Go in the attic; highest on the axis there is a pair of red shoes; bring qui.- The woman went to get his shoes. -Here here, he said the bird-man-now sing me back your canzone.- The bird came down and took the shoes in his left leg, then flew on the roof and sang: -My mother has killed me and my father I ate. Marilena, my sister, the bones in pieces found; a handkerchief she, and under the almond tree. Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird has sung here! -When he finished singing, flew holding the chain in the right claw and the shoes in his left. He flew far away to a mill, and the mill went clipp clapp, clipp clapp, clipp clapp. And in the mill sat twenty boys beating a millstone with the hammer: tick, tick, tick. And the mill went clipp clapp, clipp clapp, clipp clapp. Then the bird flew on a linden tree in front of the mill, and sang: -My mother has killed me-and-one stopped working and my father ate me. - Two more stopped working and listened - Marilena, my sister, -Other four stopped work - the bones in pieces found; a handkerchief she, -only eight still-beating and under the juniper-five more - has everything hidden. - still one - Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird has sung here! -So also the last stopped working and pot still hear the end. -Uccello- he said the latter -as you sing; Let me hear me too, sings nuovo.- No, answered the bird-not sing it twice without a reward: if you give me the millstone I will sing of nuovo.- -si- said the man-if only it were my you the darei.- -si- said the others -if sings again avrà.- Then the bird came down and millers, all twenty, with the help of a lever lifted the millstone: Oh! oh, op! Oh, oh, op! Oh, oh, op! The bird he introduced the head and put it as a collar; then back on the tree and sang: -My mother has killed me and my father ate me. Marilena, my sister, the bones in pieces found; a handkerchief she, and under the almond tree. Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird has sung here! -Quand'ebbe finished singing, he spread his wings and had the chain in the right leg, the left shoes and the millstone around the neck; and he flew away to the house of his father. In the room the father, the mother and Marilena were at table, and the father said: Ah, what joy, I feel happy! -. -NO- said her mother-I am afraid, like when you are going to get a great temporale.- Marilena instead she sat and cried, cried. At that moment came the bird and, when you put it on the roof, -Ah- exclaimed the father-are so happy, and as the sun shines out there! it is as if I were seeing an old friend! -. -NO- she said-I am so afraid: my teeth chatter and it's like I have fire in my veins! - And you ripped the bodice and everything else. And Marilena was sitting in a corner crying, holding the apron in front of the eyes, and bathed in tears. Then the bird perched on the juniper, and sang: -My mother who murdered me-She covered his ears and closed his eyes not to see and hear, but her ears rumbled as if there rumoreggiasse the storm and eyes They burned as struck by lightning. -and my father ate me .-- Ah, Mom! - exclaimed the man -there off a beautiful bird that sings so well! and the sun is so hot! and can hear the scent of cinnamon .-- Marilena, my sister, Marilena -Then put his head on his knees and began to cry, but the man said -Vado off, I must see the bird from near- . Ah, do not go! - said the woman -a I think that tremble throughout the house and that is fiamme.- But the man went out and looked at the bird. -l'ossa has tied with twine; a handkerchief she, and under the almond tree. Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird here cantato.-After the singing, the bird dropped the golden chain right around the man's neck, and fitted him exactly. Then the man came back and said -Vedessi that beautiful bird! He gave me a gold chain and it is so beautiful! -. But the woman was very frightened and fell sprawling and headphone fell from her head. And the bird sang again: -My mother who murdered me - Ah, I could sink into the ground, do not have to feel .-- and my father ate me-The woman collapsed to the ground, as if dead-Marilena, the my sister - Ah- said Marilena -I want to go out too; I wonder if the bird gives something to me! - And there went l'ossa-tied with string, a handkerchief she, -And the bird threw his shoes. -and under the almond tree Cip! Cip! What a beautiful bird here cantato.-Then Marilena felt happy and full of joy. He put the red shoes, and danced and ran into the house. -Ah- said-I was so sad when I left, and now I'm so happy! What a beautiful bird! He gave me a pair of shoes rosse.- -No.- said the woman, jumped up and her hair stood up on his head like -I flames seems that the world is about to collapse; I'll go out, perhaps I'll meglio.- But as crossed the threshold, paff !, the bird threw the millstone on her head, and she fell to the ground dead. The father and Marilena heard and ran out: smoke and high flames were unleashed from the soil, and when everything stopped, here is the little brother who took the hand of his father and Marilena. All three happy entered the house and sat down to eat.
The young giant	854	650A	Italian	A farmer had a son who was as big as a thumb, and did not become any bigger; for years he did not grow a wire. One day the father was going out to plow, the little one said -Babbo, I want to come anch'io-. -NO- said his father -Stay here, out there do not servants to nothing and you may also perderti.- Then Tom Thumb began to cry and to be left alone, the father had to take it with s. So he puts it in his pocket, and when he was in the field pulled it out and put it in a freshly plowed furrow. While little if he was sitting there, here is a great giant came through the mountains. -See that great bogie? - said his father, who wanted to scare the child because, same good. -Comes here and takes it via.- But the giant had long legs and came to the groove in two steps; He took out the little Tom Thumb and went with him. The father stood there without being able to utter a sound for terror, and thought he had now lost her baby and that she would never see in a lifetime. But the giant him across, and nursed, so, Tom Thumb grew up to be big and fat like giants. When two years had passed, the old giant took him into the forest, wanted to test him saying -Strappati a bacchetta-. The boy was already so strong that it uprooted from the ground a tree. But the giant thought he should do even better; He took it back with s, nursed him for two more years and when he brought him into the woods to try him, the boy was able to eradicate a much larger tree. But the giant was still not enough; She nursed him for two more years, and when I walked in the woods and said, now just ripped a beautiful young bacchetta- uprooted the biggest oak tree that crashed; but for him it was only a joke. Seeing this, the old giant said: -Just like that, now you perfezionato- and led him back to the field where he had taken it. His father was plowing at that moment; The young giant went up to him and said, -Guardate, father, as I have become, I am your son! -. The farmer was alarmed and said, 'No, you're not my son, go away from me-. -But of course I'm your son! Let me plow: I know it well because you.- No, no you're not my son, and thou canst not plow go away! - But because he was afraid of the man, he left the plow stand, walked away and began to part on the edge of the field. Then the youth took the plow, and just pressed a hand, but with so much force that the plow went deep into the ground. At this sight, the farmer could not resist and shouted: -If you want to plow, you do not press so hard, otherwise you do a bad job! -. But the young man pulled the horses, he pulled the plow and said: -It 'as well go home, father, and' mother make ready a large dish for lunch; I, meanwhile, will go over the campo-. The farmer went home, and ordered his wife who prepared the food;. Young, meanwhile, plowed field alone, which was two days of ground, then clung to power harrows and two at a time, also finished harrowing. When he had finished, he went into the forest and two oak trees uprooted, if upon their shoulders and put us above harrows, one in front and one behind, and so did the horses and brought everything home as if it were a bundle straw. When he entered the yard, his mother did not recognize him and asked: -Who is that horrible tall man? -. The farmer replied: -E 'Our son-. But she said: 'No, it can not be our son; one so big we never had: ours was a little! Go away, do not want you! -. But the young man was silent, but led his horses in the stable and gave them hay and oats, all right. When he had finished, she went into the room, sat on the bench and said: -Mom, I want to eat, you ready? -. She said yes because no one dared to contradict him, and took two great great dishes and well filled, that she and her husband would have been enough for eight days. But the young man devoured them alone and asked if he had nothing else to give him. -NO- said she -is all that abbiamo.- -For me it was just a glimpse, but I need a lot more to sfamarmi.- Then she went out and set it on fire the cauldron for the pig, well filled and when was ready took him inside. -Finally still he comes qualcosina- said, and ate it all, but even that was not enough to pulling hunger. Then he said: -Babbo, I see well that with you I shall never have food enough; if you get me an iron staff which is strong and I can not break against my knees, I will go away-. The farmer was glad; He attacked the wagon his two horses and went to the blacksmith to take a stick so long and thick that the two horses could only barely. But the young man put it on his knees, and snap !, broke in two as if it was one of the shrubs. The father harnessed four horses and went to get a stick so big and thick, that the four horses to carry him. The son snapped this also in twain against his knees, threw it away and said -Babbo, this does not serve me, you must harness more horses, and bring a more strongly stick. So the father harnessed eight horses, and brought one which was so large and thick, that the eight horses to carry him. But when the son picked it up, he broke off a piece to one side and said: -Babbo, I see that you can not procure the stick I need; I will go as well as are-. So he went and posed as a blacksmith's boy. He arrived in a village where he lived, a locksmith, a stingy man who did not give anything to anyone and he wanted to have everything for himself. He went into the smithy and asked him if he needed a journeyman. -Si- said the blacksmith; looked at him and thought: -This is a man who will strike out well, and earn his bread. "He asked: How much you want to pay? -. -I do not want their anything- he replied -only every fortnight, when paid other boys, I'll give two blows, and thou must bear. the miser was heartily satisfied, thinking to save money. the next morning, the strange journeyman was first, but when the master brought the glowing bar, and first shot shattered the iron and anvil sank so deep into the ground, so that you do not pot, bringing it out. Then, the miser grew angry and said: Hey, I do not do anything a guy like you, you strike excessive force; do you want for that one shot? -. He replied: -I give you just a small blow, nient'altro-. He lifted his foot and gave him a kick that sent him flying away over four loads of hay. Then he took from the forge the thickest iron bar for himself, took it as a stick and went his path. After a while 'came to a farm and asked the bailiff if he needed a foreman. -Si- said the -n factor I need: You seem a smart guy, one who knows how to get along; how much you want to pay per year? - He went on to say that he did not pay, but that every year would give him three blows, which he must bear. The factor was satisfied because he was a miser. The next morning the servants had to go into the forest to cut wood; They were already up, but the young man was still in bed. Then one shouted: Get up, now; we go into the forest to cut wood, you have to come with us-. -Ah- he replied, rude and arrogant once more go well, so get there before all of you together.- Then others went to the bailiff, and told him that the head was still in bed and did not want to go into the wood with them. The bailiff said they were going back to wake him up and tell him to harness the horses. But the foreman he repeated: -Go as well, so get there before you all together-. He stood still a couple of hours read, then finally stood up, but before he went into the barn to take a lot of peas, let them cook and if you ate them quietly; then he attacked the horses and went into the woods to cut wood. Near the wood was a ravine that he had to cross; First there he passed the wagon, then stopped the horses, walked behind the cart, took trees and brushwood, and made a great barricade, so that no horse could go. When he got to the woods, the others were just driving out to go home with their loaded carts. So he told them: -Go well, I come before you-. He does not drive far into the woods, once tore two of the biggest trees, laid them on the wagon and took the way back. When he arrived at the barricade, the others were still there and could not move. -Vedete- said -if you had stayed with me, you'd still come home early and you could sleep an hour più.- He wanted to continue, but his four horses could not make his way; He now wanted to, he puts them on top of the cart and began to pull itself around the load and managed to move so easily as if pulled a load of feathers. When he was over, he said to his companions: -Vedete, I got over quicker than you,. And he went on while the others had to stop. But in the yard he picked up a tree, showed it to the bailiff, and said: -It is a beautiful piece of wood? -. And the steward said to his wife: -This servant is a good; if he does sleep long back before the others-. Young served as the factor for one year; when it was spent, and the other servants were getting their wages, he said it was time for him to receive his due. But the farmer was afraid of the blows which he was and begged him to spare; rather he would become foreman and he would let us factor. -NO- the young-not said I want to become factor; I am foreman and I will remain so, but I will administer that which was pattuito.- The farmer wanted to give him everything you could wish for, but to no avail: the foreman answered no each time. Then the bailiff did not know which way to turn and begged for a fortnight's time to reflect. The foreman agreed. The bailiff summoned all his clerks, were to think and give him advice. Those pondered at length and concluded that it had accoppare the foreman. The factor would carry the big mills in the yard next to the well, then he had ordered the foreman to go down into the well to clean it; once at the bottom of the pit would throw the millstones on the head. At factor he pleased the council, so everything was prepared and the grinders larger were placed near the well. When the foreman he descended, rolled down stones that beat on the bottom so as to drain the water. They believed this way of having broken through his head, but he cried -Cacciate away the chickens from the well: there scratching in the sand and throw me the grains into my eyes, that I do not see more-. So the bailiff cried -Sciò, shoo! - and pretended to frighten the hens away. When the servant had finished his work, he came up and said -Guardate a bit 'that I'm wearing nice collar! -. And it was the grinders who wore around his neck. At the sight of the factor he came to be afraid, because the foreman demanded his fee. Then he asked another fifteen days and gathered The clerks who advised him to send the foreman in the haunted mill to grind corn by night: no one was left alive in the morning. The proposal pleased the bailiff; so that very evening he sent for the foreman and told him to bring the mill eight bushels of wheat and grind it that night: they needed it. The foreman went into the barn and put two bushels in his right pocket, two on the left and the other four slipped into a knapsack which led to half on the back and half on the chest, and so the load, moved towards the enchanted mill. But the miller told him that day could grind fine, but at night no, because the mill was haunted, and who had entered had been found dead in the morning. He said: -I I will manage it, just you go to bed-. Then he went into the mill, poured out the corn eleven o'clock he went into the miller's room to sit on the bench. After a while 'who was sitting there, the door suddenly opened, and entered a great big table, and on the table, because there was no one that served themselves, and set to s, wine, roast and lots of good foods. Then came the chairs, but no one came until, suddenly he beheld fingers, which handled knives and forks, and laid food on the plates; but he could not see anything else. Since he was hungry and saw the food, he sat down and ate heartily. When it was full and others also had quite emptied their dishes, all the candles were extinguished suddenly, he saw clearly; when it was pitch dark in the face came to him something like a slap. Then he said: -If it happens again, I restituisco-. And when he received the second slap, hit, too. This went on all night: do not let scare and beat on the right and left with the decision. But at sunrise, everything stopped. When the miller got up and went looking for him and was astonished to find him still alive. He said, -I received excruciating, but I have given some and I ate at sazietà-. The miller rejoiced, and said that the mill was now released from the spell, and the prize would give him much money. But he said: -I do not want money, I enough- it. Then he took his meal on his shoulders, he went home and told the bailiff that he had executed the order, and would now have the reward agreed. On hearing these words, the factor is still more frightened: it was out of s, and walked up and down the room with the sweat dripping from his forehead. Then he opened the window to get a breath of fresh air, but before he knew it, the foreman gave him a kick that threw him out the window, sending him flying through the air, and so far away, no one ever saw him again. Then the foreman said to the farmer's wife the other blow was her turn. But she said: Ah, no! There would resist! - and she even opened the window because the beads of sweat were running down her face. Then he kicked her, to fly in the air too, and even higher than her husband. The man shouted: -Come to me! -. But she answered: -Come you from me, I can not! -. And they hovered in the air that no one could get to the other; and whether they are still there, I do not know. The young giant, however, took his iron club and went on his way.
The globetrotter	1358	1696	Italian	There was once a poor woman with a child who had a great desire to go around the world. One day her mother said, "How will you do? We have no money you can take with you!" The son said: "I myself; I will always say not much, not much, not much." So he walked for a bit 'of time and always said, "Not much, not much, not much." He met a group of fishermen and said, "God help you! Not much, not much, not much." - "Why, you say 'not much', you rascal?" And when they pulled their nets, they had not caught much fish. So they took a stick and said: "You've never seen me threshing?" - "What do I say then?" He asked the young man. "You have to say, 'Get it full Piglia much!'" He continues to run for a bit 'of time and says, "Get it full Piglia much!" until, you come to a fork, where you are going to hang a malefactor. Then he says, "Good morning, seize much! Seize much!" - "Why, you say 'seize much', you rascal? There still want more wicked people in this world? Not just that?" And they beat him again. "What should I say then?" - "You have to say: 'May God comfort the poor soul!'" The boy continues to travel the world for a while ', and says: "May God comfort the poor soul!" He came to a pit where there is a knacker who was a horse. The young man says: "Good morning, God comfort the poor soul!" - "What do you say, bastard?" and gives the bat, to leave him dazed in the head. "What should I say then?" - "You have to say: 'May you end up in a ditch, bitch!'" He goes and goes on to say: "May you end up in a ditch, bitch! May you end up in a ditch, bitch!" It came to a cart full of people and says: "Good morning, you could end up in a ditch, bitch!" Then the coach falls into a ditch, and the driver begins to whip the guy who has to return to her mother. And throughout his life he did not go further to travel the world.
The thief and his master	644	325	Italian	There once was a man who wanted to learn a trade to his son; go to church and prayed to our Lord what was best. Behind the altar there was the sacristan who says: -The trade of the thief! The job of the thief! -. Then he goes home and tells his son that he must learn to be a thief: He suggested it our Lord. It starts with him to look for someone who knows the job. He walks a long and comes in a great forest, where there is a little house with an old woman. He says his father: -I know by chance someone who knows the art thief? -. -You can learn a great meal here, my son is maestro.- Then he speaks with his son and asks him if he really knows thieving. The master says: -Istruirò your child. Come back in a year, and if you recognize I do not want any reward, but if not him, you must give me two hundred scudi-. The father comes home and the son learns the art of witchcraft and thieving. After a year, his father walks and weeps, because he does not know how to recognize the child. As he goes and cries, the meeting is a little man who says: -Why, weep, you are so afflicted? -. -Oh- responds -a year ago I left my son to be a thief because he learned the craft; He told me to come back after a year, and if I had not recognized my son, I had to give him two hundred shields, and if I recognized him I should not give him anything. Now I'm so scared not to recognize it and do not know where to find the denaro.- Then the man tells him to take a piece of bread and to go to get under the fireplace: -The above the bar, is a basket, in a bird that looks out: it is your son-. The father goes and throws a piece of bread in front of the cage, the bird then comes out and looks at it. -Ola! are here, my son? - the father says. The son is delighted to see his father, but the master says: -ve told the devil, as known your son? -. -Let's go, Dad! - says the guy. The father returns home with his son; street Hereupon the son says: -I tramuterò a large greyhound, and I will earn much money-. The gentleman calls from the carriage -Good man, will you sell your dog? -. -Si- says his father. How much do you want? - -Trenta scudi.- Hey, good man, is a tidy sum, but it is such a beautiful dog that will take him ugualmente.- The Lord raises the dog in the car but, after a stretch of road , the dog jumps out the window: it was no longer a greyhound and had returned to his father. They go home together. The next day there is no market in the next village and the young man tells his father: -I I will turn into a horse; Sell ​​me, but when I sell off my bridle, or I can not take the human-appearance. The father takes the horse to the market, and here comes the master's son buys the horse for a hundred crowns; but the father forgets to take off the bridle. The man goes home with the horse and puts it in the stable. When the maid and the horse says: -Toglimi the halter, take away my tether! -. The maid stops and mutters: -You know perhaps speak? -. Va and takes the bridle; then the horse becomes a sparrow, and flies out the door, and the teacher also becomes a bird and flies behind. They meet and challenge each other, but the master loses, he threw himself into the water and becomes a fish. The youth also becomes a fish, they will compete again and the master loses. It becomes a chicken and the youth becomes a fox, and bites off the head teacher. So what he is dead and remains dead.
The Lion and the Mouse	9055	75	Italian	A Lion asleep in his lair was awoken by a Mouse running over his face. Losing patience, he grabbed the Lion with his paw and was about to kill him. The Mouse, terrified, piteously begged him to spare its life. "Please let me go," she cried, "and one day I will repay you for your kindness." The idea that a creature so insignificant could ever do anything for him amused the Lion so much that he began to chuckle and a good mood, let him go. But the opportunity of Mickey Mouse came at the end. One day the lion was trapped in a network that had been laid for game by some hunters, and the Mouse heard and recognized his roars of anger and ran to the spot. Without ado, he began to gnaw the ropes and managed in less than no time to release the Lion. "There!" He said the Mouse, "you laughed at me when I promised I would repay you: but now you see that even a Mouse can help a Lion."
The wolf and the seven little goats	39	123	Italian	There was once an old goat who had seven kids, and loved them like a mother loves her children. One day she had to go into the forest to make provisions for the dinner; He called all seven and said, "Dear children, I want to go into the woods; beware of the wolf; if it is, we all eat in one bite. That often villain disguises himself, but you will recognize it by his hoarse voice and black paws." The little kids said, "Dear mother, we will be very careful, you can go quiet." The old bleated and started trusting. A little later, someone knocked on the door, shouting: "Open, my dear children, here is your mother, who has brought you a present for each." But, by the hoarse voice the little kids knew it was the wolf. "We will not open," they said, "you are not our mother, and the mother has a sweet voice, and your is hoarse; you are the wolf." Then the wolf went to a shopkeeper and bought a large piece of clay; He ate it and so s'addolci voice. Then he came back, knocked on the door and shouted: "Open up, my dear children, is your mom, who has brought you a present for each." But he was leaning against the window his black paws The children saw it and cried, "We will not open; our mother has not black feet like you: you are the wolf." Then the wolf ran to a baker and said, "I am hurt my foot, spalmaci over a little 'of dough." And when the baker had smeared his paw, he ran to the miller and said: "Spargimi on the leg a little 'white flour." The miller thought: The wolf wants to deceive someone, and refused; but the wolf said, "If you do not, I'll eat you." Then the miller was afraid and whitened his paw. Yeah, so do uomini.Ora the rascal went for the third time to the door, knocked, and said: "Open to me, children, your dear mother has come home from the woods and brought you a present for each." The little kids cried, "First show us the paw, because they know if you are our dear little mother." Then the wolf put his paw on the window, and when they saw that it was white, they believed all true what he said and opened the door. But it was the wolf to enter. The kids got scared and tried to hide. The first jumped under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth in the kitchen, the fifth in the cupboard, the sixth under the sink, the seventh in the watch case pendulum. But the wolf found them all, and did compliments swallowed them one after the other; but the last, inside the watch case, did not find him. When he got off the desire, the wolf was gone, he lay down under a tree on the green lawn and began to dormire.Poco after the old goat came from the woods. Ah, what touched to see! The front door was wide open, table chairs and benches were overturned, the sink was in pieces, blanket and pillows torn off the bed. She tried her young, but could not find them anywhere. He called them by name, one after another, but no one answered. Finally, when he called the smallest, a little voice cried: "Dear Mom, I'm in the clock case." He pulled it out and he told her that he had come and the wolf had eaten all the others. Think how she cried for her poor children! At the end came tutt'afflitta and the youngest kid ran off with her. When he arrived in the meadow, here is the wolf lying under the tree, and snoring so much so that the branches shook. He watched from all sides and saw that something was moving in the bulging belly and struggling. "Oh, my God," he thought, "they are still alive that my poor children that he devoured for dinner?" He told the kid to run home and take scissors, needle and thread. He cut the belly of the monster; and the first cut, a kid stuck his head out, then, gradually that cut, saltaron out all six and they were all alive and were benone; because the greed monster had swallowed them down whole. What a joy it was! They hugged their dear mother and hopped about like pasque. But the old woman said, "Go now, and look for the stones will fill your belly with this damned before they awake." Then the seven kids dragged hastily and drove out the stones in the belly than he could carry. Then the old woman sewed in a flash, so that the wolf did not notice and do not neppure.Finalmente moves, when he had had a good night's sleep, the wolf got up, and because the stones in his stomach gave him very thirsty, he wanted to go a fountain. But when he began to move, the stones began to clash in the belly with a crash. Then he shouted: "Roomba and rimbombaNella my belly I thought fosseroSei goats are pietroniBelli and good." And when he came to the fountain and leaned over the water to drink, the weight of the stones pulled him down, and touched drown miserably. At the sight of the seven kids they came running, shouting: "The wolf is dead! The wolf is dead!" And with their mother they danced for joy around the fountain.
The wolf and the fox	690	41	Italian	The wolf had with s, the fox; He was compelled to do what he wanted, for she was the weaker; so, she would have liked rid of his master. One day going through the forest, the wolf said: -Pelorosso, get me something to eat, or eat you-. The fox answered -Conosco a farm where there are two young lambs; If you want we can take one-. The wolf agreed: left, the fox stole the little lamb, took it to the wolf and went. The wolf devoured it, but was not yet satisfied; also he wanted each other and went to get it but he did it so awkwardly that the mother lamb heard him and started shouting and bleating like crazy, until the farmer came running. They found the wolf and beat him so mercilessly, that he came to the fox limping and screaming. -I have a nice combo! - he said. -I wanted to take the other lamb when the farmers have caught and beaten me to the feste.- The fox replied: -E Why art thou such a glutton? -. The next day they returned to the fields and the wolf said: -Pelorosso, get me something to eat, or eat you-. The fox answered -Conosco a farm where the wife is baking pancakes; let's prenderne-. They went, and the fox around the house; and she peeped and sniffed until, could not find the plate with the pancakes; He took six and brought them luck. -Here here meal- said, and went on his way. The wolf devoured the pancakes and said: -They only increase voglia-. He returned to the house and took down the entire pot, breaking it. There was a lot of noise; the lady came out and when he saw the wolf called rescue: they came and beat him so much that he came into the woods, fox, two lame legs, and howling said: -What kind of trouble have I done? The peasants caught me, and tanned for feste-. But the fox replied: -E Why art thou such a glutton? -. On the third day, while they were out together, the wolf was advancing with difficulty, but once more said -Pelorosso, get me something to eat, or eat you-. The fox answered -Conosco a man who has been killing, and the salted meat in the cellar; let's prenderla-. The wolf said, -But I will go when you, because you can help me if I can not scappare-. -For me! - said the fox, and led him through streets and trails, they reached the cellar. There was meat in abundance, and the wolf threw himself on, thinking: "Before I'm through, no time !." The fox liked it also, but looked about everywhere, and often ran to the hole through which they had entered, and tried if his body was still thin enough to slip. The wolf said -Cara fox, because, never running here and there and jumping in and out? -. -I have to see that no one is coming - he replied the crafty. -Bada Just do not eat too much! - He answered: -I do not leave until the barrel is vuota-. But in the meantime came the farmer, who had heard the fox jumps. Seeing him, Pelorosso jumped a leap out of the hole; The wolf wanted to follow her, but she had eaten so much that he could no longer move and was trapped. Then came the farmer with a club and killed him. The fox bounded into the forest and was happy to be rid of the old glutton.
Mount Simeli	1348	676	Italian	Once upon a time two brothers, one rich and the other poor. But the rich do not give anything to the poor, and these had to be provided with hard work to support themselves by trading in corn; and often he did so badly, that he had no bread for his wife and his children. One day, while he was crossing the forest with his chariot, he saw on the one hand a large bare mountain; and since, he had never seen her, stopped and watched in wonder. As he stood there he saw coming twelve great, wild men, believing they were robbers he pushed his barrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to see what happened. The twelve men went to the mountain and cried Semsi, Semsi mountain, open up! -. Immediately the barren mountain opened down the middle, the twelve came, and when they were within, it shut. But shortly after it opened and the men came out carrying heavy sacks on their backs; and when they were all once more in the light of day, they said Semsi, Semsi mountain, shut thyself -. Then he shuts, no one could see any more passing, and the twelve went away. When they were gone, the poor man got down from the tree, curious to know what the secret is hidden in the mountain. He went there before and said Semsi, Semsi mountain, open up! - and the mountain is also opened before him. He came in, and the whole mountain was a cavern full of gold and silver, and behind lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels, heaped up like corn. The poor man did not know what to do, and if he could get some 'of those treasures. Last he filled his pockets with gold, but he left the pearls and precious stones. When he came out again he also said Semsi, Semsi mountain, shut thyself -. Immediately the mountain was closed, and he went home with his cart. Now he no longer had to worry, but could buy bread and even wine for his wife and children; He lived happily ever after, giving to the poor and doing good to all. When the money ran out, he went to his brother, borrowed a bushel and took the other; but the great treasures not touched them. When he wanted to take for the third time, he returned to his brother borrowed the measure. But one already from a piece envied his wealth and comforts he enjoyed at home, and could not understand where it came from that fortune, n, what his brother wanted with the measure. Then he thought of trick, and covered the bottom of the measure with pitch; and when he returned he was sticking a gold coin. Once he went to his brother and asked: -What have been measuring in the bushel? -. -Grano and orzo- replied. Then he showed him the gold coin and threatened to sue him if he did not say the truth. So his brother told him what had happened. The rich man had suffered attack a chariot, went into the woods, and he meditated to take away many other treasures. When he came to the mountain he cried, Semsi, Semsi mountain, open up! -. The mountain opened, and he entered. The treasures all before him, and for a while 'he does not know which to first; finally he picked up many precious stones as he could bear, and proceeded to leave. He came back, but since he had nothing else in mind than the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain and cried -Monte Simeli, Mount Simeli, open up! -. But, not being the right name, the mountain never stirred, but remained shut. Then he was alarmed, but more she thought about it, the more confused themselves, and all the treasures were of no avail. In the evening the mountain opened, and the twelve robbers came, and seeing him, they laughed and said: -Merlo, have we caught you! We thought that maybe we had not realized that you were entered twice? We could not catch, but a third time will not come out of here! -. Then he cried: -I was me, I was my brother -. But let him beg for his life He says what he would, they cut his head.
The sparrow and his four children	1494	157	Italian	A sparrow had four young ones in a swallow's nest. When they were fledged, some naughty boys pulled the nest, but fortunately all escaped in the high wind. Now the father complains that his children if they go throughout the world before he was able to warn them against all dangers, and given them good advice. Autumn many sparrows gather in a field of grain, and the father is her four children and, full of joy, he brings them home with him. Ah, my dear sons, what concerns you have given me this summer when you left in the wind without my advice! Hear my words, obey your father, and be well on the small birdies at great risk! - Then he asked the eldest where he was during the summer and how he had supported. -I stopped in the gardens looked for caterpillars and worms, until you have gained the ciliegie-. Ah, my son - said his father -l'abbondanza is fine, but it is also dangerous; So from now on is' very careful especially in the gardens turns people with long green poles which are hollow inside, but with a small hole in cima.- -Yes, father; but if the hole is stuck with wax a little green leaf? - the son said. -Where did you see? - -In the garden of a mercante- replied the bird. Oh, my son - said his father -i, merchant swindlers! You've been with men of the world and have learned to be circumspect: Watching to make good use, and not too much trust you stesso.- Then he asked the second: -And you, where have you been? -. -A corte- he replied the son. -I Sparrows and silly little birds are good at court, where there is so much gold, velvet, silk, armor and weapons, hawks, owls and falcons; remains in the stable where you order or where oats threshed, and you will touch it in peace your grains quotidiani.- -Yes, babbo- said the son-but if the grooms make traps, hiding in the straw nets and snares, there are many presi.- -Where did you see? - the old man asked. -A court from palafreniere.- Oh, my son, the courtiers: fake and pimps! Have you been to court, with the gentlemen, and we have not left even a pen, you have learned enough and you know get by in the world. However, look around and is' careful: often the wolves also eat the dogs giudiziosi.- The father also called the third to s: -Where did you try your luck? -. -I put the winch to the highways and the carriage, and at times I found a grain or bruco.- -E 'really a fine-food-but said the father is' very careful and look around often, especially if someone is bends down to pick up a stone, it does not suit you stand to aspettarlo.- -E 'true- replied the son-but if one already had a stone in your pocket or breast? - -Where did you see? - -Come miners, dear dad, when they come out with the wagon, usually carry the stones with s, .- -Artigiani and miners have superior minds! If you have been with the miners, you have seen and learned something. Va 'as well, but be on guard you have to be: the miners, sparrows and killing goblins know! -Finally his father came to his younger brother: -You, my dear little devil, you're always the silliest and weakest; Stay with me, the world has too many rough, wicked birds which have crooked beaks and sharp claws, and lie in wait to devour the poor little birds; Stay with your peers, and get the spiders and the caterpillars of the trees and houses, and you will be happy to long-. Oh, dear father, he who feeds himself without injury to other people fares well, and no sparrow hawk, vulture, eagle or kite will hurt, especially if each evening and morning devotional himself and his lawful food to God, who is the creator and Preserver of all forest and village birds, and even hear the cries and prayers of small crows; because, without his will, does not fall n, n a sparrow, one scricciolo.- -Where did you learn it? - The son replied: -When the great wind tore me from you, I came to a church; there during the summer, picked up the flies and spiders from the windows and heard this discourse preached; and the father of all sparrows fed me all the summer and protected from any misfortune and by malvagi- birds. -In my faith! My dear son, if you fly in churches and aid in making a clean sweep of spiders and flies buzzing, and peeps to God like little crows, and will recommend to the eternal Creator, you'll be fine even if the world was full of treacherous cruel birds. He who to God commits, In silence suffers, wait, pray, have faith and keep a clear conscience, and the Good God will help! -.
The shepherd boy	1445	922	Italian	Once upon a time a shepherd boy whose fame spread to the wise answers which he gave to every question. He heard of it likewise the king of that country, but did not believe and did not call him. He said: "If you are able to answer three questions that I will, I will hold you like you're my son and you will live with me in my royal palace." The boy said: "What are the three questions?" The king said: "This is the first: how many drops of water are there in the sea?" The shepherd replied: "Your Majesty, please close all the rivers of the earth, so that it is no longer even a droplet that I have not already counted, and tell you how many drops there are in the sea." The king said, "This is the second question: how many stars are there in the sky?" The shepherd boy answered, "Give me a large sheet of white paper." Then, with the pen, he made so many dots that he could barely see, but could not be counted; if they looked, they were dizzy. Then he said: "In the sky there are many stars as there are points on the paper; just count them" But no one was able to do so. The king said, "This is the third question: how many seconds of eternity?" The shepherd boy answered, "In the Eastern Pomerania is the Diamond Mountain, stretching an hour in height, width and hour by hour in depth. Every hundred years a little bird comes and sharpens its beak; when it has consumed all the mountain, will be spent a second of eternity. "the king said," you have answered the three questions like a wise man, and from now on you'll be with me in the palace, and will make thee as my own child. "
The fisherman and his wife	179	555	Italian	There was once a fisherman and his wife who lived together in a booth like a chamber pot, near the sea and the fisherman went there every day and fished, and every day a long rising tide. Once he was sitting near the sea intent on fishing and the water looked clear, always toward the fishing rod when he saw the line go down in the water green and deep, and as he pulled up from the bottom, lifted a big roar. When the flounder said to him: "Please, let me live, I'm not a real diamond, but an enchanted prince, Put me back in the water and let me swim. "" Now, "said the man," you do not spend too many words, because I speak a roar that, I would have still left to swim. " Then he puts it in the water, and the roar went away. towards the bottom of the sea, leaving a trail of blood behind him. He went first to his wife in the hut and announced that he had caught a flounder, who told him to be an enchanted prince, and that he had left to swim free. "You have not submitted any desire for you? "The woman said. "No, the man replied," I could make that desire? "-" Ah, "she said," it is really bad to continue living in this pot hut night, it stinks so much and is so dirty; go even beyond the sea for us and express the desiderio.di a small hut! man what anava not exactly a genius, but yet he went anyway, and how it got there, the sea was completely yellow and green, then he walked to the water and said: "Little man, little man, you suggest to me! Small, small diamond, and in the sea, alas, Ilsebill, my wife, oh rio fate!, does not want what I want! Then came the roar swimming and said, "Now, what happens? "-" Ah, "the man said," when I caught you, then told my wife, "I would have wanted something for me, in fact it has had enough of living in a kind of chamber pot, but would gladly a real hut. " "Back there as well," said the flounder, "she cie already inside." The man went back there, and his wife was standing in the doorway of a hut, and said, "Come here. My husband is now so much better! "There was a living room and a bedroom and a kitchen in there and back a small garden with all kinds of vegetables and a courtyard where there were chickens and ducks. "Ah," the man said, "Now we want to live with pleasure." - "Yes," he said his wife, "we will try to do it." So went on for eight or fourteen days, so his wife said: "My husband, the hut I stà too narrow, the courtyard and the garden are too small, I want to live in a large stone castle, then go to the flounder, he must let us have a castle. Ah, my wife, "said the husband," the roar had given us first a hut, I would not get back all over again, the roar could misrepresent everything. " - "I bet," the wife said, "he can do it very well, and that makes him willingly, then, go to him! "The husband went there and felt his really heavy heart, as he arrived at the seaside, the water was completely purple and gray and dark blue, but it was still quiet. he stopped standing there and said, "Little man, little man, you suggest to me! Small, small diamond, and in the sea, alas, Ilsebill, my wife, oh rio fate!, does not want what I want! "Now, what do you want that? "Said the flounder. "Ah," the man said, "quite distressed," my wife wants to live in a stone castle. "-" Go there, "it is standing at the door," said the flounder. The man went there and his wife was standing in front of a large building. Husband, see how beautiful! " With these words I went with them, there were many servants, and the walls were all bright, and in the room there were chairs and gilded table, and behind the castle there was a garden and a forest, well a mile long , where there were deer and hares, and in the courtyard stables for cows and suderie for horses. "Ah! "Said her husband," now we want to remain happy in this beautiful castle and be happy! " - "On this we have to think about it," said his wife, "and we do not want to sleep on it. On these words came to letto..Il next morning his wife woke up, when it was broad daylight: she found her husband with his elbow in a decoction and said, "Husband, get up, we want to be King over all the land." - "Ah! Wife, "her husband said," What we want to become King, I do not want to be King. Now, it's me that I want to be King "-" Ah, wife, "said her husband, where you want to become King, roar could not do it. " - "Husband," said the wife, "go straight there," I want to be King. The husband went there and it was totally distressed by the fact that his wife wanted to be king. And as he came to the sea, this was completely black and gray and he was boiling from the inside. He went there, standing, and said: "Little man, little man, you suggest to me! Small, small diamond, and in the sea, alas, Ilsebill, my wife, oh rio fate!, Does not want what I want! "What do you want now?" said the flounder. "Ah," he said the husband, "my wife wants to be King." - "Come home, it already is," said the flounder. The husband went there, and when he arrived at the palace, there were so many soldiers and timpani and trumpets, and his wife was sitting on a throne made of gold and diamonds and had a great golden crown and they stood on both sides of the pretty young, still a higher dell'altro.Ah head, "her husband said," now you become King? "- Yes," she said, "I am the King. And as he was looking around for a while ', then he said," Ah, wife, how beautiful, you're king, now we have nothing left to be desired. " - "No, husband," she said, "this takes me too long, I do not bear it anymore, I am King, now I want to also become Emperor! "-" Ah, wife, "the husband said," What you say you want to become emperor? "-" Husband, "she said," go to the flounder, I want to be emperor. " - "Ah, wife," said the husband, "the Emperor he can not create, I do not want to tell him roar." - "I am the King," said his wife, "and you are my husband, go there at once! "And there went her husband ,, and while he was going, he thought:" That's not okay, Emperor is too brazen, the roar in the end will get tired. With these thoughts he came to the sea, the water was completely black and swollen, and blew such a brisk wind on top of him, trying to protect themselves; and her husband was horrified. Then he stopped on his feet and said: "Little man, little man, you suggest to me! Small, small diamond, and in the sea, alas, Ilsebill, my wife, oh rio fate!, Does not want what I want! "Ah, what do you want now? "Said the flounder. "Ah, turbot," he said, "my wife wants to become emperor." - "Back there," he said the flounder, "it already is." And there went her husband, and how he got there, so there was a big castle with polished marble alabaster contours and gold ornaments. In front of the marching they bring soldatim and blowing trumpets and banging their tambourines and drums; first they entered into the house of the barons and the accounts and the dukes and even turned the servants, then they opened the doors that were real gold. and how he went in, there was his wife on a throne, made in one piece of gold, and was up two miles, and had a great golden crown that was three cubits high and was decorated with brilliant and anthrax; in the other hand the orb, and from both sides of wires made of her 'followers were standing, always one smaller than the other, from big giants, which were high two miles, down to the smallest dwarf, who they were as big as my little finger. And they stood in front of her so many princes and counts. It was there that she went to get her husband and said, "Wife, you become Emperor? "-" Yes, "she said," I am Emperor. " "Ah," said the husband, "and looked straight ahead. Wife, lately it's just nice, since you emperor. "-" Husband, "said his wife," What are you doing standing there, now I'm inperatore, but now I also want to become Pope. " - "Ah, wife," the husband said, "so you want to become Pope. The Pope ce n 'only one in Christendom." "Husband," she said, "I want to become Pope still today." "No, wife," he said, "the roar can not make you Pope, that's not good." - "Husband, what is this strange, of course you can make me Papa, go away there at once." And there went her husband, and was the feeble and tottering calves, and the wind was blowing hard, and the water, when indicated, jolting ships in distress, who danced and jumped over the waves, while the sky in the center he had a kind of black flower bed, especially to the south, and there he took his right path, that is, as a hurricane. He went there stood up and said: "Little man, little man, you suggest to me! Small, small diamond, and in the sea, alas, Ilsebill, my wife, oh rio fate!, Does not want what I want! "What do you want now?" said the flounder. "Ah, the husband said," My wife wants to be pope "-" Go there, "said the flounder," It already is. He went back there, and how he got there, his wife was sitting on a throne, which was six miles, and was wearing three large wreaths, and around her was all the religious state, and at the sides of her, there were two rows of lights, the largest was so big and high as the largest tower in the world, down to the smallest kitchen luminary. . "Wife," disseil husband, and looked him straight: "Now you're the Pope?" - "Yes," she said, "now Pope! "Ah, wife," said the husband, "how beautiful you are Pope; wife, now you will be happy, now you're the Pope, can not become bigger, "-" On this I will think on it, "said his wife," and that they both went to bed, but instead it was not happy, and not greed let her sleep, she always thought, what she could still become. With this the sun sank; ah, she thought, as she saw off the darkness, I could not even make the sun rise? And it became very well furious, and her husband was forced to get up: "Husband, go by the roar, I want to become like the Good Lord! "The husband was still half asleep, and was frightened enough to fall out of bed. "Ah, wife," he said, "back in you and remain pope." - "No," said his wife, and straightened the bodice, "I am not quiet and I can not reveal it, when I see that the sun and the man get up, and not I who make them get up, I want to become like God. " - "Ah, wife," said the husband, "the roar can not do this, Emperor and Pope can do, but not this." - "Husband," she said, and had a horrible look, "I want to become like God. Go immediately to the flounder. This upset her husband in all its Mebra, so much so that he moved with fear, while outside there was storm, shaking all the trees and rocks, and the sky was completely black, and it thundered and flashed, and her husband saw beyond the high black waves like mountains, and all had a white sciuma crown, and then said: "little man, little man, you suggest to me! small, small diamond, and in the sea, alas, Ilsebill, my wife, oh fate rio! , I do not want what I want! "What do you want now?" said the flounder. "Ah," dsse him, "she wants to be like the good Lord." - "Go home, she sits back in the booth. And there still sit up nowadays.
Little Claus and Big Claus	2004	1535	Italian	Once there were two men in a village of the same name, both were called Claus, but one owned four horses, the other I only had one, so to distinguish them, the one with four horses was called and the big Claus who he was only a small horse Claus. Now we feel as if passed, because this is a story all week vera.Per the Little Claus had to plow the field of big Claus and lent him his only horse, then the big Claus helped him with his four horses, but this He came only once a week, namely Sunday. Hup! How Claus waving the little whip on the five horses; that day was as if they were his! The sun was shining so beautiful and the church bells rang in celebration, people were well dressed and he walked with the book of the arm psalms to hear the preaching of the pastor and saw the Little Claus plowing with the five horses and was so pleased waving the whip, shouting "Hup, my horses!" "I do not have to tell you," the big Claus, "he said, because only one of the horses is yours." But it passed still people who went to church, and little Claus forgot that he was not supposed say it and shouted again: "Hup my horses!" "I ask you to stop" the big Claus said. "If you say it again, hit your horse to the front so that it falls died instantly: at least it's over with him." "I'll tell you," replied Little Claus, but when it passed other people who greeted him , he was delighted at the thought that was so evident that he possessed five horses to plow the field; then he waved his whip and cried. "Hup, my horses!". "I urge them your horses," said the big Claus, and took the hammer and hit him on the forehead the only horse of Little Claus, who fell down dead. "Alas, now I have no horses ! " exclaimed Little Claus and began to cry. Then peeled his horse, took the skin, let it dry in the wind, put it in a bag that he threw himself on his back and went to town to sell the skin of his cavallo.La way to go was very long, he had to cross a huge dark forest and suddenly came bad weather; the small Claus wandered for some time and when he finally found the right path was already evening and was too far is to get into town, either to get home before it was the notte.Vicino the road there was a large country house the shutters were closed, but the light filtered out. "He will definitely permission to spend the night here," thought Little Claus, and went to bussare.La hostess opened the door, but once he knew what he wanted, he said that he had to go, because her husband was not at home and she could not accommodate strangers. "All right, then I'll lie out here," said little Claus, and the woman shut the door faccia.Lì nearby was a large haystack, and between it and the house had made a deposit with a thatched roof. "I can lie up there" thought little Claus when he saw the roof "is a great read, as long as the stork does not come to peck my legs." In fact there was a stork with its own nest above the tetto.Così the Little Claus climbed to the roof, lay down and turned to be your own convenience. The Persian front of the windows did not cover the upper part, so he could see into soggiorno.C'era a large table set with wine and roast with beautiful fish, the hostess and the sexton sat at the table, and there 'was no other; she filled his glass and he served the fish, because it was a dish that he liked very much. "Blessed are those who can eat!" He thought the Little Claus and brought the head to the window. My God, what a beautiful cake could see there! Yes, it was a goodness! He heard someone riding along the road towards the house, was the husband of the woman who tornava.Era a great man, but he had a terrible flaw: he could not bear the sight of the sacristans. If a sacristan presented itself before, he became furious. And that is why the sexton had gone to say goodbye to the woman because she knew that her husband was not home, and the good woman had prepared all the best food for him. But now, feeling that the man was returning, the woman became frightened and begged the sexton to hide in a big empty basket that was there in the corner, and the clerk hid because he knew the poor man could not stand the sexton. the woman hid all that good food and wine in the oven, because if her husband had seen him would naturally asked why he had prepared. "What a pity!" sighed Little Claus from the roof when he saw that all the food was taken away. "Is anyone there?" He asked the farmer and looked toward the small Claus. "Why are you lying? Come rather in the living room." So Little Claus told how he was lost and asked if he could stay there for the night. "Certainly," said the farmer, "but first we have to eat something." She welcomed joy the two, set the table and offered a large plate of porridge. The farmer was very hungry and ate with appetite, but Little Claus could not help but think of the delicious roast, fish and cake that were in the oven. Under the table, at his feet, he had put the sack with the horse's skin; remember that he was going to town to sell it? The porridge did not like it, so move the bag and strong crunched dry skin. "Shhh!" said Little Claus to his sack, but at the same time struck him stronger and so this creaked more than before. "Ah, what do you have in that bag?" asked the farmer. "Oh, it's a" Little Claus said "the magician says we should not eat porridge, for he has done a magic and the oven is now full of roast, fish and cake." - "Thing?" He asked the farmer and immediately opened the oven, where he could see all that good food that his wife had hidden, but that he believed had been magically brought to the magician. She could not say anything, but brought the food to the table, and they ate fish, roast and cake. Little Claus struck again sackcloth and creaked skin. "What does he say now?" asked the farmer. "He says," replied Little Claus, "who also prepared three bottles of wine for us and who are in the oven." So she had to bring out the wine he had hidden, and the farmer drank and became very cheerful, sure he would have really liked to have a magician like what Little Claus had in the bag. "It can also bring up the devil?" asked the farmer, "I'd like to see it, now that I'm so happy!" "Yes," said Little Claus, "my magician can do all that I ask. Is not it? You!" he asked, and hit the sack until it creaked. "Feel that says yes? But the devil is so bad that it is not worth to see it." "Oh, I have no fear at all, and what would be its appearance?" "Ah, would look exactly like a sacristan!" "Uh ! " said the farmer "is really bad! You should know that I can not stand the sight of the sacristans. But now it's okay, I know it's the devil and then I feel better already. Now I have the courage, but I must come too close. "" Then I try to feel the magician "said little Claus, hit the sack and listened." what does it say? "" He says you can go to open that trunk in the corner there, in there you will find the devil who is ammuffendo, but you must keep the lid, so that does not slip out. "" you have to help you to keep it, "said the farmer, and went to the trunk, where his wife had hidden the real sexton, who now lay dying dl fear. the farmer raised a bit 'the lid and looked inside: "Uh!" he shouted, and jerked back. "Yes, I saw it, has just the appearance of our sacristan - what a fright!" They had to have a drink over, and so they drank all night. "Now I have to sell your mage" said the farmer, "ask in return for all that you want. Ah yes, you immediately do a full money bag. " "No, I definitely can not, think how much profit I can get from this wizard." "But I would like it very much," said the farmer and continued to pray. "All right," agreed at the end of the Little Claus. "You have been kind enough to host me tonight, and I will give in. You'll have the wizard for a lot of money, but the bag must be filled to the brim." "That's what you'll get," said the farmer, "but you must take away the chest, because I do not want to be here any longer; you never know if it is still inside! "little Claus gave the bag with dry skin to the farmer and received in exchange a bulging money bag . The farmer also donated a large wheelbarrow to transport the trunk and money. "Farewell!" said Little Claus, and left with the money and the chest in which there was still the sacrestano.Dall'altra part of the forest was a large and deep river, the water flowed so strong that one could hardly swim upstream; They had built a big new bridge and Little Claus stopped right in the middle and well said aloud, so that the clerk could hear him from the trunk: "And no! What do I do with this useless trunk? It weighs so much that it's like full of stones; get tired I too still trascinarmelo behind, so I'd better throw it in the stream. If it is transported to my house so much the better, otherwise we do not lose anything. "so grabbed his chest with one hand and held it up a bit ', as if to throw it into the water. "No, do not!" cried the sexton from the trunk "let me out!" "Uh!" said Little Claus, pretending to be afraid. "It's still in the trunk! Then you better throw it straight into the creek, so will drown." "Oh no! Oh no!" She cried the sexton. "If you let me go, I'll give you a bag of money!" "Ah, then it is another thing!" said Little Claus and opened the trunk. The sacristan came out right away and threw the empty chest into the water and went to his house, where Little Claus received a full money bag. One had already had from the farmer and now had the wheelbarrow full of money! "See, the horse han paid me just fine!" said Little Claus to himself when he arrived at his home and took all the money a big pile in the middle of the floor. "Of course the big Claus is angry a lot coming to know what I have become rich with my only horse, but I'm not going to go and tell him the truth." So he sent a boy from the big Claus to borrow a measuring cup. "What ever we He wants to do! " he thought the big Claus, and smeared it on the measuring cup bottom a little 'tar, that remain stuck something that was measured. And it was what happened, and when the big Claus recovered the measure there were attacked three silver coins eight shillings. "What does that mean?" Claus said the largest, and rushed immediately from Little Claus. "Where does all this money?" "From the skin of my horse, which I sold last night." "Of course you have paid good!" He exclaimed the big Claus; ran home, took an ax, and he killed her four horses, then took off his skin and went to town. "Skins, skins! who wants to buy skins?" she cried out in strade.Tutti shoemakers and tanners ran to him to know how much he wanted for the skins. "A lot full of money for each one." "Are you crazy?" they all said "you believe that we have so much money?" "Skins, skins! Who'll buy skins?" he shouted again, but to all those who asked how much they cost the hides, he replied: "A lot of money." "We want to make fun" they all said, and so the shoemakers took their leather straps and the tanners their leather aprons and they began to beat the big Claus. "skins, skins!" mocked him "we give you the skin that you fit! get out of town!" they cried, and the big Claus had to cut and run like crazy, because he had never taken so many. "Ah," he said after coming home "Now the small Claus has to pay, I shall pound to death for it." But to little Claus was dead grandmother; actually he had been mean to him, but he was still saddened and took the dead and put in a hot bed, to see if he could not resurrect. She would stay there all night, and he sat down in a corner and slept on a chair, as he had indeed already done other volte.Mentre asleep, the door opened and the big Claus came in with his ax: he knew dov ' was the bed of little Claus, went straight there and hit him in front of his grandmother who was already dead, thinking it was little Claus. "there!" He shouted, "Now do not take me around anymore!" and so he went away again. "It is an evil, evil man!" said Little Claus, "I wanted to hit to death; fortunately the old grandmother was already dead, or he would kill her." She dressed grandmother with their best clothes, borrowed a horse from the nearby, she attacked him in his chariot and he puts his old grandmother in the back seat, so he could not fall during the trip; finally they departed through the woods; When the sun rose, they had reached an inn; there stood the little Claus and went in to eat qualcosa.L'oste had a lot of money and was a good man, but he was angry, as if in him there was pepper and tobacco. "Good morning," he said to Little Claus, "you had eagerness to wear beautiful clothes today! "" Yes, "the little Claus," said i must go to town with her grandmother, she stayed on the cart, absolutely does not want to enter. you do not want to bring her a glass of mead? Talk to her in a loud voice, because not hear well. "" Of course! " The host said, and filled a large glass of mead, which led out to the dead grandmother who was in the carriage. "Here is a glass of mead from your grandson!" He said the landlord, but the dead did not say a word. "Do you not hear?" She cried the landlord as he could. "That's mead from your grandson!" Cried the same again and again, but since she did not move at all, became angry and threw the glass at him, so that the mead is poured on the nose and she fell pouring into the tank, because it was not connected firmly. "What!" cried Little Claus, rushed out and grabbed the innkeeper: "You killed my grandmother! Look at that big hole has on the forehead!". "Oh, it was a disgrace!" He shouted the innkeeper, and folded his hands. "It's all because of my temper! Poor Little Claus; I will give you a lot of money and I will bury your grandmother as if it were mine, but you do not tell anyone, because otherwise I will cut your head, and the idea is so disgusting! "So little Claus had a lot of money, and the landlord buried his old grandmother as if it was just the little sua.Non Claus was at home with all that money, he sent a boy from the big Claus, to borrow the measuring spoon. "How?" exclaimed the big Claus "had not struck dead? I have to go myself to control!" and so he went to the Little Claus with a measuring cup. "And where did you get all this money?" she asked, and her eyes widened when she saw how much more money there! "You killed my grandmother and not me!" said Little Claus. "Now I sold it and it got me a lot of money." "It is worth it!" said the big Claus; hurried home, took an ax and killed his grandmother, then he puts it on the cart and went into town to the house of the pharmacist and asked if he would buy a dead body. "Who is and where it comes from?" asked the pharmacist. "It is my grandmother," said the big Claus "I killed her for a lot of money." "God save us!" said the chemist. "You talk too much! Do not say such a thing, or you will lose your head!" and then he explained to him what a terrible thing he had committed, and that bad man was and who was to be punished; but the big Claus is so impressed that he jumped on the bandwagon, whipped his horse and flew to casa.Il pharmacist and others believed he was mad and let him go where it seemed to him. "You'll pay!" He said the big Claus once reached the high road. "Yes, you have to pay me, Little Claus!" and as soon as she got home he took the largest sack he had, he went to the Little Claus and said, "You took me around again. First I killed my horses, then my grandmother and all your fault, but you never deceive me! " and so she took him by the waist and stuffed it into the bag, put it on his shoulders and shouted: "Now you'll drown." There was a nice piece of road before arriving at the creek and Little Claus was not light enough bring. The road passed by the church, the organ played and people sang just fine in there; so the big Claus put the bag with the small Claus near the entrance of the church and thought it was a good thing to go hear a psalm before continuing. Little Claus could not escape and all the people were in church. So in he went. "Ah, ah!" moaned the small Claus closed in the bag; kept tossing and turning, but it was impossible to untie the knot that legava.In that moment passed by an old herdsman with hair as white as chalk and a big stick in his hands, he drove a large herd of cows and bulls, passing on the lot where the little Claus was locked up, overthrew him. "Ah," groaned the little Claus "are so young and already I have to go to heaven!" "Oh, poor me!" said the herdsman "but I'm not that old, but still I can not go yet." "Open the sack," cried Little Claus "stay here in my place, and you will soon be in heaven." "Of course I would love to," said the drover and liberated the small Claus who jumped out of the bag. "We think you herd?" He asked the old man, and entered into the bag that Little Claus tied it again, then the small Claus went with the cows and the tori.Poco left the church after the big Claus and put the bag on his back; He felt that the bag was lighter because the drover weighed half of Little Claus. "How light now! Maybe because I heard a psalm!" and so he came to the river which was large and deep, and threw the sack with the old herdsman shouting: "See, now you can not fool me!"; He thought that inside there was little Claus.Poi returned home, but when he came to a crossroads, he met Little Claus who was driving the herd. "But how?" said the big Claus. "Did not I drowned?" "Yes. I've thrown in the river, but it was half an hour ago." "And where did you get that splendid herd?" He asked the big Claus. "It's a herd of sea!" said the Little Claus. "Now I'll tell you what happened. And thank you, you've drowned me, now I'm just fine, I'm rich, and you can believe it! I was very scared, there in the sack, and the wind whistled in my ears when you give me gettasti off the bridge into the icy water. I reached the bottom now, but I did not do anything to me, because there grows the most tender grass. There I fell over and soon the bag was opened, and the most graceful of creatures, dressed in white with a green wreath on wet hair, took my hand and told me: "you are here, little Claus? You now have for the first time a herd! and a mile further up there is another one that I want to give you. "Then I saw that the people of the sea the river was the main road. At the bottom were on foot or in a carriage by sea as far as the torrent ends. it was so beautiful with flowers and fresh grass, and fish swimming in the water touched my ears like birds in the air. what nice people and livestock as he walked along the hedgerows and ditches! "" But why then did you come up here? " He asked the big Claus. "I would not have done if there had been so beautiful!" "Yes," said Little Claus, "but I was smart. You've heard what I said to you the sea girl said that a mile higher - So Long the stream, because you can not get elsewhere - there is another herd for me. But I know that the river is full of inlets, one here, one there, it's all a long ride, so it's faster, when you can do, get back on the ground and cross the stream, thus saving nearly half a mile and arrive more quickly to my herd of sea. "" How lucky you are! " said the big Claus. "Do I think I would have a sea herd, if I went to the bottom of the stream?" "Yes, I think so, but I can not take the bag to the brook, you're too heavy for me; if you go up there to alone and then you stick in the bag, I'll throw down with great pleasure. "" Thank you so much! " said the big Claus. "But if not then I will have my sea herd, once down, then you do buscherai many! I can be sure." "Oh, no, do not be so bad!" and so they went to the creek. And the herd, who was thirsty, when he saw the water rides as he could to have a drink. "See how they hurry?" said Little Claus. "Do not wait to get to the bottom again." "Yes, but now help me, or I'll pesto!" and so he slipped into the big bag that was on the back of a bull. "Put in a stone well, so I'm sure to drown." "That's okay," said Little Claus, but also put a large stone into the bag, tied him well and gave him a shove: plump! the big Claus fell into the stream and soon reached the bottom. "I'm afraid we will not find herds!" exclaimed Little Claus, and went home with what he had.
The poor boy and the Pussycat	1003	402	Italian	Three apprentices served in a mill lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child. After spending several years together, one day the miller said, -Go, and who will lead me home the best horse will have mulino-. The third boy was a serving-that others thought a fool, and he did not want the mill; the rest he did not want it. They left the three of them and when they were out of the village, the other two said that fool Gianni: -You can also stay here once in your life you will never find a horse-. But Gianni, went with them and when it was night they came to a cave where they lay down to sleep. The two smart ones waited until Hans had fallen asleep, then they went out of the cave and fled, leaving John alone, and thought they were being clever: Yes, but you will go wrong! When the sun rose, and Hans woke up, he found himself at the bottom of a cave; looked around and exclaimed: Ah, God! Where am I? -. He got up, went up the cave, went into the woods and thought, "Why am I going to find a horse !." While he was so deep in thought, he met a spotted cat who said: -Where are you going, John? -. Ah, you can not help me - he said. -I know well what they want- said the cat -Want a nice horse. Come with me; if you serve me for seven years, I'll give you one more beautiful than you will have ever seen in life tua.- So the cat took him in her small enchanted castle, where he was to serve her and chop wood every day: for this was given the silver ax, wedges and silver saw and the bat was copper. And so chopped wood and they were in the house, gave him food and drink, but saw no one except the spotted cat. Once she said to him: -It 'to mow my lawn and make the dry grass- and gave him a silver sickle and a stone for sharpening that was gold, and ordered him to hand over everything right. Gianni went and did as he was told; when he had finished brought home the scythe, whetstone, and hay, wondered if he believed that it was high time to give him his reward. No, he answered the cat-before you get me another thing: here's the silver wood, an ax, a team and what it takes, silver everything: build me a small casetta.- Then Hans built the house, and he said he had done everything but had no horse. Seven years had passed as if they were six months. The cat asked him if he wanted to see his horses. -Si- said Gianni. Then he opened the small house, and opened the door, there stood twelve horses looking superb. They were as polished as mirrors and the young man's heart leaped in his chest with joy. Then she gave him to eat and drink, and said: -It 'well at home, the horse now I have I give you; In three days I come to portartelo-. So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill. But the cat did not give him even a new suit, and he had to keep his dirty old smock frock, which he had brought with him, and that was too short in those seven years. When he reached home, were there again the other two boys; both of them had brought a horse, but one was blind and the other lame. And they asked -John, where's your horse? -. -Arriverà between three giorni.- They laughed and said: -Yes, where wilt thou get a horse, Gianni! Who knows what good stuff! -. Hans went into the room, but the miller said he could not sit at the table it was so ragged and torn, there was no shame if any one came. So they gave him two bites of food, and they did go out to eat them; and in the evening, when they went to sleep, the other two did not want to give him a bed, and he ended coll'andare in the coop of geese and lie down on a little 'straw. The next morning, when he wakes up, have already passed the three days, and get a carriage drawn by six horses and they shone so bright that it was delightful! and a servant brought a seventh, for the poor boy. He alighted from the coach a beautiful princess who went into the mill was the little spotted cat, whom poor Hans had served for seven years. He asked the miller where was the boy and drudge. He answered: -We can not have him here in the mill, it is so ragged; It is in the coop of oche-. Then the princess told him to go now to call him. So they did, and he had to hold together the shreds of her blouse to cover. Then the servants unpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed; and when that was done, no king could have looked more beautiful. Then the maiden desired to see the horses they had brought the other two boys: one was blind and the other lame. So she ordered the servant to bring the seventh horse, and when the miller saw it, he said that in his backyard that had never been one like it. -This is for the third garzone- she said. -So will have mulino- said the miller, but the princess replied that there was the horse and could even keep the mill; then takes his faithful John, the seats in the carriage and goes with him. They go into the house he had built with the silver tools is a great castle, and everything inside is made of gold and silver. Then they married him, and he was rich, so rich that he had enough for a lifetime. So no one should say that a fool can not make a fortune.
The frog king or Iron Henry	2	440	Italian	In ancient times, when desire was still of some, there lived a King whose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautiful that the sun, which also has seen so much, wondered each time he shone face. Near the royal castle there was a great dark wood, and the wood under an old linden tree, there was a fountain. In the hottest hours of the day, the princess went into the woods and sat on the edge of the cool spring. And when he was bored, he took a golden ball, throw it up and catch it again; and this was his game preferito.Ora happened one day that the golden ball instead of falling back into the little hand which had sent it aloft, dropped to the ground and rolled right into the water. The princess followed her with his eyes, but the ball disappeared, and the well was deep, deep out of sight. Then she began to cry, and cried louder and louder, and could not be comforted. And while it was crying, someone shouted: "What are you, princess? You weep piteously to the stones." She looked around to see where the voice came, and saw a frog stretching his thick ugly head. "Ah, you're you, old frog!" He said, "I weep because my golden ball has fallen into the well." - "Never mind, do not weep," answered the frog, "I got it, but what will you give me if I fetch your ball?" - "Whatever you want, dear frog," she said the princess, "my clothes, my pearls and my jewels, maybe my golden crown." The frog answered, "Your clothes, your pearls and jewels, and your golden crown, I do not want them, but if you want me well, if I can be your friend and playmate, sit with you at your little table, eat from your golden plate, drink from your cup, sleep in your bed if I promise this; tufferò me and I'll bring the golden ball. " - "Ah yes," he said the princess, "I promise you all you want as long as bring me the ball." But he thought: What goes on about this stupid frog, which is in the water to croak with his fellows, and can not be the companion of a human being! Awarded the promise, the frog put his head under the water, he dived and shortly thereafter He remixing returned to the surface; He had the ball in his mouth and threw it on the grass. The princess was overjoyed to see her pretty toy, he took it and ran. "Wait wait!" cried the frog, "take me with you, I can not run like you do." But that availed croaking how his lungs! The princess did not listen, ran home and soon forgot the poor frog, who had to dive back into his fonte.Il next day when she sat at the table with the king and all the courtiers, and was eating from his plate d ' gold - plitsch platsch, plitsch platsch - something bounding climbed the marble staircase, and when he was on top of a knock on the door and shouted: "the daughter of the king, little one, let me in!" The princess ran to see who was outside, but when he opened it he saw in front of the frog. Then she shut the door hastily, and sat down again at the table, full of fear. The king noticed that the heart was pounding, and said, "What are you afraid, my child? At the door is there a giant who wants to kidnap you?" - "Oh no," she said, "it is no giant, but a disgusting frog." - "What do you want from you?" - "Ah, my father, yesterday when I was playing in the woods close to the source, my golden ball fell into the water. And because I was crying so much, the frog has fished me. And why at all costs wanted it, the I promised it would be my companion, but I never thought he could get out of that water. it is now out and it come to me. " Meanwhile, there was a knock for the second time and shout: "The daughter of the king, little one, let me in! You do not know what ierim'hai said vicinoalla fresh source? Daughter of kings, little one, let me in!" Then the king said: "What you have promised, you must keep it; go 'then, and open." She went and opened the door; the frog came in and, always behind her, hopped up to his chair. There he sat and cried: "Lift me up to you." The princess hesitated, but the king commanded her to do. As soon as he was in the chair, the frog wanted to get on the table and when it was on the table he said, "Now avvicinami your golden plate, because we eat together." She did, but it was obvious that he did so reluctantly. The frog ate heartily, but she almost every morsel remained in his throat. Finally he said: "I have eaten and I'm tired. Now carry me to your room and tidy up your silken bed will go to sleep." The princess began to cry; he was afraid of the cold frog, that he dared not touch and that now he had to sleep in her pretty clean bed. But the king was angry and said, "You must not despise those who have helped you in time of need." Then she picked up the beast with two fingers, carried him upstairs and put it in a corner. But when she was in bed, the frog was saltelloni and said, "I'm tired, I want to sleep as well as you: take me up, or I'll tell your father." Then the princess became angry, took it and threw it with all his might against the wall: "Now you shut up, ugly frog!" But when he fell down, he was not a frog was a prince with beautiful eyes. At the behest of his father, he was her dear companion and husband. He told her that he had been bewitched by a wicked witch, and no one but her, she could free him. The next day they would go together into his kingdom. Then they fell asleep. The next morning, when the sun awoke them, a carriage came with eight white horses, which had white ostrich feathers on their heads and golden harnesses; and behind was the servant of the young king, faithful Henry. Henry had been so unhappy when his master was turned into a frog, that he had been putting three iron bands around his heart, because he does not burst with anxiety. The carriage was to bring the young king in his kingdom; Faithful Henry had them both in there, he went back and was full of joy at the liberazione.Quando had gone a stretch of road, the prince heard a loud crash, as if behind him something had broken. Then he turned and shouted, "Henry, the carriage is breaking!" "No, sir, it is not the coach, Rather a circle of my heart, Which was immersed in great pain, when in the fontanaTramutato you were a frog. " Twice more he heard a crash during the trip; and each time the prince thought that the coach went to pieces; and instead they were just circles, leaping away from the heart of Faithful Henry because his master was free and happy.
Prince fearless	1146	590	Italian	There was once a prince who did not want to stay home of his father; and as he had no fear of anything, he thought: "I will leave the world in order not to get bored, and I'll see all sorts of things." So he took leave of his parents and left, walking all day long, regardless of where they would lead the way. The happened to arrive at the house of a giant, because he was tired, he sat at the door to rest. And, while his eyes roam here and there, he saw on the ground in the courtyard of giant games: some huge ball of the big skittles. After a while ', he felt like playing, straightened the pins and then rolled the balls; when pins were falling, yelling, screaming and amused. The giant heard the noise, looked out the window and saw a man no taller than the others, and yet played with his nine-pins. Then he shouted: -Vermiciattolo, who gave you the strength to play with my balls? -. The prince looked up, saw the giant, and said -Babbeo, perhaps you believe to be the only hast strong arms? I can do everything that I like! -. The giant came down and watched with great admiration, and said, -Man, if you are of that kind, go 'and bring me an apple of life-. -What do you do with it? - he asked the prince -not for me- said the giant -is my girlfriend that wants; I have already turned over, but I can not find the albero.- -I just get in the Route replied the prince-and surely I will find the tree; and I think it would just weird if I fail to grasp the apple! - The giant said: -It is not as easy as you think. The garden in which the tree stands is surrounded by an iron railing, and in front of it are, huddled next to each other, wild beasts, and they keep watch and not let in no-. -Vedrai if you do not let me in - said the prince. -But if you even get into the garden and see the apple on the tree, it is still your: before there is a ring and you have to stick my hand if it wants to reach the apple, and this has not yet managed to anyone. - Oh, is reserved for me- said the prince-I will succeed! - he took leave from the giant and went over hill and dale, through fields and woods, until he found the enchanted garden. The beasts lay, but were down and were asleep head. On arrival they did not wake up, and he stepped over them, climbed the fence, and got safely into the garden. In the middle of it, he stood the tree of life with red apples were shining between the branches. The prince climbed onto the trunk, and while it was about to seize an apple saw a ring hanging in front of the fruit, but pot, introduce the hand without any difficulty, and the apple. The ring, however, clung to his arm, and he felt a prodigious strength flowing through a sudden, so much so that he thought he could dominate everything; actually this strength gave him the ring. When he came down from the tree, he would not climb on the gates, but grasped the great gate, shook him and that burst open with a crash. He came out, and the lion, who was lying down before, woke up and followed him on the run, not in rage and fierceness, but with humility, as if the prince was his master, and never left him. The prince took the giant the apple he had promised. -Vedi- said -I caught without fatica.- The giant was glad to have gotten so fast that he had so desired, he ran from his girlfriend and gave her the apple. She was a beautiful and wise maiden, and, not seeing a ring on his arm, said: I do not believe that thou hast brought the apple, until I see the ring on your braccio-. -Oh- said the giant-not that I go and get a house.- And he thought to take him away by force, weak man, unless he wanted to give of his own. She went home and demanded that the prince gave him the ring, but that he did not want. -Where the apple, there must also be the ring-the big man said. -If you do not give it to me, you have to fight with me! - They fought for a long time, but not the giant pot, harm, who was strengthened by the magical power of the ring. Then the giant thought of a stratagem, and said: -The struggle made us come hot will bathe in the river and cool ourselves back again-before. The prince, who knew nothing of falsehood, went with him to the river, took off his clothes, and even the ring from his arm, and dove into the water. Immediately the giant grabbed the ring and ran away; but the lion, who always followed his master, realized the theft, pursued and snatched it. Then the giant went on a rampage, he returned to the river and, while the prince was busy to get dressed, grabbed him and put both his eyes. Now the unhappy King was blind and did not know what to do. The giant came back with bad intentions. Silently, he took the blind man by the hand, as someone who wanted to guide him, and led him on top of a high cliff. Then he abandoned it and thought, "If it is still close, it kills falling, and I can get him the ring." But the faithful lion had not deserted its master; She held him back for the dress and, little by little, made him turn back. When the giant came to rob the dead man, found him alive and well. -Possible not be able to send down the drain a human being so miserable! - he said angrily to himself, and s; again he took the prince by the hand, and brought him again to the precipice by another way. But the lion which saw his evil and design, helped its master out of danger here also. When they reached the edge, the giant left hand of the blind man to leave him alone; then the lion is hurled him with all his strength, so that, the monster rushed into the abyss and havoc. Then the animal again drew its master back from the, and led him to a tree by which flowed a clear brook. The prince sat down, while the lion lay down, and sprinkled water on her face. A few drops landed on his eyes and bathed them, and the prince noticed that his vision came back, because he saw a light, and he could make out something next to s. It was a bird passed next to her face and slammed into the tree trunk, just as if he were blind. Then he dropped into the water and bathed itself therein, then took off and flew trees without touching them, just as if he had received his sight. The prince realized that it was a divine sign, he leaned over the water and washed and bathed his face. And when he arose he had his eyes again, clear and clearer than they had ever been. The prince thanked God for this miracle and continued to travel the world with his lion. One day he came in front of an enchanted castle. The gateway stood a maiden of beautiful form and fine face, but all black. She spoke to him and said: Ah, if you could free me from the evil spell which keeps me in her power! -. -What shall I do? - asked the prince. The girl replied: -You must pass three nights in the enchanted castle living without fear enter thy heart. If thou endure without complaint the torture that will make you, I will be free; they dare not take the life-. He told the prince: -Tenterò with the help of God: I fear nothing in this world-. So he went gaily into the castle, sat down in the living room and waited for nightfall you. Everything was quiet until midnight, then he broke a racket and all the corner came little devils. They pretended not to see him, sat across the room, lit a fire and began to play. When one lost, he said: -It is not right: there is anyone here who is not of our own, and the fault is his if I lose! -. -Wait, I come, you fellow behind the stove - said another. The screams were louder, and no one could have heard it without terror. The prince, however, was not at all. At the end of the devils they jumped up and fell upon him; and they were so many that he could not defend himself from them on the floor, pinched him, pricked him, beat him and tortured him, but he bore it all without fear and without complaint. Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted he could not move. But at the dawn of day came to him the black girl. He held a bottle wherein was the water of life; she washed him, and soon all pain and he felt fresh and healthy. Then she said: -You happily passed a night, but you still have two ahead of you-. Then he left, and as he walked away, he noticed that his feet had turned white. The next night the devils came and began their game; but soon they fell on the King and beat him violently, much more severely than the night before, until, his body was full of wounds. But as he bore all quietly, they had to leave him; and when dawn appeared again the girl who healed him with the water of life. When she went away, he saw with joy that had become all white, not the fingertips. And now he had only one night more, but it was the worst. Devils returned. -Are you still here? - they shouted. -I tortureremo from mozzarti the fiato.- The pricked and beat him, threw him here and there and pulled her arms and legs, as if they wanted quartered. But he gave a cry and was not afraid, and he consoled himself thinking that everything would pass, and that the girl would be freed from the spell. But when the devils vanished, he lay motionless and unconscious; no pot, even looking up to see the maiden who came and bathed with the water of life. And suddenly it freed from all pain, and he felt fresh and healthy as if he had just awakened from sleep. And when he opened his eyes, he saw beside s, the girl, white as snow and as beautiful as the sun. Get up! - she said-and wield your sword three times on the scale, so everything will be libero.- And when he had done that, the whole castle was released from enchantment, and the maiden was a rich princess. The servants came and said that in the living room, the table was already prepared and lunch served. They sat, ate and drank together, and in the evening the wedding was celebrated in great rejoicing.
The gallant tailor (Seven at one blow)	189	1640	Italian	One summer morning a little tailor was sitting at his table, in front of the window, and sewed. Down the street was a peasant shouting good -Marmellata! Marmalade good! -. The cry sounded pleasant in the little tailor; She poked her head out the window and called -Quassù, good woman! Here you spaccerete your mercerising. The woman came up and had to open all his basket. The little man inspected well every pot, and finally just bought a quarter pound, so the woman left in a foul mood and grumbling. -What God bless my marmellata- said the little tailor -and give me strength and vigor! - He took the bread, I cut a piece for the long and rubbed it over the jam. -Must have a good flavor- said -but first bite I want to finish farsetto.- He put the bread beside s, she took up her sewing and joy grew longer stitches. Meanwhile the smell of jam had climbed up the wall until you get to a swarm of flies that rushed down. The tailor every now and then he turned to look at the bread, and so discovered the interlopers. -Olà- exclaimed -who he invited you? - and drove away. But the flies, who did not understand the language, and were not rejected and returned even more numerous. The tailor lost patience, took a piece of cloth from her, and saying -Aspettate, I'll let you! - and down strokes. When he stopped and counted, he found seven lying dead before him. -You are so good? - said, wondering at his 'es'. -Must know all città.- And hurriedly cut his belt, and he stitched and I embroidered on it in large letters: -Sette at once! -. -macché city! - he went -all the world must know! - And his heart leapt for joy like a lamb's tail. Then she tied the belt around your waist and rummaged through the house if there was nothing to take away, because he wanted to leave the world. But at home he found only an old cheese and stuffed it in his pocket. In front of the door with a stroke of luck he caught a bird that went to keep company with cheese. Then he took the road between his legs and climbed up into a high mountain, and when he reached the top here there sits a great giant. -Ehilà, comrade! - he said the little tailor to te giant will you sit watching the world? I, too, I walked to test my strength. You want to come with me? - The giant looked at him and said: -You, being miserable! -. -Right! - said the little tailor, and unbuttoned his jacket and showed the giant his belt: -Here you can read that are- man. The giant read. -Sette at once! - she thought it was the men killed and began to have a little 'respect for the little tailor. But first he wanted to test Jesus picked up a stone and held it up to make it drip out of the water. -Now foul you- said the giant -if you have the forza.- -All here? - said the little tailor. -I know anch'io.- to put his hand in his pocket, pulled out the cheese and squeezed it, so that it flowed out the juice. -E 'even better, is not it? - he said. The giant did not know what to say, and could not believe that that little man was capable of so much. Then he picked up a stone and threw it so high that you could hardly see it. -Now, duckling, do you- even said to the little tailor. -Subito- he answered. -The your shot was good, but the stone has also had to fall to the ground; Now I'll throw you do one, he do not tornerà.- He put his hand in his pocket, took out the bird, and threw it into the air. The bird, happy to be free, went up and flew away. She like that, comrade? - asked the tailor. -Launch, you know-but the launch good- giant said now let's see if you can bring some nice peso.- She led him to a big heavy oak, which lay on the ground torn down, and said: -The bring together outside Bosco-. -You take the trunk on shoulder- said the little man-I will raise will take the branches and leaves; It is the part pesante.- The giant took the trunk and put it on his shoulders, while the tailor sat behind a branch, and the giant had to carry him and the whole tree. The tailor back there was very merry, and whistled the tune as if carrying the tree was a breeze. After dragging all that weight for a stretch of the road, not the giant pot, over and said, -Listen, I have to drop the tree-. The tailor jumped down and grabbed the tree with both arms, as if he had taken, and said to the giant: -You are so big you can not carry a tree! -. They walked together and, passing by a cherry tree, the giant grabbed the crown of the tree, where the ripest fruit, and gave it to the tailor, bidding him eat too. The tailor was too weak to resist the force of the tree and was thrown into the air. How come, you do not have the strength to keep that wand? - he asked the giant. And he said, -Do you think it's that great for someone who has hit seven at once? You know why I did it? Because, below the hunters shooting in the bush. Do it yourself if you capace- six. The giant tried, but failed to jump over the tree since, always ended up between the branches and there impigliava; so this time the tailor took over. The giant said: -Come in our cave and spend the night by us-. The tailor followed him willingly. The giant then gave him a bed where he could rest. The little tailor, however, did not lay down, but cowered in a corner. At midnight the giant came with an iron bar, with a blow smashed the bed and thought, "finally ended with the grasshopper, so there will be more to see." The next day the giants went into the woods and had completely forgotten the little tailor, who believed dead, quand'eccolo get all happy and confident. The giants, bewildered, they were afraid of being killed and all fled precipitately. The little tailor went on his way, always behind the tip of his nose, until he entered the courtyard of a palace, and as he was tired he lay down in the grass and fell asleep. Meanwhile came the king's people, observed it from all sides, and read on his belt -Sette at once! -. -Ah- said -what should this great lord come here in time of peace? It must certainly be a powerful sir They warned the king and said: -In the event of war would be a useful and important man; you must not be allowed to depart -. The king liked the advice and sent to the tailor one of his men as soon as he had woken up, he had to offer to enter into his service. The tailor agreed and said: -I came for this, to serve the re- So he was received with great honor, and was given a special accommodation. But the warriors were hostile to him and wished him a thousand. -How will it end? - they said to one another. -If we attack lite and he leads the barrel, they fall seven strokes. The rest of us can not face him! - He therefore resolved to go all together to the king, they asked him to dismiss them and said, -We are not made to withstand a man so strongly. The king was sorry to lose all his servants because of one man, he would willingly get rid of and regretted the moment she met him. But he did not dare dismiss him, for fear he would kill the with all his people and occupy the throne. He pondered for a long time and finally had an idea: he sent word to the tailor that since he was such a great hero, he wanted to make him a proposal. In a forest of his reign there were two giants who were doing great damage with robbery, murder, fires; although no one could approach them armed. If he had killed them, he would give his daughter in marriage and half his kingdom as dowry; Moreover hundred knights would accompany him to manforte. "It would be quite a coup for a man like you," thought the little tailor. "A beautiful princess and half a kingdom'm not bad!" Oh, yes- replied -i giants domerò them and the hundred knights do not need me, who can kill seven at once can not fear them due.- So he set out and when he came to the edge of the forest said to the knights: -Rimanete off, with giant me'll hurry I- He entered and looked this way and that. Finally he found them both asleep under a tree, and snoring so as to swing the branches. -The're done! - said the tailor; he filled his pockets with stones and climbed the tree. Then she began to throw a stone after the other on the chest of one of the two giants, until they woke up angry, hit his companion and said, Hey, why beat me? -. -You sogni- said the other -non beat you affatto.- They were back to sleep, and the tailor threw the second stone on his chest; what he jumped up and said: -What are you going to do, what to throw to me? -. -Do not spray anything- just said the first. They argued for a while ', but because they were tired, they gave it up, and shut her eyes again. Then the little tailor began his game, he chose the biggest stone, and threw it with all his might on the first giant chest he shouted -This is too much! -, jumped up like a madman, and rapped his companion. At the other he did not go to the genius and repaid of the same coin; then they raged so that divelsero trees, and quarreled among themselves over until they fell dead. -Less bad- said the little tailor-which have uprooted the tree on which I was, otherwise I would have made a bad jump! - He got happy then from the tree, drew his sword and, with confidence, buckled them a few hacks in breast, and she went by the knights. -The lie the two Giants- said. -I made them the party, but we were waiting for someone who can kill seven at once, why, pressed, still have uprooted the trees! - -You are hurt, are you? - they asked the horsemen. -There it virtually answered the tailor-but I would not have harmed a capello.- The knights did not believe him and s'inoltrarono in the forest: they found the giants immersed in their blood and around the trees uprooted. And they were amazed and were even more afraid because of the little tailor, did not doubt that he would kill them all if they were the enemy. They returned to the castle and told it unto the king; Then he came also the little tailor, and said: -Now I want the princess and half the kingdom-ref. But the king had repented of his promise, and he thought back to how out of the way the hero, who wanted not to give her daughter. So he said that if he wanted to marry must first capture a unicorn running in the forest causing harm to humans and animals. The tailor was delighted, he took a rope, went to the forest and ordered the escort to wait out because he wanted to capture the unicorn alone. Then penetrated into the forest, and wandered here and there in search of the unicorn. Soon came the unicorn and rushed straight into the tailor to bury it. -Plan, plan! - he said. He stopped waiting for the animal came quite near, then quickly he jumped behind a tree. The unicorn ran so fast that he had no time to change direction, so that, lunged against the tree and stuck his horn in the trunk so firmly that, while using all his strength, failed to retract and remained imprisoned. Then the little tailor stepped out from behind the tree, putting the rope around his neck and led him first by his companions and then the king, which recalled the promise made to him. The king was frightened, but came up with a new cunning and said that before were held the wedding, he had catturargli a boar that ran into the forest; hunters would help him. -Volentieri- said the little tailor-is the least difficile.- So he went again into the forest leaving out the hunters, and they were very happy because we, the boar had already welcomed them often in order to remove the desire to give hunting. When the boar saw the man, he persecuted the foaming at the mouth grinding his teeth, and he wanted to knock him down. The tailor was located next to a chapel, he jumped in and, nimbly, went immediately out the window. The boar had followed him, but when the little tailor jumped out ran to close the door, and the beast was imprisoned because he could not jump up to the window. He then called the hunters so, they saw their prey, and then went to the king and said, -I caught the boar and, with it, even the princess-. It 'easy to imagine if the king was happy or not the news; but he does not know what to argue, so he had to keep his promise and withhold his daughter. At least he thought he was a hero; if he had known that it was not that of a tailor, he would give him still more to heart. Then the wedding was celebrated with great pomp and little joy, and the tailor was made into a king. After a few days, at night, the young queen heard her husband say, dreaming: -Garzone, make me that waistcoat and patch the trousers, or I'll give you the tape on orecchie-. Then he realized where birth her husband, and, the next morning, he went to her father and asked him to help her free from a man who was not a tailor. The king consoled her and said: -The next night, leaves open your bedroom; out there will be my servants and, when asleep, and they will come prigioniero-. She was pleased; but the armor bearer of the king had heard everything and as he was fond of the young ladies and was faithful, ran to him and told him everything. The tailor said of good cheer: -Metterò shelter to what-. In the evening he went to bed with his wife at the usual time and pretended to sleep; She got up, opened the door and went back to bed. Then the little tailor began to shout in a loud voice: -Garzone, make me that waistcoat and patch the trousers, or I'll give you the tape on the ears! I have taken seven at one blow, I killed two giants, caught a unicorn and a boar and I should be afraid of those out there, in front of the cam? -. When they heard these words, all they fled as if they had been wild hares, and no one dared approach the tailor. So he was and remained king for life.
The spider and the turtle	8974	60	Italian	One day Anansi the spider picked from her garden very large and delicious vegetables. The scorched patiently and carefully baked, really smelled good. He could not wait to sit down to eat it. At that moment there was a knock at the door. It was Turtle who had traveled all day and was very tired and hungry. "Hello, Anansi," said Turtle. "I walked for a long time and I felt the best vegetable aroma of my life. Would you be so kind as to share your meal with me?" Anansi could not say no because in his country it was customary to share the food with guests. But it was not particularly happy because it was a bit 'selfish and wanted to keep that exquisite vegetables only for himself. So Anansi thought for a bit 'and devised a plan. "Please, come in, Turtle. It will be an honor to have you as a guest tonight. Sit down, this is your chair, and served." Turtle came in and sat down, but when he was about to sample the Anansi vegetables yelled, "Turtle, do not you know it is bad manners to sit at table with dirty hands? "Turtle looked at his hands and saw that they were dirty. He had crawled all day and had not been able to wash them. So he got up and went to the river to wash his feet. He walked, slowly like all turtles, all the way up to the house and when he returned, Anansi had already begun to eat. "I did not want this delicious vegetables to cool, so I had to begin," said Anansi. "But please, join now, Turtle." Turtle sat down again and took a bit 'of vegetables, but Anansi cried again. "Turtle, did not you hear what I told you before? It is bad manners to sit at the table with dirty hands!" He looked down and saw that his hands were dirtied again because he had to use them to drag and go home. So he went back to the river to wash them. And this time, when he came back, he had the foresight to walk on the grass so as not to dirty them again. But when he arrived at the table, Anansi had already finished all the delicious vegetables and not left even a bite. Turtle looked at Anansi for a moment and then said: "Thank you for sharing with me your food. If one day happen near my house, please, let me return the favor." And then slowly he walked out the door and went on his way. The days went by and Anansi thought more and more to the dinner that the turtle had promised. His desire to eat for free grew and in the end, he could no longer contain it. He decided to set out a day and go look for the home of Turtle. He found Turtle on a river bank in the sun right into the dinner hour. Turtle looked up and saw him and said, "Hello, Anansi, have you come to dinner with me?" "Oh, yes, yes!" Anansi said, that with each passing minute had always hungry. Turtle went to set the table for dinner in his house underwater. Then he went back to the shore and said, "Dinner is served, and your place is waiting for you. Please, follow me, Anansi." And then he dived and began to eat slowly. Anansi jumped into the water, but could not reach the bottom of the river. He tried to swim down, but it was so light that his body went back each time to the surface. He tried to dive and swim on their backs. He tried to jump into the race, but nothing helped him to get to the bottom of the river. Meanwhile, the turtle slowly chewed dinner. Anansi did not want to give up a free dinner and returned to shore thinking about how to do. Finally he had an idea. He began to collect rocks and stones and put them in his jacket pockets. So, when he entered the water, he sank and was able to take his place at the table. The table was a feast of delicious food. Anansi could not believe the amount of delicious food they had in mind and he could not wait any longer. But when he was about to give the first morsel, Turtle stopped eating and said: "In my country, the jacket at the table never wear it." Anansi saw Turtle fact that, before sitting down, he had taken off his jacket. Anansi started to take off his jacket and, as soon as the slid from his shoulders, he went straight back to the surface. He put his head under water and saw Turtle, down there, slowly enjoying that wonderful banquet.
The king Thrushbeard	493	900	Italian	A king had a daughter of extraordinary beauty, but so proud and haughty withal that no suitor was good enough for her, and she rejected them one after the other, and ridiculed them. Once the King made a great feast and invited those who wished to marry. They were all marshalled in a row according to their rank and standing: first the king, then the dukes, princes, counts and barons, and the gentry. The princess was led through the ranks, but to every one she had some objection to this was too fat: -What blows! - exclaimed; that was too long: -Long, long, high up there, beautiful gait just does not! -; the third was too short -So fat and little one, looks like a pig! -; the fourth was too pale -Terreo like death! -; The fifth too red: -What turkey! -; the sixth was not straight: Green -Wood dried behind the stove! -. So she had something to say about each; but especially merry over a good king who was in the front row and had the chin a bit 'curved. -Oh- he laughed -what has a chin like a thrush's beak! - And by that time they called Thrushbeard. But the old king, when he saw that his daughter did nothing but make fun of the pretenders there are concentrated, sdegnandoli, and vowed to marry her to the first beggar that came to his door. A few days later a musician began singing under the window to have a small alms. When the king heard it, he said: -Fatelo up! -. Fiddler came in dirty, ragged clothes, and sang before the king and his daughter, and when he had finished, he asked for a trifling gift. The king said: -Your song has pleased me so well that I give you my daughter in isposa-. The princess was horrified, but the king said, -I have taken an oath to give to the first beggar and manterrò-. A ignoring the protests: the pastor was called and she had to marry the player. Celebrate the wedding, the king said: -Do not befitting the wife of a beggar clothes in my castle, you have only to go away with your husband-. The beggar went well with her. They arrived in a great forest, and she asked: -This beautiful forest who owns it? - -Bazza of thrush in his power to keep it. Would you I had not rifiutato.- -Povera me, or everything I remembered, how I wish this had not been! -Then to a meadow, and she asked again: -This lawned who owns it? - -Bazza of Thrush in his power to keep it. Would it I had not rifiutato.- -Povera me, or everything I remembered, how I wish this were not! -Giunsero then in a great city, and she asked again: -What prosperous city! Who owns it? - -Bazza of thrush in his power to keep it. Would he I had not rifiutato.- -Povera me, or everything I remembered, how I wish that it were not! -So the player said: -I do not like it at all that you always wishing for another husband; I not enough for you, perhaps? -. At last they came to a small hut, and she said, Ah, my God! What a small house Who owns the poor little house? -The player replied: -It 's my house and yours, where we will dwell together-. -Where are the servants? - he asked the princess. -macché, servants! - he replied the beggar alone -you get what you want. Turn immediately the fire and put water on to boil for dinner: I'm tired morto.- But the princess did not know n, n light the fire, cooking, and the beggar had to help her so that she could get away. When they had finished their scanty meal, they went to bed, but the next morning, he threw her out of bed early because, hurry up the housework. For a few days they lived as well as best and all their provisions. Then the man said-wife, we can not continue like this, to eat without gaining. Farai of canestri-. He went to cut some willows, and brought them home; she began to weave, but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands. -I see that there VA- said the man. -Fila quite possibly he can meglio.- She sat down and tried to spin; but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so bleed. -Vedi- said-not the man you are good for nothing: with you I ended badly. Be ', I want to try to trade in pots and in earthen vessels: will sell the goods to the market- "Ah," thought the princess, "if it is to market other people from my father's kingdom, and sees me sitting to sell, they will mock myself!" But there was no way out, he had to go there if he did not die of hunger. The first time she succeeded well for its great beauty, people were glad to buy her wares and paid what she asked; many even gave her the money and left the pots. They went on with that gain until it lasted, then the man bought a lot of new crockery. She sat in a corner of the market and exhibited merchandise for sale around s. But suddenly there came a drunken hussar galloping and he rode right amongst the pots, sending pieces. She began to cry and to the fatigue did not know what to do. Ah, what will become of me! - he exclaimed. -What will my husband say - She ran home and told him what had happened. -Who would seat at the corner of the market place with crockery! - said the man. -Stop crying, I can see that you are good for nothing. For this I have been to the castle of our king and asked if he needed a kitchen maid; they promised me that they will take you, in return they will give you the mangiare.- So the princess became a kitchen maid; He had to help cook and perform the most strenuous jobs. Each pocket staring at a pot to take home the leftovers; and so campavano. Now it happened that we had to celebrate the wedding of the eldest son of the king; the poor woman went up and stood in front of the door of the room to watch. Among such luxury and splendor, she thought all afflicted to his fate and cursed the pride and arrogance that had plunged into misery. Every now and then the servants threw a few morsels of delicious dishes that were served, and she put them in her jars to take home. Suddenly came the prince all dressed in gold and, when he saw the beautiful woman at the door, took her hand and wanted to dance with her. But she refused, frightened, because he recognized the king Thrushbeard, the suitor who had driven away with scorn. Her struggles were, Prince pulled her into the hall; so you broke the string by which her pockets were hung, the pots fell down, the soup ran out, and the leftovers were scattered here and there. At this sight, all burst laughter and derision; and she was so ashamed that she would rather be a thousand fathoms below the ground. She ran to the door and wanted to flee, but on the stairs a man caught her and brought her back. And when she looked at him, saw that it was again the king Thrushbeard. -Do you fear- said these-I and the fiddler who lived with you in that wretched hovel are the same person: for thy sake I disguised myself so; and also the hussar who rode through your crockery. This happened to break your pride and to punish the arrogance with which you made fun of me. But now all is over, and now we will celebrate our nozze.- Then came the maids and made her wear the most expensive clothes, and was the father of the princess with the whole court to wish her for her marriage to the king of Bazza Thrush; and only then the real party began. If you and I had been there too
The tailor in heaven	330	800	Italian	One day he died a crippled tailor and, therefore, went limping paradise. He knocked on the door, but St. Peter, who was on guard, did not open right away and asked: -Who is that knocking? -. -I am a poor but honest tailor, begging to be left entrare.- -Yes, honest as a gallows neck! - St Peter said. -Avevi long hands when scroccavi the fabric to customers! Go to hell, in heaven there does not enter! - Ah, merciful Lord! - cried the tailor-I limp, and I have all blistered feet on the long road, I can not go back. Let the same in heaven, I'll be sitting behind the stove, and I will willingly do the most menial jobs:'ll watch the kids, I will clean the wings, fregherò the benches on which they play, let me just go! - St. Peter sank pity and opened a little gate of heaven to the tailor, so he could insinuarvisi. All this took place around noon, when the Lord, the Divine Father and the archangels wanted to go for a walk in the garden of heaven. San Pietro ordered the tailor to keep order in heaven, and be careful that nothing was stolen during their absence. -Si- replied the tailor -provvederò each cosa.- When all were gone, the tailor thrust his nose into every corner of paradise and finally ascended the throne of the Lord, from which you could see everything that was happening on earth. And he saw there a nasty old who washed in a stream and secretly evaded two-ply. And, although he had devoted often in life, this kind of work, and what St. Peter had almost denied entry to paradise, was seized with such anger that gripped the stool of the Lord, was before the throne , and threw it down in the ribs of the old thief, causing her to fall. The woman was frightened, not understanding what the devil had thrown him, and ran home to the ground leaving the veils, so that they returned to their rightful owner. When the Lord and Master returned with his heavenly later, he saw that the stool was missing and asked the tailor who had taken away. Oh, Lord-he answered happily -I hurled to the ground behind an old woman I saw stealing two veils while lavava.- Then the Lord said -Caro my son, if I judge as you did, how do you it would have gone long ago? And long ago I would not have more chairs here, no benches, no, armchairs and even a poker, but I would have knocked out all the sinners. Now you can no longer live in paradise, but outside, in front of the door, see what a beautiful result! Here no one should punish, if not only I, the Lord come. So St. Peter had to bring out the tailor, at the door of paradise; and since, he had torn shoes, and feet covered with blisters, he took a stick and went to Wait a moment, where are the devotees soldiers pass the time cheerfully.
The old Sultan	453	101	Italian	A farmer had a faithful dog called Sultan, who had grown old and was no longer able to hold anything. One day the farmer was standing with his wife and said -Tomorrow to shoot Old Sultan is no longer good for anything- She had compassion on the poor animal and said: -There has faithfully served for so many years! We continue to maintain it for an alms. -What do you say? - the man replied crazy -six: no longer a tooth in his mouth, and no thief might be afraid; has served us, he has had good feeding. Now that is no longer good for anything now that he vada.- The dog, which was lying nearby and had heard everything, was frightened and was sad that the next day was his last day. Sultan had a good friend, the wolf. At night, secretly, she went to see him in the woods and told him the sad fate that awaited him. -Do preoccuparti- he said the wolf -I have an idea. Tomorrow, at daybreak, your master and his wife go to get the hay and bring with them, their baby. While they work they put in the shade behind the hedge: lying next to him, as if he wished to guard. At that time I will go out of the woods and rapirò; corrimi behind you as quickly as you can, like me, you would seize it. I will let it fall, and you will take it back, who will think that you have saved and will be far too grateful to do you harm; indeed will be in high favor, and they'll never let you want nulla.- The proposal pleased the dog, and everything went according to plan. The farmer cried out seeing the wolf run off the field with her baby, but when Old Sultan brought it to him, happily stroked him and said: -Do you'll do no harm, I will keep you free of charge until, vivrai-. Then he told his wife: -It 'straight home and prepares a soup that is not chewing on the old Sultan; Also from my pillow, her gift for her cuccia-. From that day on, the old dog was treated with every respect, and he could not have wished for better. The wolf came to visit him and was glad that everything went according to their design. -Listen compare- then he said -chiuderai an eye if by chance steal your master a beautiful sheep. Nowadays it is difficult to get on with life! - No, answered the dog-I am loyal to my master; I can not concedertelo! - But the wolf thought that the dog was serious and, at night, he came to take away the sheep. Instead, the faithful Sultan had told his master, and they waited for the wolf in the barn and dressed for the holidays. The wolf had to cut and run, but he shouted to the dog: -This'll pay, bad companion! -. The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog in the woods, to resolve the issue. But no pot dog, find no godfather, besides a cat with three legs. When they set out together the poor cat limped and stretched out her tail for pain. The wolf and his friend were already in place, but when they saw the enemy, they thought it would bring with s, a saber, while it was not that the cat's tail. And when the poor beast hopped on three legs, they believed that he was picking up stones to throw at them. So they were both afraid: the boar hid in the foliage, and the wolf jumped up a tree. Moving closer, the dog and the cat were surprised not to see anyone. But the boar had not been able to hide entirely in the foliage: the ears stuck out a little 'off. While the cat was looking around, the boar moved his ear: the cat, thinking it was a mouse moving there, jumped up and bit it hard. The boar jumped up and ran noisily shouting: -The, the tree is the culprit! -. The dog and cat looked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed of having been so scared and agreed to make peace with the dog.
The Tom Thumb trip, the little tailor	427	700	Italian	A tailor had a small little son, no bigger than a thumb, and why she had called him Tom Thumb. He had, however, some courage, and one day said to his father -Babbo, I want to go for the world to each cost-. -Well, son mio- said the old man; He took a long darning needle and the flame of a candle made you a head of wax: -Eccoti a sword for the trip-. The little tailor wanted to have one more meal with them, and hopped into the kitchen to see what had made her mother as a farewell dinner. He was ready, and the dish stood on the hearth. He said: -Be ', you eat today? -. -See you same- said the mother. Then Tom Thumb jumped on the fireplace and looked at the plate, but since too craned his neck, the steam rising from the food caught him and dragged him up the chimney when he fell to the ground, the little tailor found himself out in the wide world; He wandered here and there and went to the shop of a master, but he did not like what was given him to eat. Madam Mistress, said Tom Thumb -if not prepare me a better food I go, and tomorrow morning I will write with chalk on the doorstep "too many potatoes, meat there, I salute the great King potatoes !." --What do you want to, he, flea? - said the landlady; He became angry and grabbed a rag to strike; but my little tailor crept nimbly under a thimble, peeped out and stuck his tongue out at the mistress. She took up the thimble to grab it, but Tom Thumb hopped into the cloth, and while the lady threw them here and there to look for him, he drove in the table slot Hey, hey, lady mistress! - shouted sticking his head, and when she was about to strike him he leapt down into the drawer. At last, however, she caught him and drove him home. Walk, walk, the tailor came into a great forest, where he met a gang of robbers who wanted to steal the treasure of kings. To see him they thought such a little thing could be useful to them. -Ola! - shouted one -tu, Strongman, you want to come with us to the room of the Treasury? You can crawl inside stealthily and throw out the money Pollicino thought, and finally said yes and took them to the room of the Treasury. He watched the door firmly from top to bottom, to see if there was a crack; Fortunately he found one, but it was about to enter when one of the guards said, -Look there that ugly spider! I want schiacciarlo-. -But let alone the poor beast- said the other -non made you niente.- So Pollicino managed to pass unscathed through the slot. Coupling in the chamber of the Treasury, he opened the window and threw a shield after another which the robbers were standing down there. But, at the climax, he heard the King coming he wanted to gaze at his treasure, so he had to hide in a hurry. The king noticed that was missing a lot 'solid thalers, but could not conceive who could have stolen them, the locks were in good condition and all seemed well guarded. Then he went and said to the sentries: -Be careful, there is someone behind the money-. When Tom Thumb resumed his work again, guards heard the money moving, and a sound clip, clap, clip clap. Then they rushed in to seize the thief. The tailor, who heard them coming, was still swifter, and leapt into a corner and hid under a shield that covered him completely. Then he began to mock the guards shouting: Hey, I'm here-. Those against the rushed, but did not have time got there, he was jumped under a shield in another corner and shouted: Hey, I'm here! -. Those rushed back, but Tom Thumb was long ago in a third corner and shouted: Hey, I'm here! -. So let them run back and forth like crazy around the room, until they left exhausted. Then, one by one, threw out all the shields; the last threw it with all his strength, jumped on, and flew down with it through the window. The robbers filled him with praise: -You are a great hero-said -Want to be our captain? -. But Tom Thumb apologized saying he must first see the world. They now divided the booty, but he took only a penny, because they could not carry more. Then again put on his sword, bade the robbers goodbye and went on his way. He went to work with some masters, but since had no liking, he hired himself as servant in an inn. The maids, they could not suffer because, without being seen, he could see all that they did secretly, and he told their bosses that they had taken off the plates were taken away from the cellar. Then they said, -Wait a bit 'that we give tit for tat! - and began to play him a trick of agreement. In fact, once that one of them was mowing in the garden, saw Thumbling jumping here and there, up and down the plants, she mowed quickly with the grass, tied all in a great cloth, and secretly threw it to the cows. If he swallowed a black and coarse, without hurting him. But there where was it did not like because it was dark and there was not even a candle. When they milked the cow he cried -ICT, tac, elm, elm the pail soon be full? -The noise of the milking, however, prevented his being understood. Shortly after he entered the stable master and said -Tomorrow this cow should be macellata-. Then in Pollicino he was so alarmed and began to shout louder: -Son here! -. The master heard but did not understand where it came from his throat and said: -Where are you? -. -Inside that nera.- But the master did not understand what that meant, and went on. The day after the cow was killed. Fortunately in squartarla at Tom Thumb was not wrong even a hair, he got among the sausage meat. When the butcher came in and began to work, he shouted at the top of his voice: -Do not cut too deeply! Do not cut too deeply! They are amongst it -. But because of the noise, no one heard him. Now the poor Tom Thumb was in danger, but necessity is the mother of invention, so began to jump with great agility between the blows, so that not one touched him, and he managed to save his skin. But he not yet managed to escape; there was no other solution let himself be thrust into a pudding with the bits of bacon. The place was a bit 'tight, and moreover, it be smoked hanging on the mantel, where he was bored a lot. Finally, in the winter he was taken down, because the pudding had to be a guest. When the hostess was cutting it in slices, he took care not to stretch too much the neck, in order not to have it cut; at last he saw his opportunity, pushed and jumped out. The tailor did not want to stay any longer in the house where he fared so badly, and set out on his journey. But while he was in open country he met with a fox who snapped him up thoughtfully. Hey, lady fox! - cried the little tailor-are finished in your throat, let me go! - -You reasonably answered the fox is like having nothing in the stomach; if you promise me the fowls in the yard of your father, I'll let libero.- -With all my heart said Pollicino -avrai all the chickens, I prometto.- Then the fox let him go and took him home . When the father saw his dear son, he gave willingly all chickens. -In other hand she home a nice monetary Pollicino said to his father, and handed him the money he had earned on the road. -But why, the fox get the poor chickens to eat? - -But silly, your father would ever love his child that chickens of cortile.-
Jorinda and Joringel	653	405	Italian	There was once an old castle in the heart of a large and thick forest; He dwelt all alone, an old woman who was a witch. By day he turned into a cat or owl, and the night took up the human aspect. She could lure wild beasts and birds, and then she killed them and cook them boiled or roasted. If someone came at a hundred paces from the castle, was forced to stop and could not move until she not freed But if a virgin entered the circle, the old woman turned into a bird and locked up in a cage put in one of the rooms of the castle. Of those cages had about seven thousand in as much rare birds. There was a girl named Jorinda, more beautiful than any other. She was betrothed to a handsome youth named Joringel. The wedding day is fast approaching, and they were happy in each other's company. To be able to talk to and confide in, they went into the woods for a walk. -Make attention- said the young man -to do not go too near the castello.- It was a beautiful evening, the sun shone brightly between the trunks of the trees into the dark green of the forest, and moaning dove on old birch trees. Jorinda wept, he would sit in the sun, complaining, and so did Joringel. They were as sad as if they were to die. They looked around: they were lost and did not know how to find his way home. The sun had set behind the mountain half. The young man looked in the bushes and saw the old walls of the castle; at the sight she was frightened to death. Jorinda sang: -My little bird with the necklace red, sings moans, groans, moans. He predicts the dove death in torment; sings laments, yes! Chiù, jug, jug! -Joringhello looked at her Jorinda had turned into a nightingale singing: -Chiuì, chiuì-. An owl with glowing eyes flew three times round, and three times cried -Sciù, uh, uh, uh-. Joringel could not move: he stood as stone, and could neither weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot. Now the sun had set: the owl flew into the thicket, and directly afterwards there came out a crooked old woman, yellow and lean, with large red eyes and a hooked nose, which reached to her chin with the tip. She muttered to herself, caught the nightingale, and took it away. Joringel could not speak nor move; the nightingale was gone. At last the woman came back and said hoarsely: -Health, Zachiele, when the moon shines in the chervil, dissolve, Zachiele, the buon'ora-. And Joringel was free. He threw himself at the feet of the old begging her to give him back his Jorinda; but she replied that she would never have her again and left. He cried, wept, wailed, but in vain. Oh, that will never be me? - Joringel went away and finally came to a strange village, where he kept sheep for a long time. Often wandering around the castle, but without getting too close. Finally one night he dreamed of finding a blood-red flower in the midst of a beautiful large pearl. He picked the flower and went to the castle, and everything he touched with the flower was freed from enchantment. He also dreamed that by means of it he recovered his Jorinda. In the morning when he awoke, he began to seek the flower hill and dale. He sought until the ninth day, and, early in the morning, he found the blood-red flower. In between there was a drop of dew, as big as the finest pearl. He brought with s, flower day and night, until she came to the castle. There, he was not held fast, but walked on to the door. Joringel joy; he touched with the flower, and the door swung open. He walked in through the courtyard and listened to understand where it came from birds singing. Finally, the leaders, went and found the room where she was the witch was feeding the birds in the seven thousand cages. When she saw Joringel, he went on a rampage, and scolded and spat poison and gall, but he had to stop a few steps away from him. He did not bother to her and went to the cages with the birds. But there were many hundred nightingales, among many, how could he find his Jorinda? As he watched, he saw that the old woman quietly take away a cage with a bird and was heading toward the door. He came up with a start and, with flower, touched the cage and also the old woman, who could now no longer bewitch. Jorinda was there, they had thrown her arms around his neck, and it was as beautiful as ever. He gave back human aspect to other birds, then he returned home with his Jorinda and they lived together happily for a long time.
Knoist and her three children	1310	1965	Italian	Among Werrel and Soist lived a man who Knoist, and had three sons: one was blind, the other lame, and the third around naked. One day they went to the fields and saw a hare. The blind one shot, the lame one caught and the naked one put in his pocket. Then they came to a wide river and there were three boats, one sailed, one sank, and the third had no bottom. They went all three into that bottomless and came to a great forest, where there was a large tree, and the tree there was a large chapel, and in the chapel there was a sacristan of carpine and a priest of the cartridge case that gave the holy water to the sound of beatings. Happy is the one Who, dispensing holy water!
The lock	1997	562	Italian	One-two, one-two! A soldier came marching down the main street. With the backpack on his shoulders and his sword at his side, because he had been to the war, and was now returning home. On the road he met an old witch was really horrible, with lip hung down to his chest! "Good evening, handsome young soldier!" he said, "what a beautiful saber you have that big backpack! You're a handsome young soldier! Now I can have all the money you want." "Thank you, old witch!" the soldier replied. "Do you see that big tree?" the old woman pointed him one that stood beside them. "Everything inside is hollow. If you climb to the top you will find a hole, through which you can let yourself down into the bottom; I will tie a rope round your body, you can pull you up when you call them to me." "But what do I do in quell 'tree?" the soldier asked. "Take the money!" she replied. "When you arrive at the bottom of the hollow shaft, you know that you will find yourself in a large hall lit by a hundred lamps. You'll see three doors, and you can open, because the keys were in the lock. If you enter the first room you will see in the middle of floor a large chest. above is a dog sat: his eyes are as big as teacups, but ignore it. i'll give you my blue and white checkered apron to spread on the floor. You go to the dog, acchiappalo, put on her apron spread, open the chest and take all the money you want. They are all copper, but if you want them silver you have only to go into the second room. there is a dog with big eyes millstones, but ignore it, put it on my apron spread, and take anything you want! If you prefer gold, in the third room you can take everything you can carry. The dog is crouching on the case of coins gold has two eyes as big as the great Tower Copena hagen: one that's a dog, believe me! But not paying much attention: put it on my apron and will not do anything to you, and take also from the chest what gold you will. "" Not bad, "said the soldier," but what am I to give you, you old witch? Because even something for you, is not it? "" I want nothing, "she replied the Witch," not even a penny! The only thing you need to bring me an old tinderbox that my grandmother left under the last time I fell. "" Okay, "said the soldier," then tie the rope. "" Here it is, " the old woman said. "and here's my apron in white and turquoise squares." the soldier then climbed up the tree and dropped in the tree: just as the witch had said, it was in a great hall, illuminated by hundreds and hundreds of lampade.Quando opened the first door, my mom! there sat the dog with eyes as big as teacups, staring at him. "you're such a nice guy!" the soldier said. the put it in the witch's apron and grabbed all the copper money you could put in your pocket, then he closed the box, put it on the dog, and went into the second room. Damn! there was a dog with eyes as big as millstones a mill. "Do not look so much, that you will ruin the view," the soldier said. he put the dog on the apron s Trega, and when he saw all the silver money, threw away all those copper he had and filled his pockets and only silver backpack. Then came the third room. What a horror! The third dog had two really big eyes as the Great Tower of Copenhagen, and made them turn like wheels! "Good evening," said the soldier, and took off his cap, because throughout his life he had never seen a dog like that; but after a while 'thought that was enough, he puts it on the floor, and opened the chest and ... my God, how much gold! He might buy us all Copenhagen, all the sugar pigs of street sellers of sweets, all the tin soldiers, all rocking horses in the world! Ensure that there were none of money! He threw all the silver that he had in his pockets and backpack, and instead took the gold, and filled his pockets, backpack, cap and boots, so that he could scarcely walk. Now it was rich! Put the dog on the chest, he locked the door and called up through the trunk cable: "Pull me up, you old witch!" "And the striker, you have it?" He asked one. "Yeah, it's true, I'd totally forgotten!" and he went to get him. Then the witch pulled him up, and he found himself back on the main road, with pockets, boots, knapsack and cap full of gold. "What are you going to do with?" the soldier asked. "It's my business," said the witch, "you've got the gold! I just want the tinderbox!" "humbug," said the soldier, tell me now what we want to do, or with me asciabola'll cut your head off! "" No! "she cried the strega.E then the soldier cut off her head: wham! he picked up all the money in her apron, put it on his back like a bundle, pocketed the tinderbox , and went directly into città.Era a very nice town, and he went to the most luxurious inn, he asked the best room and ordered his favorite dishes, because he was rich and could afford everything voleva.Il servant while cleaned them, he found his boots seemed old and truly ridiculous for such a rich gentleman, but it was only because he had not yet bought any new ones. the next day he procured proper boots, and other nice clothes. Now it had become a distinguished gentleman and he came to tell all the wonders of the city, including the r and, and his daughter, who was a very pretty princess. "Where can I see it?" "You can not see it," they all said. "He lives in a large copper castle, with many walls and towers all around! No one can go and see her, except the king, because a prophecy says that she will marry a common soldier, and that the king does not go!" "I'd like to see it "he thought the soldier, but he was not possibile.Ora really enjoyed himself: he went to the theater, drove the royal park in a carriage, and made charity to the poor: a nice gesture on his part, but he knew what it means to be without the beak of a penny! Now he was rich and well dressed, had many friends, and they all found a sympathetic and noble knight, and that he was very pleased. But by dint of spending every day of money without ever intascarne, at the end, there were only two pennies, and he had to leave the lovely room where he had lived to go stay in a tiny attic, he had to get shiny own boots, and mend them with a large August: none of his friends came to see him, because there were too many stairs to climb. A very dark night the soldier, who could not even buy himself a candle, he remembered a moccoletto stuck all'acciarino he had taken in the hollow shaft, when the witch had asked him to come down. Then he took out the moccoletto and tinder, beat him to light the fire, and just as few sparks from flint, swung open the door and stood before the dog with eyes as big as cups of tea he had already met under the tree. "In what can I serve my master?" asked the dog. "But you see," said the soldier, "quest'acciarino great thing! So I can have whatever I want !," and, turning to the dog, he asked him to give him money. The time to count to three, and that was no longer there; time to count back up to three, and there he was again, in the mouth with a sack full of soldi.Adesso ensure that the soldier had understood what was so interesting about quell'acciarino! If he struck once, the dog that was on the copper cash if he struck twice, the dog came on the silver chest; if he struck three times was that of gold. So the soldier returned to his lovely room on the first floor, put back some nice clothes, and all his friends knew him right away, and all they wanted bene.Un day he thought: "Too bad you can not see the princess! All they say she is very beautiful! But what is the use if must necessarily remain locked up in a copper castle with the many towers? I really do not ever get to see it? But where is my tinder-box? " He tapped, and eccogli before the dog with eyes as big as teacups. "It's late at night, I know," said the soldier, "but I burn with the desire to see the princess, even for a moment!" The dog tossed out the door, and before the soldier being aware, return to the princess asleep on his back. It was so beautiful that anyone could see right away that it was a real princess. The soldier could not resist his desire, and kissed her: he was still a soldier! The dog then came back with the princess, but the next morning, while the king and queen were having tea, the girl told that during the night he had a very strange dream, with a dog and a soldier; He had ridden on the back of the dog, and the soldier had given her a kiss. "Just a big deal!" said regina.La night after one of the old ladies in waiting had to watch from the bed of the princess to see if it really was a sogno.Il soldier tormented by the desire to see the beautiful princess, and so the night the dog was to resume, and drove as fast as possible; But the old lady put on his boots, and went after him just as quickly. When he saw them disappear in a large house she thought: "That's where she went," and made a great cross chalked on the door. Then came home and went to bed. When the dog came out to bring home the princess, he saw that it had been traced a cross on the soldier's door; then drew a chalk piece of the crosses on all the doors of the city. It was an excellent idea: Now the court lady could not find the right house, because there were dappertutto.La crosses next morning, very early, the king, the queen and the old lady of the court went to see where she was the princess. "here it is!" cried the king, when he saw the first door with a cross. "No, my dear husband, is there," said the queen, seeing a cross on another door. "Here there is another one! And even here, "they cried, as they saw the crosses on the doors. Until they realized that it was useless to continue cercare.Ma the queen was a very clever woman, who was not only capable of going into the carriage, but also of many other things. With its large gold scissors, he cuts a piece of silk and sewed together, so he knows form a neat little bag; she filled corn, chopped, tied it to his daughter's back, and when he finished he made a small hole in the bottom of the bag, so that the corn falling from spreading on the road traveled by principessa.Quella night the dog came back to take the girl on croup, to take her to the soldier, who loved her very much, and that he wanted to be a prince, to be able sposare.Il dog did not notice maize spread from building up under the soldier's window, and climbed up the wall together the princess. The next morning the King and Queen saw well where she was their daughter, then took the soldier and put him in prigione.Com'era dark and dull, in the prison! Then they said to him: "Tomorrow t'impiccheremo!" and these are not things that they feel happy to say. "In addition, he had forgotten the tinder-box at the inn. The next morning, through the iron bars of the small window, he could see people running out of the city to go and see the his hanging. He could hear the drums beating, and saw the soldiers marching. They ran out of all their cities; there was, among others, a shoemaker's apprentice, in leather apron and slippers, and ran so strong that a power strip escaped, and bumped right up against the wall where the soldier was leaning against the iron bars. "Hey, boy, you need not be in such a hurry," he cried the soldier. "So before it gets me nothing will happen if instead want to do a race where I lived before, and bring me my old tinderbox, I will give you peanuts. But you must hurry! "The four money did not mind the boy, who ran to get the tinderbox, handed it to the soldier ... and you are a bit 'to hear what happened ora.Fuori from the city had been erected a large fork ; there were soldiers around, and hundreds of thousands of people. the king and queen sat on a magnificent throne, just in front of the judges and the whole Consiglio.Il soldier was already on top of the ladder, and were about to mettergli rope neck, when he said that it was tradition to fulfill the last wish of the condemned before execution. he would have loved to pull one last drag on his pipe: the last before going to another world.This king could not just deny him: so the soldier took his tinder-box, slammed him to start the fire, once, twice, three times! and then all three big dogs jumped out: the one with eyes as big as two cups of tea , the one with eyes as big as millstones, and the one with eyes as big as the Great Tower of Copenhagen! "Help me now, so that I may not be hanged!" said the soldier, and then the dogs fell upon the judges and the whole council, seized one by the legs, the other by the nose, and threw them in the air so high that falling broke into many pieces. "not me!" cried the king, but the largest dog seized him and the queen, and them he threw behind everyone else. Then the soldiers were afraid, and all the people began shouting: "Dear soldier, you shall be our king, and we'll give you marry the beautiful princess!" They put the soldier in the royal carriage, and all three of the dogs preceded dancing and shouting cheers; the boys whistling with fingers in the mouth, and the soldiers presented arms. The princess came out of the copper castle, and became queen, which made her very happy. The marriage lasted eight days, and the dogs sat at the table with others, opening his eyes wide.
The beautiful Catherine and Pum Pum Fracassino	1242	2019	Italian	Good day, dad Berlicchio.- -Mille thank you, Pim Pum Fracassino.- -I would you give to your daughter? - Oh, yes, if Mom Pastora, Spocchione brother, sister Caciottina and fair Katrinelje are, you can also make Where is never gone .-- la Pastora mom? - -A, milking the cow already early .-- Good morning, mom Pastora.- -Mille thank you, Pim Pum Fracassino.- -I would you give to your daughter? - Oh, yes, if father Berlicchio, Spocchione brother, sister Caciottina and fair Katrinelje are, you can also do .-- and where is that without brain? - -A chopping wood to good brother .-- good morning, brother Spocchione.- -Mille thank you, Pim Pum Fracassino.- -I would you give to your sister? -. Oh yes, if Father Berlicchio, Pastora mom, sister and Caciottina Katrinelje are beautiful, you can even do .-- And his sister where he hunted? - -It 'down the garden salad that cuts .-- Good day, sister Caciottina.- -Mille thank you, Pim Pum Fracassino.- -I would you give to your sister? -. Oh yes, if Father Berlicchio, Pastora mother, brother and Spocchione Katrinelje are beautiful, you can even do .-- Catherine, you know where he is? - -Count and recount the dowry that has .-- Good morning, beautiful Catherine .- -Mille thank you, Pim Pum Fracassino.- -Vorresti be my bride? -. Oh yes, if Father Berlicchio, Pastora mom, Spocchione brother, sister Caciottina are happy, you can also do.- -Bella Kate, what you have talent? - -Quattordici cents in money, three and a half debt, half a kilo dried apples, a handful of prunes, and a root and not only that, they are or are not a damsel? Pim Pum Fracassino that job? Perhaps the tailor? - -Still better! - -The cobbler? - -Still better! - -The farmer? - -Still better! - -The carpenter? - -Still better! - -The Blacksmith? - -Still better! - -The miller? - -Still better! - -Make perhaps the brooms? - -Yes, that's right, is not it a good job? -.
The cicada and the ant	4451	280A	Italian	The Cicada imprudentetutta summer the sun sang, provide only the nientenell'inverno found himself, without a speck and senzauna fly in credenza.Affamata and lamentosava to seek the Formicae asks her something, anything in cortesiaper able to pull across the prossimaprimavera: promising to August, the animal consciousness, interests and capitale.La Ant has difettodi lend reluctantly, the clear question and clear: - that you did until yesterday? - Dear friend, to be fair, not I did that cantaretutto time. - Brava, I taste, dances now, if you please.
The girl without hands	290	706	Italian	A miller had fallen gradually into poverty, and had nothing left but his mill and behind a big apple tree. One day he had gone to cut wood in the forest approached an old man and said: -Why, are anxious chopping wood? I will make you rich if you promise in exchange for what's behind your mill; in three years I'll come prenderlo-. "What else can it be but my apple tree?" He thought the miller; as he agreed and pledged in writing with the stranger, who went off laughing. When the miller came home, he was met by his wife and said, -Of where is all this wealth into our house? Boxes and bins are full of stuff, no one came to portarla- He answered: -From an old man I met in the woods; in return, I have promised to give him what's behind the mulino-. Ah, husband- she said scared -c and we will see bad: it was the devil! He meant our daughter who was sweeping the yard behind the mulino.- The miller's daughter was a beautiful, pious girl, and lived those three years in the fear of God and without sin. When the day came when the evil one was to fetch her, she washed herself clean and drew with chalk a circle around s. The devil appeared quite early, only she could not approach her. Angrily, he said to the miller -Portale all the water, it can not wash; so I will have in my power-. Terrified, the miller obeyed. The next morning the devil returned, but she had wept on his hands, which were spotless. Again he could not get close again and furiously said to the miller -Tagliale hands; otherwise I can not make them anything-. The miller was shocked and answered: How shall I cut your hands on my daughter! -. Then the evil one threatened him and said: -If you do not, you're mine and I take you-. He Frightened, the father promised to obey him. He went to the girl and said: -Bimba mine if I do not cut hands, the devil takes me away, and terror I have promised to do so. Please do perdonarmi-. She replied: -Father, do with me what you want, I am your daughter-. He held out his hands and let them be cut. The devil came for the third time, but she had wept so much and for so long on the stumps that were spotless. He had lost all right over her and had to leave. The miller said, -For your merit I have received such great wealth that all my life I want to treat you queen-. But she answered: -I can not stay here; I will leave, compassionate people will certainly to my need-. He did tie the stumps behind his back and at sunrise she set out on foot and walked all day, into the night. He came to a royal garden where, in the moonlight, he saw the trees laden with fruit; but the garden was surrounded by a ditch. Since she had not eaten anything all day and was so hungry, he thought: "Ah, I was there and I could eat a bit 'of those fruits! If not I have to starve." He knelt down, cried to the Lord and prayed. Suddenly an angel appeared a cataract closed, so that the moat became dry and she could walk through it. He went into the garden and the angel went with her. She saw a tree covered with beautiful pears, but they were all counted. She approached him and, to appease hunger, ate one with her mouth. The gardener was watching, but because there was an angel, he was afraid and thought the maiden was a spirit, so did not dare cry out, or say nothing. After eating the pear, she was satisfied, and went into hiding in the woods. The next morning was the king who owned the garden, counted pears and seeing that one was missing, he asked the gardener what had happened. It was under the tree, but was gone. The gardener replied: -The last night came a spectrum with no hands and ate it off it with her mouth-. The king said: -How did you cross the water, and where did he go? -. The gardener replied: -A be came from heaven, with a white robe as snow, and closed the floodgate draining the water. It had to be an angel, and I was afraid, so I did not question No, I called. Then the ghost disappeared again-. The king said: -This night I will watch with you-. When it grew dark the King came into the garden and brought a priest who was to speak to the spectrum. They sat all three under the tree and waited. At midnight the maiden came out of the grove, went to the tree and ate one pear off with the mouth; next to her was the angel in white. Then the priest came forward and said: -Come from heaven or earth? You're a ghost or a human? -. No, she answered she -are not a ghost, but a poor creature who all deserted except Dio.- The king said: -If everyone has abandoned you, I do not abbandonerò- you. He took with him into his castle, did make two silver hands and, because she was so beautiful and good, he fell in love and took her as his bride. A year later, the king had to go to war; He urged the young queen to her mother, telling her: -When bear Take good care and write subito-. The queen gave birth to a beautiful baby, and his aged mother haste to write and announce the happy news. But because the messenger rested next to a stream and fell asleep. Then he came the devil always seeking to injure the good queen, and exchanged with another letter in which it was said that the queen had given birth to a monster. When the king read the letter he was frightened and troubled, but he said they had to take care of the queen until his return. The messenger went back with the letter, but rested at the same place and fell asleep again. Then came the Devil and pocketed another letter in which it was written that the queen and kill the child. When the old mother received the letter, she was alarmed and wrote to the king again, but received no other answer, because each time the devil gave the substituted a false letter and, last, even ordered to keep the tongue and eyes the queen as proof of his death. But the old mother wept to think that was shed innocent blood; so he sent for, at night, a doe and cut out her tongue and eyes, and put them aside. Then he said to the Queen: -I can not get killed, but you can not stop here: it must be 'the world with your child and not ritornare-. She tied her child on the back, and the poor woman went away with eyes full of tears. He came into a great wild forest; He knelt to pray and appeared the angel of the Lord who led her to a little house on which was a sign that said: -Here are staying gratuitamente-. From the house came a white maiden snow said -Benvenuta, Majesty! - and let her in. He took the boy from her back, and held him to her breast that he might poppasse, then put it in a nice bed ready. Then the poor woman said: -How do you know that I was a queen? -. The white maiden answered: -I am an angel sent by God to take care of yourself and your child-. The Queen stayed seven years in the little house, the angel's protection, and for his devotion, God gave her the grace and hands grew back. Meanwhile the king, when he returned home, he wanted to see his wife and his child. Then his aged mother began to cry and said, -Man evil, because you wrote me to kill two innocent creatures? -. She showed him the two letters which the devil and added: -I did what you ordered- and showed him, as evidence, the tongue and eyes. Then the king began to weep even more bitterly on his poor wife and son, so that the old mother relented and said -Rallegrati, is still alive: I did kill a doe secretly from which I took the evidence; but your wife I bound the child on the back, and I told him to go for the world and promised to never come back, because you were so angry with her-. Then the king said: -Camminerò to where the sky is blue and not eat No, I drink until I have found my dear wife and my child, if you have not died of fame-. So I wandered here and there for seven years, and sought for all rocks; but he did not find her and thought she was dead. All that time, he neither ate nor drank, but God kept him alive. Finally came the great forest, and found the little house with a sign that said: -Here are staying gratuitamente-. The white girl came out, took his hand and led him into saying -Benvenuta, Majesty! - and asked where it came from. He replied: -I am almost seven years that I go around looking for my wife and her child, but I can not find them; They will starve! -. The angel offered him something to eat and drink, but he did not take anything, and only wished to rest a little. He went to sleep, covering his face with a handkerchief. Then the angel went into the chamber where the Queen sat with the baby, whom she usually called Sorrowful, and said: -Come with your child, it's about your sposo-. The woman went to where he was sleeping, and the handkerchief fell from his face. Then she said -Doloroso, collect the handkerchief to your father, and cover again face-. The child picked it up and covered his face. But the king heard the half asleep and left the handkerchief fall once more. Then she said it again: -Doloroso, collect the handkerchief to your father, and cover again face-. The boy grew impatient and said -Cara mother, how can I cover the face to my father if I have no father on earth? I learned the prayer: Our Father, who art in heaven; you said that my father was in heaven and was the good God. How could I know a wild man like this? It is not my father! -. At that moment the king sat up and asked who they were. She said: -I am your wife, and that's your son Doloroso-. And he saw her living hands, and said: -My wife of silver- hands. She replied: -The good God made them ricrescere-. And the angel went to her room, took the silver hands, and showed them to him. And he was certain that those were his dear wife and his dear child, and kissed them all happy. The angel of God gave them one meal together once, then went home to his old mother. There was great joy everywhere, and the King and Queen were married again and lived happily until their holy death.
The daughter of Madonna	22	710	Italian	Near a great forest there lived a woodcutter with his wife and only child, a little girl of three years. But they were so poor that not all had daily bread, and did not know what to feed the baby. One day the woodcutter went to work in the forest, and while he was cutting wood, suddenly appeared a beautiful tall lady, who had a crown of shining stars on her head, and said: "I am the Virgin Mary, the mother of the Child Jesus, you are poor and needy, bring thy child; I'll take it with me, I will be her mother and care for her. " The woodcutter took the child and gave her to the Virgin Mary, who brought with up to heaven. There was fine: marzipan ate, drank sweet milk, his clothes were of gold, and the little angels played with her. When she was fourteen, the Virgin Mary called her as, and said: "Dear child, I have to make a long trip, take over the keys of the thirteen doors of the kingdom of Heaven twelve you can open them and contemplate the wonders that guard, but the thirteenth, so you have this little key belongs, it is forbidden; Beware of opening it, or you will be miserable. " The girl promised to be obedient, and when the Virgin Mary was gone, she began to examine the dwellings of the kingdom of heaven: every day she opened one until he was twelve views. In every room there was an apostle, and midst of a great splendor. She rejoiced he had never seen in his life such magnificence and splendor, and the little angels, who always accompanied him, they rejoiced with her. Now there remained only the forbidden door; she felt a great desire to know what could be hidden, and said to the angels: "I will not open it at all, but only a little, that you can see through the crack." - "Ah, no," said the little angels, "it would be unfortunate: the Virgin Mary has forbidden and could be your downfall." Then she was silent, but silent curiosity and craving that continued to haunt her in his heart. And once when the angels had gone out, she thought, "Now I'm alone Who can see me?" So he took the key, and after taking it slipped it into the lock, and after he had slipped turned it. The door swung open, and she saw the Trinity sitting in fire and splendor. He touched just that glow with your finger, and it was covered with gold. Then it was taken by fear, violently she closed the door and ran away. But whatever he did, the fear is not passed and my heart continued to race, and you would not hush, and the gold too stayed on her finger and did not go away, as far as he lavasse.Dopo before the Virgin Mary came back from his journey. He called the girl and said, "Give me the keys of Heaven." When the maiden gave her the bunch, the Virgin looked at her and asked, "Have you not opened the thirteenth door also?" - "No," he replied. Then she laid her hand on his heart, he felt like beating and realized that she had disobeyed her order and had opened the door. He asked again: "I really have not done?" - "No," she said the girl a second time. Then she perceived the golden finger, with which the girl had touched the divine fire, saw that he had sinned, and said for the third time: "You did not?" - "No," said the girl for the third time. Then the Virgin Mary said: "You did not obey, you lie: you are no longer worthy to be in heaven." The girl fell into a deep sleep, and when he awoke, he lay on the ground near a tall tree, surrounded by dense bush impossible to penetrate. Her mouth was mute and could not utter a word. Tree, there was a cavity where she was sleeping at night and repaired when it rained or there was storm. Roots and wild berries were her only food, she sought as far as he could get. In autumn he collected the tree leaves, the bore into the cavity and, if snowing or freezing, is covered with them. His clothes were all torn, and fell off and so had to wrap themselves in the leaves. As soon as the sun shone warm, he went out and sat in front of the tree, and her long hair covered her on all sides like a cloak. Thus she sat and felt the pain and misery of world.A day of spring the king of the country was hunting in the forest, and followed a roe, and as the beast had fled into the thicket which surrounded the hollow shaft, horse runs, he broke the weeds and broke through with his sword. Penetrated in the foliage, he saw her sitting under the tree a beautiful girl, covered with her golden hair down to her feet. He marveled and said, "How could you sitting here in the desert?" But she gave no answer, for she could not open her mouth. The King continued: "Will you come with me to my castle?" The girl nodded her head. The King took her in his arms, put her on his horse and took her home where he put on some clothes and gave her all things in abundance. And, although he could not speak, she was so beautiful and charming that he fell in love and sposò.Dopo about a year, the queen gave birth to a child. At night, while she was alone, appeared to the Virgin Mary and said, "If you tell the truth and confess that opened the forbidden door, I will open my lips and will restore the word, but if you insist on lying remaining sin, then I will take your newborn baby. " Then the queen was permitted to answer, but said, "No, I did not open the forbidden door," and the Virgin Mary took from her arms newborn baby and disappeared with him. The next day when it was discovered that the baby was gone, people began to murmur that the queen was a monster who had killed her baby. She heard everything, but could not replicate anything. The king would not believe any of it, so much the amava.Dopo a year the queen gave birth to another son. At night it appeared again the Virgin Mary and said, "If you admit to having opened the forbidden door, will restore your baby and you melt the language, but if you persist in sin and deny it, I will take even this baby with me." But the queen said again: "No, I did not open the forbidden door," and the Virgin Mary took the child from his arms and took it with up to heaven. In the morning, the baby disappeared again, people said loudly that the Queen had devoured it, and the king's advisers asked it to be judged. But the king loved her so much that he would not believe it, and commanded the councilors not to talk about the pain of life.After a year the queen gave birth to a beautiful little daughter; the Virgin Mary appeared to her again at night and said, "Follow me." He took her hand, led her to heaven, and showed her two eldest sons that were smiling and playing with the ball in the world. The queen was glad; Then said the Virgin Mary: "If you admit to having opened the forbidden door will restore the two little children." But the queen replied for the third time: "No, I did not open the forbidden door!" Then the Virgin let her sink down to earth and he took the third bambino.La next morning, when the loss was reported abroad, people cried loudly: "The Queen is a monster and should be condemned!" The king he could no longer restrain his councilors. The queen was judged, and because he could not answer, and defend herself, she was condemned to die at the stake. Piled firewood and when he was tied to the stake and the fire began to burn around her, her heart was moved by repentance, and she thought: I could but confess before my death that I opened the door! and he shouted, "Yes, Mary, I did it!" As this thought was in the heart, the sky began to rain and the water extinguished the flames, she was flooded with light descents and the Virgin Mary between the two children and with her baby in her arms. The lovingly said, "He who repents his sin and acknowledges it, is forgiven," she offered her children, untied her tongue and made happy for a lifetime.
The greedy farmer's daughter	892	875	Italian	There was once a poor peasant who had no land, but had only a small house, and one daughter. The daughter said, "We should pray to the King for a bit of land." The king had come to know of their poverty, he presented them some sod; the girl and her father dug to sow with a little 'of wheat and some other groats. When they had dug nearly the whole field, they found in the earth a mortar of pure gold. "Listen," said the father to the girl, "as our King has been so gracious and presented us with the field we have to give the mortar." But the daughter did not agree and said, "Father, if we have the mortar without having the pestle, we shall have to get the pestle, so it is better to remain silent." But he would not listen, he took the mortar and carried it to the king and said he had found him on the heath. The king took the mortar, and asked if he had found nothing. "No" said the farmer. But the king said he must now bring him the pestle. The farmer replied that he had found it, but it was as if he had spoken to the wind. He was thrown in jail and was to stay there until he produced the pestle. The servants had daily to carry him bread and water, what you get in prison; and I always heard shouting: "Ah, if I had listened to my daughter! Ah, if I had listened to my daughter !." So the servants went to the king and told him that the prisoner would always say: "Ah, if I had listened to my daughter!" and he did not eat or drink. Then the king ordered his servants to bring the prisoner and asked him why he was always crying, "Ah, if I had listened to my daughter !." - "What did you ever tell your daughter?" - "Yes, he said he did not take the mortar, otherwise I would have to produce the pestle." - "If you have a daughter so wise, let her come here." She was therefore obliged to present to the king, who asked her if she really was so wise, and said he would set her a riddle, and if she could guess that, he would marry her. She said yes, she would guess it. Then the king said: "Come to me not clothed, not naked, not riding, not walking, either on the road or out of the road and if you manage to do all that I will marry you." She went away and he stripped naked as God made her, she was not clothed; then took a great fishing net, he sat inside and wrapped it around, so it was not naked; he borrowed a donkey, which tied to the tail of the network, and it had to drag it, so it was neither horse nor carriage; and the ass had also to drag on the roadway so that it touched the ground only with the great toe, and that was neither on the road nor out of the strada.Quando came from the king, he told her that he had solved the riddle. He freed his father from prison, took her to wife, and gave all the royal possessions. They had already spent some years and one day the king went to the magazine, it came to pass in front of the castle stopped with their carts, peasants who had been selling wood had some oxen, and some horses. There was a farmer who had three horses and one of them gave birth to a foal, and it ran away and lay down between two oxen attached to another wagon. When the peasants came together, they began to dispute, to beat each other and make a disturbance, the peasant with the oxen wanted to keep the foal, and said that they had made the oxen, and the other said that the horse had had it and it was his .The quarrel came before the king, and he ruled that the foal should stay where he was; so the peasant with the oxen, to whom it belonged. The other went weeping and wailing for her foal. But he had heard that the queen was so gracious, because she too came from a poor peasant family; so he went to her and begged her to help him get his foal. She said, "Yes, if you promise not to betray me, I'll help. Early tomorrow morning, when the King parades, put yourself in the middle of the road by which he must pass, take a great fishing net and pretend to be fishing; continue fishing and empty out the net as if it were full. "and he also told him that he was to say if the king he was questioned. So, the next day, the farmer was there, and fished dry. When the king passed by, and saw him, he sent his messenger to ask what he was intending that crazy. He replied, "Peach." But the messenger asked how he could fish when there was no water. The peasant said: "If an ox to have a foal me to fish on dry land." The messenger went to report the answer to the king; then he sent for the farmer and told him that that was not of his own making; of who it was? He had to admit it right away. But the farmer would not speak and kept saying, "God forbid!" and that he had thought about him. Then they put him on a bundle of straw, and beat him and tormented him until he confessed that he received from the Queen. When he returned home, the king said to his wife: "Why are you so falsely to me? I do not want more to wife: now it is up, go back into your house of peasants, where you came !." However he allowed her to bring it more dear and precious that he had: this was his farewell. She said, "Yes, dear husband, if that's what you want, I'll do it." And he fell on my neck, kissed him and said she would take leave. Then she ordered a powerful sleeping potion to drink farewell to the King took a long draft, but she took only a little. He soon fell into a deep sleep, and when she perceived that, she called a servant and took a fair white linen cloth and wrapped it in; the servants had to carry him into a carriage that stood before the door, then she brought him to his house. He put it in his bed, and he slept one day and night and when he woke up, looked around and said, "Oh, my God, where are they ?." He called his servants, but there was none. Finally his wife went to the bed and said: "My dear sir, you ordered me to take away from the castle what I was most dear and precious, so I decided to take you !." The king said, "Dear wife, you are mine and I am yours." He led her back to the castle and he wanted you ricelebrassero the wedding. And some will live even today.
The lazy spinner	1212	1405	Italian	In a village there lived two married, and the woman was so idle that she would never work, and whatever her husband gave her to spin, did not get done, and what she did spin, not wind, but let it all remain wound on the spool. One day her husband scolded her, telling him she retorted: -How do I wind it, when I have no reel? It should be 'in the forest and get me one-. -If it's all here- -andrò said the man in the woods and get some wood to make aspo.- Then the woman was afraid that he had the wood he would make her a reel, and she was then forced to reel and line of new. He thought a little and came up with a great idea: she secretly followed her husband, and when he had climbed into a tree to choose and cut the wood, she crept into the bush, where he could not see her, and she cried: -A reel for cutting wood, it dies; who uses it is taken from malore.-The man listened, laid the ax and stood a moment to think about what this would mean. -Mah- finally said -what can that have been! You booed ears, it is useless to be afraid! - again took the ax and was about to lead the coup, when from below cried out again -A cuts wood for reel, he dies; who uses it is taken from malore.-He he stopped, and felt afraid and began to brood. But after a while 'she returned to her courage, grabbed the ax for the third time and started to lead the coup. But for the third time and said loudly: -A cuts wood for reel, you die; who uses it is taken from malore.-Then he had had enough, and all inclination had passed; hastily he descended the tree and walked toward the house. The woman ran as fast as he could for another path to get home before him. And when he entered the room, he said, with an innocent look as if nothing had happened: -Be ', you bring me good wood for the reel? -. No, he answered he -I realized that winding will not do bene.- and told her what had happened in the woods, and from that day on, he left her alone with the reel. Soon, however, the man began to complain of the disorder in the house. -Moglie- said -it is a shame that the yarn remains on rocchetto.- -You know? - she said. -Since we can not have a reel, put yourself in the attic, and I will stand down below will throw the yarn and you will throw it down so we will make the matassa.- -Yes, is well- said the husband. They did so, and when they had finished, he said, now that the skein is made, we must also make cuocere-. The woman was again distressed but said: -Yes, we will boil early- morning and thought meanwhile another trick. He got up early in the morning, lit the fire, put the kettle on, but instead of yarn, she put in a bunch of tow and let it boil. Then she went to her husband, who was still in bed, and said, -I have to go out, you get up and care in the meantime the wire that is on the fire in the cauldron; but you have to do it on time, is' attention: if the cock crows and you are not careful, the wire becomes stoppa-. The man wasted no time, got up quickly and went into the kitchen. But when he reached the kettle and looked inside, he saw nothing but a bunch of tow. Then he was as still as a mouse, thinking he was wrong and that the fault was his, and from then on did not talk more about yarn, spinning to his wife, who was very happy.
The fortune of Gianni	788	1415	Italian	Hans had served his master for seven years, so he said, -Padrone, my time is up; now I want to go home to my mother, give me what I spec-. The master replied: -I have served me faithfully and honestly: the fee will be equal to your service-. She gave him a big piece of gold as Gianni head. Hans pulled out his handkerchief, and I wrapped the gold, put it on his shoulder and walked toward the house. As he walked, one step after another, he saw a horseman, fresh trotting quickly and merrily by on a lively horse. -Ah- high lovely voice -who said Gianni thing is to ride! There you sit as on a chair; you stumble over no stones, you save your shoes and you go forward without accorgersene.- The rider, who had heard him, shouted: Hey, John, why do you go on foot? -. -Oh! - he said Gianni -I have to take home this burden: it is true that it is gold, but I can not hold my head straight, I press on a spalle.- -You know what? - said the Knight. -We return, I give you my horse, and you give me your piece of oro.- -Well volentieri- said Gianni-but I warn you that you will hardly take it! - The rider dismounted, took the gold, and helped Gianni to rise to horse; She gave him the reins to hold in hand firmly and said: -If you want to go fast, you must click your tongue and call out: "hop, hop!" -. Gianni was happy to be riding his horse and rode at full gallop. After a while 'it occurred to him to go faster, and he began to click with his tongue and shouted: "hop, hop !." The horse put himself into a sharp trot, and in less than no time, John was thrown off and ended up in a ditch which separated the field from the road. The horse would have escaped if he had not arrested a farmer who was coming by the road and driving a cow. Gianni went back on their feet and stood up. But, annoyed, said to the farmer: -Bel fun ride, especially if you hold of a mare like this that kicks and throws it to the ground chance of breaking your neck! I will never go up again! Your cow, I like that: for one can walk quietly behind her, and, every day, milk, butter and cheese are insured. What I would give to have such a cow -. -Be'- said the farmer -if you love so much, I will change the cow with your cavallo.- Hans agreed happy, the countryman jumped upon the horse and ran away. Hans drove his cow quietly before him thinking about the good deal: -I just have a piece of bread, and certainly will not miss me, and I can eat butter and cheese with it as often as I like; If I'm thirsty, I milk my cow and drink the milk. What more can I want? -. When he came to an inn he stopped, ate up everything he had with s, lunch and dinner, with the last money he had left, he asked for half a glass of beer. Then he drove his cow to the village of his mother. But, around noon, the heat became more oppressive, and Hans found himself in a land with an hour of walking in front of s. It had a warm that for thirst, his tongue was stuck to the palate. "I must do something" thought Hans. "I will milk the cow now and refresh myself with the milk." He tied her to a withered tree, and took him under his leather cap, but try as he would to do, was not even a drop of milk. And as clumsy way, the impatient beast at last gave him such a blow on the head with its hind foot, that he fell to the ground; and for a while 'he was unable to figure out where he was. Fortunately, at that moment he was passing a butcher who had a pig on a wheelbarrow. -What tricks! - he said, and helped the good Hans up. Hans told him what had happened. The butcher gave him his flask and said -Bevete a drink that will make the forces. The cow will certainly give no milk is old, and it is only fit to draft animal or macello-. -Ahi, ahi- Gianni said, running a hand through his hair-who would have thought! Sure is a beautiful thing one can kill a beast like that at home! How much meat! But I will not do to much for beef, not juicy enough for me. Such a beautiful little pig instead quite another taste, without talking of sausages! - -Sentite, Gianni- the butcher said -you will make a pleasure and in return the cow will leave the porcello.- -God reward your kindness! - said Gianni; gave him the cow, he untied the pig from the barrow, and he put up the rope that bound him. Hans went on his way thinking as it was well: when you meet with any vexation it was immediately remedied. Presently there joined him a lad who was carrying a fine white goose under his arm. They greeted each other, and Hans began to tell of his good luck, and such good bargains he had done. The boy told him that carried the goose to a christening-feast. -Try a bit 'in sollevarla- added, grabbing her by the heavy -Com wings but was fattened up for two months. To quest'arrosto bites, remain the mouth greased! - -si- said Gianni raising it with one hand-is a good weight, but my pig is no joke! - The boy then took a look around thoughtfully, and continued to shake his head. -Sentite- then said -for what with your pig, there must be something underneath. I went from a village where they had just stolen one from the mayor's barn. I'm afraid it's this guy. It would be a bad business if they found there with the animal at least ficcherebbero you in jail! - The good Hans was afraid: Ah, God--aiutatemi said get out! Here you are practical in the area, take the pork and let your oca.- Sure is a nice risk-said the boy-but I do not want you to finish in trouble because mia.- So he picked up the rope and quickly , led away the pig for a cross street. The good Hans, instead, be released from his concerns, he continued on his way back home with the goose under his arm. -A well- think about saying to himself, -there I gained to make changes: first there is the roast, then everything that Anointed who will drip and give goose fat for three months; and lastly the beautiful white feathers with those we'll stuff the pillow, so I will fall asleep without needing to be rocked. How glad my mother will be! - After crossing the last country, Gianni found a knife-grinder with his cart; by spinning the wheel for sharpening the knives, so he sang: -Faccio the grinder, are fast with the grinding wheel, round and round like a banderuola.-Gianni stopped to look at; eventually she spoke to him saying just that there -Pare you pass the well, since you're so cheerful! -. -Si- said the grinder. -Who knows a trade is a lucky man. A good grinder, he puts his hand in his pocket finds gold. But where did you buy that fine goose? - -Do I bought it, I had it in exchange for a maiale.- -And the pig? - -I got in exchange for a mucca.- -E cow ? - -I had in exchange for a cavallo.- -And the horse? - -For I gave him a big piece of gold as my testa.- -E gold? - Eh, it was the sum that it was for me to have served seven years! - -You have always known arrangiarvi- said the grinder. -If now able to hear jingling money in your pocket, when you get up, it would have made your fortuna.- -And how could I do? - said Gianni. -Dovete be a grinder like me; why do not you need a grindstone, the rest finds itself,. I have one here which is a bit 'ruined, but in return I ask only your goose you agree? - -And do you ask? - said Gianni. -Diventerò the luckiest man on this earth; if I have money whenever I put my hand in my pocket, what more can I want? - and she handed him the goose. -And now-said the grinder, picking up a stone that whatever was next -eccovi also a beautiful stone, on which you can hammer well and straighten your old nails. Take it and cherish it with cura.- Gianni hoisted the stone on his shoulders and continued on his way with a joyful heart; his eyes sparkled with delight, and he thought to himself, "I must have been born lucky! All I want happens to me as if I came to Sunday's world." Meanwhile, as he walked since daybreak, he began to feel tired; Hunger also tormented him, for he had eaten up all the food, to the delight of having obtained the cow. Now he advancing with difficulty and had to stop all the time; and on top of the stones they weighed him terribly, help thinking how nice it would if he had to carry them just then. Slow as a snail, he managed to drag himself up to a spring, where he wanted to stop and cool off with a nice drink of fresh water. But not to spoil the stones sitting, he placed them carefully beside s, on the edge of the source. Then he turned and bent down to drink but, by mistake, the hit a little and both of them fell into the water stones. Gianni, seeing them sink, took a leap of joy and knelt to thank God with tears in their eyes for having also granted this grace had freed him from those large stones so that he should not be criticized anything, it was just what we wanted to make it fully happy! -Felice as -not me- said there really is no one on earth! - A light heart and free from every burden, ran until, came home to his mother.
The cat Cinderella	3352	510A	Italian	There was, therefore, once a widower Prince, who had a daughter so dear to him that he saw other eyes. He had given a teacher sewing of the first row, who taught the chains, the point in the air, the fringes and Hemmings, dimostrandole such affection that you could not tell. But, having the father riammogliato fresh and having taken an angry, evil and devilish female, this damned began to have hated her stepdaughter, making cère sharp, twisted faces, frown glances, to give her a start in fear. The poor girl was always complaining with the teacher of the mistreatment of his stepmother, concluding: "Oh God, you may not be're my mommy, you make me so many quirks and caresses? ». And many times he repeated this chant, which put his ear wasp, so that, blinded by the devil, the teacher ended up telling her: "If you want to do so in this crazy head, I will be Mom and you will be the apple of my eyes. " He was going to continue in this prologue when Zezolla (which was the name of the girl) interrupted: "Forgive me if I break the word into his mouth. I know you love me; therefore shut up and sufficit; teach me the art, for I am new: you write and I sign. " "Come on! - said the teacher - listen well, open your ears, and always will enjoy white bread of fine flour. When your father goes out of the house, the 'your stepmother who want a dress of those old, who are in the large chest in the closet, to save this leading him. It, you want to see all rags and shreds, open the cabinet and say: - Keep the lid. - And you, holding it, mentr'essa go poking around in there, let it fall abruptly, because the sap neck. After this, you know that your dad would smash for thy sake; and you, when he will caress, beg him to take me for his wife, because, you blessed, you will be the mistress of my life ".Udito drawing, in Zezolla every hour seemed a thousand years and put in place step by step the teacher's advice, when he spent time mourning for the death of his stepmother, began to tap the keys to his father so s'ammogliasse with his teacher. At first, the prince took it in jest; but many times Zezolla pulled the dish, which finally hit peak, and he bent down to the persuasions of the daughter. So he married the teacher Carmosina, and there was a grande.Ora party, while the couple were in bliss, Zezolla appeared to a gaifo of his house; and at that point, a dove flew over the wall and said, "When comes you desire something, to ask it sends the dove of the fairies of the island of Sardinia, for thou hast suffered" .For five or six days new stepmother incensed with all sorts of Zezolla caresses, making her sit in the best place of the table, giving it the best morsels and adorning it with the best clothes. But very little over time, he sent upstream and forgot all ministering received (oh sad soul, who has poor mistress!), And began to put iscranna six daughters, who until then had kept secret; and so did her husband, presele in grace, let cascar from the heart of her own daughter. And Zezolla, scapita today, tomorrow is missing, ended up reduced to such an extent that ran from the room to the kitchen, from the canopy to the hearth, from silk and gold to strofinaccioli boastful, scepters from the skewers. Neither was it turned only, but also the name, and no more Zezolla, but was called "Cat Cinderella" .Now that followed, the Prince having to go to Sardinia for certain things necessary to his condition, before leaving he asked one by one, to Imperia, Calamita, Fiorella, Diamante, Colombina, and Pascarella, who was six stepdaughters, what they wanted to bring them back. And who asked him a luxurious outfit, who gallantry pel leader, who cosmetics for face, those toys to pass the time; and who one thing and some another. Finally, almost in derision, he said to his daughter: "And what do you want? ». And she: "Nothing except that I recommend to do the dove, you send me something; and, if you forget, you can not go neither forward nor back. Keep in mind what you say to your weapon, your sleeve ".Partì Prince, hurried his affairs in Sardinia, bought what they had asked for stepdaughters, and Zezolla came out of his mind. But, when it was boarded and sails, it was not possible to make that the vessel had already been explained comes off from the port: it seemed that he was prevented by the obstacle. The master of the ship, which was almost in despair, fell asleep from exhaustion, and in a dream appeared to him a fairy, which he told him: "You know why you can not tear yourself away from the port? Because the prince, who comes with you, has broken his promise to her daughter, remembering anything but their own blood. " Just woke up, the captain told the dream to the prince, who, confused because of the misconduct, he went to the cave of the fairies, and they recommended the daughter, the begged him to send her a gift. And here I come out of the cave, a nice young man, who seemed a banner, and said, thanking him for the daughter of a good memory, and that if passed glad for his sake. With that, he handed her a date, a hoe, a golden pail and a silken towel: the date to be planted, and other things for cultivating and curarlo.Il Prince, amazed at this gift, he took his leave from the fairy , turning to his country; where, now, he distributed to the stepdaughters the things that they want, and ultimately gave his daughter the gift of fairy. Zezolla, with much rejoicing as not being in the skin, the date palm planted in a beautiful vase; and morning and evening I zappettava. I watered and wiped with a napkin seta.Con these cures, the date palm grew in four days to the stature of a woman, and it came out of a fairy, who asked the girl: "What would you like? ». Zezolla said he wanted to come out sometime in the house, and the sisters did not know it. He said the fairy, 'Whenever you like it, come to the plant and': Date My gold, with gold hoe dug thee; with the golden pail, watered, with silk band t ' I asciugato.Spoglia you and me clothes! then when you want to undress, it changes the last verse and ': - robes and strip me and you. " It was a day of celebration, and the daughters of the mistress had gone in procession out of the house, all overblown, and strigliate imbiaccate, all ribbons, rattles and fronzellini, all flowers and smells, roses and things. Zezolla then rushed to his plant, uttered the words she learned from fairy and immediately was placed in Queen trim, on a hackney, with twelve pages tight and dapper, and went too where were the sisters, who did not know her, but felt be mouth watering for the beauty of this vague colomba.Volle luck that happen in the same place the king, who, at the sight of outstanding beauty of Zezolla became enchanted, and ordered one of his servants more intrinsic in that s'informasse best way of that beautiful creature, who she was and where she lived. The servant immediately began to tail her. But she, who had comprehended the attack, threw a handful of curly shields, that had been made to give the date to this effect; and the servant, lit with longing for those glittering pieces, forgot to follow the hackney, stopping to collect the money. Dodge And she went into the house, took off quickly in the way the fairy had the educated; and then they came upon the six harpies of the sisters, who, for sting and torment, the described at length the many beautiful things that they had seen the festa.Il servant, meanwhile, had returned to the king and told him about the fact of the shields. It enraged the king and with great anger said that for four monetuzze vile, had sold her taste, and that, for each account, had procured the feast fortune to ascertain who that pretty young, so graceful and where s'annidasse bird. It was the other party and the sisters, leaving all adorned and gallant, left the despised Zezolla the hearth. But at once she ran from the date, he said the same words, and there burst forth an army of maids, those with the mirror, those with the water bottle of cucuzza, those with iron to curl, some with lipstick piece, some with comb , who with pins, some with clothes, some with necklaces and pendants. They all began around her, and made beautiful as a sun, and set it in a chariot drawn by six horses, accompanied by footmen and pages in livery. And he went in the same place as last time, and said, wonder in the hearts of the sisters and fire in the re.Anche chest this time, the return, the servant went after her; But it, in order not to arrive, threw a handful of pearls and jewels, dabben that that man could not help but bow down to peck, because they were not things to let go; Zezolla and so had time to fall in his home and undressing complies usual. He came back the servant, all stunned, to the king, who told him: "For the soul of your dead, if you do not find myself that young, I give a solemn clubbing, and many kicks ass how you hairs in my beard! ".At the new feast day, and when the sisters they had already made available in, Zezolla returned by date; and, repeating the fairy song, he was superbly dressed and placed in a golden carriage with so many servants around, that seemed a courtesan arrested in the public promenade and surrounded by cops. And, after having excited the wonder and envy of the sisters, departed, followed by the king's servant, this time it sewed in glove to coach. Seeing that it was always the coast, Zezolla shouted, "touches coachman! »; and the carriage started in the race with such fury, that she, in his agitation, he fell from his foot a slipper, which you could not see richer and gentile.Il servant thing, not being able raggiunger the carriage was flying now, picked the slipper and brought it to the king, telling him what had happened. The king took off his hands and went out in these sayings: "If the foundation is so beautiful, it will never be the house? O beautiful candleholder where it was stuck the candle that consumes me! O beautiful tripod of the boiler, which boils my life! O beautiful cork, fishing line attached to love, with whom he has caught this soul! Behold, I will hug and squeeze you, and if I can not come to the plant, I love the roots; I can not draw on the capitals, kiss the basics! You were already strains of a foot white, and now you are a snare of a grieving heart. For your virtues, it who tyrannize my life, was a foot high and a half more; and for you grows equally in this sweetness my life, while I look at you and you possess! ".This said, the king calls the scribe, commands to the trumpeters, and tu-tu-tu, does throw a notice that all women of the country are at a party and a banquet that determined to give. On the appointed day, my oh well! which the chewing and which show it was! Whence came many pastiere and Casatelli? Donde stews and dumplings? whence the macaroni and the graviuoli, which could saziarvisi a huge army? The females were all and every kind, and noble and ignoble, rich and beggars, and old and young and beautiful and ugly; and since they had worked well with his teeth, the king, made profizio, he began to try the slipper one by one to all invited to see who of them went to the hair and well settled, so that he could be the shape of the Know yourself slipper that he was looking for. But he found no foot who went to sixth, and ful about to disperare.Nondimeno imposed general silence, said, "Come back tomorrow to do penance with me; but if you love me, do not let any female at home, and it is what! "He spoke then the prince," I have a daughter, but he is always watching the fire, because it is a creature miserable and worthless, unworthy to sit where you eat. " Replied the king, "This is the head of the list, because I have dear," .So they left, and the next day returned to all, and, together with the daughters of Carmosina, Zezolla, which, as the king saw him, dié the impression that he wanted; and yet he dissembled. But, over the dinner, it was the test of the slipper, that as soon as he was appressata to Zezolla foot, rushed in and of itself, such as iron runs to the magnet, to wear that pinto of Love coconut. The king shook Zezolla in his arms, and, condottala under his canopy, put the crown on his head, ordering all of them bows and curtsies as their queen. The sisters, livid with envy, unable to withstand the crash of their hearts, spun moge moge to the house of his mother, confessing in spite that their crazy are those who contrasts with the stars.
The green jacket Devil	956	361	Italian	There were once three brothers who always walked away the smallest of them; when they wanted to leave the world, they said: -We need you, get out of just-. So they abandoned him and he had to go alone; he came to a large heath and was very hungry. In the moor there was a circle of trees sat down below and began to cry. Suddenly he heard a noise, and when he looked around, he saw the devil come with a green coat and a horse's foot. -What's the matter, why are you crying? - he said. Then he confided his sentence and said: -My brothers scacciato- me. The Devil said, -I want to help you: wear this green jacket, has pockets which are always full of money; you can take as long as you want. In return, however, I want you for seven years you do not wash you, you do not comb No, pray. If you die during these seven years, you are mine; but if you stay alive, you will be free, and rich to the end of your days-. The young man ended by accepting, because of the need in which he found himself; so he put on the green jacket that the devil had taken off, and when he reached into his pocket he found it full of money. So he went around the world with the green jacket. The first year went well: all he wanted was paying him with his money, and was still regarded as a human being. But the second year things got worse: his hair had grown so much that no one recognized him; Also no one wanted to give him lodging because of its ugly appearance. And, as time went on, the worse it became. But wherever he gave the money to the poor, why, pray for him, might not die during the seven years and fell so in the hands of the devil. In the fourth year he came to an inn where the landlord would not receive him. But he took from his pocket a handful of money and paid in advance, so finally got a room. At night he heard loud crying in the next room, he opened the door and saw an old man who desperately crying and told him to leave because he could not help him for sure. But the young man asked him what ailed him ever so much, and the old man said that he had no more money; He was indebted to his host that he held until, he should pay. Then the young man from his green coat said: -If it's all here for me I have enough money: pay for you-. And he released the man from his debts. The old man had three beautiful daughters and told him to scegliersene a wife as a reward. But when they arrived home and saw him more, and he cried out to the idea of ​​marrying a being so horrible, that he had no more human appearance and looked like a bear. The second ran away and preferred to go for the world. The third said instead: Dear father, if you have promised a bride, and he has helped you in time of need, you ubbidirò-. Then the young man from his green coat drew from his finger a ring, he broke it, gave half to the girl and held for himself, the other; and first he wrote his name, the other her name, begging her to the greatest care of the middle ring. He was still a bit 'of time with her, and finally said: -Now I must take leave, I'll stay away for three years, faithful to Me in this time period; when I return we will celebrate our wedding. If you do not come back I're free, why, I'll be dead, but you pray to God to keep me in life-. In those three years the two sisters of the bride made fun of her and told her that he had a bear to her husband instead of a normal man. But the girl was silent and thought that whatever happened had to obey his father. The young man from the green jacket, however, went around the world, often put his hands in his pockets and bought for his bride the most beautiful things that capitavano under the eyes. He did nothing wrong, indeed dealt well where he could and gave the money to the poor so that, pray for him. Then God gave him the grace and, after three years, he was still alive and healthy. When the time was spent he went back into the heath and sat beneath the circle of trees. There was a loud hiss, and here comes the devil all angry and grumbling; threw his old jacket and rivolle behind the green. The young man took it off with joy, handed it to the devil and he was rich and free forever. Then he went home, cleaned well and he set out to go to his wife. When he reached the front door, he met his father; She greeted him and said to be the groom, but that did not recognize him and did not believe him. Then he went up the bride, but she also did not want to believe him. Finally he asked if he still had the ring halves. She said yes, and went to take it; he also took his, lifted it to another and saw that the two parts fit together perfectly: he could only be her husband and when she saw that he was a handsome man, rejoiced, loved him and celebrated the marriage. The sisters, however, were so furious that he lost that fortune, the same day of the wedding the one was drowned, while the other hung himself. At night, they knocked on the door and felt a growl; when the bridegroom opened it, here's the devil in his green coat, who said, -See, now I have two souls in exchange for your! -.
The goose at the source	1709	923	Italian	There was once a very old woman, who lived with her flock of geese, in a clearing in the mountains and there was a small house. The clearing was surrounded by a great forest, every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbled into it. And the old woman was very busy, a lot more thought, considering her age, for its geese grass, itself caught wild fruit that was within reach, and carried everything home on her back. One would have thought that the heavy load would have weighed her to the ground, but she always brought it safely home. If you met someone greeted him very politely: "Good morning, neighbor, now the weather is nice! Yeah, sure you wonder that I should drag grass about, but every one must take his weight on his shoulders." But people do not met her willingly and preferred to lengthen the way, if a father passed her with her child, immediately whispered: "Beware of the old one, is clever as the devil, it is a witch." One morning came through the woods a handsome young man! The sun shone bright, the birds sang and among the trees was blowing a fresh breeze, and he was content and happy. He had not yet met anyone, when suddenly perceived the old witch kneeling cutting the grass with a sickle. In a tarp he had already put quite a while, and near it stood two baskets of pears and wild apples. "But Grandma," he said, "how do you carry all that stuff?" - "I must carry it, dear sir," she said, "the children of the rich do not need it. But at the farmers say: Do not look around hunchback stay all day." Would you help me ?, "he said when he is the stopped by, "you have beautiful straight back and young legs, it will be easy for you. Then my house is not far off: is in a clearing, there behind that mountain. In two jumps are there. "The young man took pity on the old:" Actually my father is not the farmer, "he said," is an earl, and very rich, but because you can see that they are not only the farmers who know how to bear burdens, will take the your bundle. "-" If you want to try, "said the old woman," I will certainly delight! Certainly it has to walk for an hour, but that you care! And you also have to take the apples and pears. "The young count became suspicious hearing about an hour's walk, but the old woman did not let him off, he packed the bundle on his back and the two baskets arm." You see, they are light as a feather, "he said." no, no light at all, "replied the count with a grimace of pain," the bundle of grass weighs as if it were made of stone, and apples and pears have a weight that seem to lead, I was almost out of breath. "He wanted to put everything, but the old woman did not give him peace." Just look, "he said in a mocking voice," the young man does not want to bring what an old woman like I was so often dragged along. A fine words are all ready, but if you are serious if they want your heels. "What do you expect," he continued, "by the move. That bundle would not let any more." Until the young man walking on the floor, he could still resist, but when they came to the hill and had to climb, and the stones rolled down under his feet as if they were alive then could not take it anymore. Beads of sweat stood on his forehead, and ran down his back, now bitter cold now. "Granny," he said, "do not take it anymore I must rest a little!" - "Not at all," the old woman said, "you can rest when we get there, but now it goes on. Perhaps they will do well." - "Old, you really are insolent," said the young man, and he wanted to throw off the burden, but it was useless; it stuck in the back as if the grass had taken root! He turned and shook here and there but could not shake. The old woman laughed and jumped with his crutch, happily. "Do not get angry, dear sir, become red in the face like a turkey," he said, "Carry your bundle patiently and when we get home I will give you a good tip." And what could he do? He had to resign himself to his fate, and crawl along patiently behind the old. It seemed to grow more and more nimble and increasingly heavy load. Suddenly she jumped, jumped on to the bundle and seated herself well, dry and lean as he was weighed over the country lass. The youth's knees trembled, but if you did not go on, the old woman hit him on the legs with a switch and with stinging nettles. Groaning, he climbed the mountain and eventually came to the old house, just as he was about to drop. When the geese perceived the old woman, they raised their wings. They craned their necks and ran to meet him shouting "quack." Behind the pack, with a rod in his hand, an old wench, strong and big, ugly as night. "Good mother," said she to the old woman, "has anything happened, you have been away so long?" - "Reassured, my daughter," she answered, "I have met with nothing bad, on the contrary, with this kind gentleman took my load and think, when I was tired, she charged me too on his back. The road there seemed long at all, we were in good cheer and we joked together. " Eventually the old woman slid down to the ground, removed the burden from his back and the baskets from his arm, looked at him kindly and said: "Now put yourself on the bench before the door, and rest. You've earned your fee and you will have it. " Then he said to the goose: "You go home, my daughter, no good to be alone with a young man, you must not pour oil on the fire, you may fall in love with you." The count did not know whether to cry or laugh, "a darling like this, even if she were thirty years younger, certainly not touch my heart." Meanwhile the old woman stroked and fondled her geese as if they were children, and then went into the house with the daughter. The young man lay down on the bench, under a wild apple tree. The air was sweet and mild; lay a beautiful green lawn. full of primroses, wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers, standing before him murmuring a clear stream over and the sun was shining, the three white geese strolling up and down and bathed in water. "And just beautiful here," the young man said, "but I'm so tired that I can not keep my eyes open, I'll sleep for a while. Just that one does not lead me to blast away the legs, because me as rotten as ricotta. "he slept a little when the old woman came and woke him by shaking. "Get up," he said, "you can not stay here. I have tormented. Is true, but you have not then put the skin. Now you will have your reward - money and possessions you do not need, here they are something else." And he puts his hand in a box, made from a single emerald. "Take great care," he said, "will bring you luck." The count jumped up and, feeling fresh and invigorated, thanked the old of his gift and set off without even once looking back at the beautiful daughter. He had already done quite a bit of road still hear the noisy cry of the geese. In that lonely place at the count had to wander for three days, before finding her way out. He then reached a large town, and since no one knew him, they took him to the royal palace, where the king and queen sat on trono.Il count fell on one knee, drew the emerald from his pocket and handed it to the queen. But when the Queen opened it and looked inside, he fell to the ground as if dead. The count was seized by the servants of the king and was being led to prison, when the Queen opened her eyes, and ordered to set him free and everyone to go out, because they wished to speak with him. When they were alone, the queen burst into tears and said, "What do I need the luxury and honors that surround me every morning when I wake up in anxiety and pain? I have three daughters, and the youngest was so beautiful, that everyone remained spellbound! She was white as snow, as rosy as apple blossom and her hair shone like the sun. If crying, his eyes not tears fell, but pearls and precious stones! When he was fifteen, the king summoned all three sisters before him! you should have seen that the people gazed when the youngest entered what seemed the sun had risen. " The king said, "My daughters, I do not know when it will be my last day and up to now I want to decide what each shall receive at my death I know that you all love me, but the one who loves me best, shall the best part. " Each said that she loved him more than the others. "Not sapetedirmi as you love me ?," the king said, "so I will understand your thinking." The eldest said, "I love my father as the sweetest sugar." The second said: "I love my father as the most beautiful dress." But the youngest was silent. Then the father asked, "And you, my dearest child, as you love me ?." - "I do not know, I can not compare it to anything my love," said the smallest. But the father insisted that name something. Finally she said: "The best do not like food without salt, therefore I love my father like salt." Hearing it the king was angry and said, "If you love me like salt, your love will be rewarded with salt." He divided the kingdom between the two elder, the smaller caused a sack of salt on the back and two servants had to lead her in the wild forest. "We all begged and prayed for her," said the queen, "but the wrath of the king was relentless How she cried when she had to leave. The whole street was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes. Soon the king He repented of his cruelty and sent for her by the whole forest, but no one could find her. When I think that the wild beasts have devoured her myself for sorrow, sometimes I console myself and I think she's still alive and that it is hidden in a cave, or has found shelter with compassionate people. But think about it, when I opened your little emerald book, a pearl lay therein, precisely the same as those that fall from my daughter's eyes. You can also imagine how my heart is moved at the sight. Tell me how you came by that pearl "The count told her that he had given the old forest, and he was found strange, it was probably a witch, but the queen's daughter had not seen and had not heard . the king and the queen resolved to seek out the old, where there was thought that the pearl there also had to be their figliola.Fuori sitting in that lonely old and spinning. it was dark, and a log which was burning in the fireplace gave a scanty light. Outside, suddenly there was a great outcry. geese returning from pasture, and uttering their hoarse cries. soon afterwards the daughter also entered. the old woman scarcely his greeting and collapsed his head a little. the daughter sat down beside her, and took the spinning wheel and began to spin as fast as a little girl. So they continued for two hours without exchanging words. Eventually something rustled at the window and looked inside two large eyes of fire was an old owl for three vo lte shouted "Uhu." The old woman looked up just a little, then said: "Now is the time, my daughter, that you go out and do your job." She rose and went out. Where did she go? Through the meadows. right down to the valley, until they came to a well, there were three old oak trees. The moon was big and round over the mountain and it was so clear that you would have found a needle. She removed a skin on her face, then she leaned on the source and began to wash. When he finished also immersed in the water and put the skin on the lawn because it should bleach, and dry in the light of the moon. But how the maiden was changed! One thing of some kind you've never seen. When the gray mask fell, broke forth golden hair like sunbeams, and like a mantle over her whole form. They could not see that his eyes sparkling like the stars of heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a soft red like apple blossoms. But the fair maiden was sad, sat and wept bitterly, one after another, tears running from his eyes and rolled through her long hair. So he was and would remain for a long time, if he had not heard a creak and a rustle in the branches of the tree vicino.Balzò standing like a deer that feel the hunter's gun. Just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud, in an instant the maiden had put on the old skin and vanished like a lamp off by the wind. He is shaking like a leaf She ran back home. The old woman was at the door, and the girl was about to relate what had happened, but the old woman laughed kindly, and said, "I already know everything." He led her into the room and lighted a new log on the fire. But he did not come back, sit down, picked up a broom and started sweeping and scrubbing. "Everything must be neat and clean," said the girl. "But mother, why do you begin work so late? What do you want?" - "Do you know what time is it ?," he asked the old woman. "Not yet midnight," answered the maiden, "but already past eleven o'clock" - "Do not you remember ?," went on the old "now been three years since you came to me. Your time is up, we can not stay together . " The girl was shocked and said: "Dear Mom, you want to throw me out? Where will I ever? I have no home, no friends to turn to. I did everything you ordered me, me he has always been satisfied, do not send me away." The old woman would not tell her what lay ahead. "I can not stay here anymore," he said, "but before I go all has to be clean, so do not hold me in my work. As for you, do not worry, you'll have a roof to shelter and then you'll be happy with the compensation I'll give you. " - "But tell me what will happen to me," said the girl again. "I repeat, do not disturb me in the work. Do not talk more, go into your room, take off the skin from the face, and put the silk dress you wore when you came to me, and then wait until I call thee." But back to the king and queen, who had left with the count in order to seek out the old woman in the wilderness. At night the count had preceded them in the woods and then lost, so he had to go alone. The next day he had seemed to be on the right track. He kept walking until it got dark, and then climbed up a tree to spend the night because he was afraid of getting lost again. When the moon illumined the surrounding saw a figure coming down from upstream. She had no stick in her hand, but he recognized it as the guardian of the geese, he had seen at the old house. "Here," he thought, "if there is one of the witches not escape me another." But was stunned when she went to the well, he took off the skin, washed and melted golden hair. It was so beautiful as he had never seen someone in the world. He dared hardly breathe, but stretched his head as far forward through the leaves was possible, without taking his eyes off her. Either he bent over too far, or for some other reason, suddenly the branch cracked, and that very moment the maiden slipped into the skin and ran like a deer. Was suddenly covered the moon and he did not see her più.Appena was gone, the count came down the tree and ran after him. He had not gone far when the dim light he saw two figures coming over the lawn. They were the king and queen, who had perceived from a distance the light in the old house, and were going to it! The count told them what wonderful things he had seen at the source, and they do not doubt that it had just lost their daughter. They arrived full of joy at the lodge, the geese were around the house with her head under her wing and slept, and none of them moved. They looked out the window. The old woman sat quietly and spinning. It was only a nod with the head, but you never looked around. Everything in the room was perfectly clean, as if we were living the little mist men, who carry no dust on their feet. But they saw their daughter. For a while they watched very carefully, they took heart, and knocked softly at the window. It seemed that the old waiting for them, got up, and called out: "Come in, you already know." When they were inside. she said: "You might have spared this long journey, if three years ago you had not unjustly driven away your daughter, who is so good and lovable. She did not do any harm. has had to tend the geese, so he did not learn for three years nothing wrong and has kept her pure heart. But you have been sufficiently punished by where you lived. " Then he came to the room and called out: "Come out, my little one !." The door opened and the princess appeared in her silk dress, with her golden hair and eyes like stars, and it seemed that an angel had come down from cielo.Si pulled up to the parents, hugged them and kissed and everyone wept for joy . The young count was next to them, and when she saw it red in the face like a musk rose, and she herself did not know why. The king said, "My kingdom I have given away, dear child, what should I give you ?." - "He does not need anything," the old woman said, "I the gift of tears cried for you, are beads, more beautiful than those found in the sea, and are worth more than your whole kingdom! And in return his services I leave my house. " That said the old woman disappeared. There was a faint creaking in the walls, and as they looked around, they saw that the house had been transformed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been spread, and the servants were running hither and là.La story continues, but my grandmother that I manage has told, he had partly lost her memory, and the rest if you had forgotten. However, I imagine that the beautiful princess married the count, and that they remained together in the palace and there they lived, until God allowed him, in all happiness. Whether the snow kept geese near the castle were all maidens (no one need take offense), whom the old woman had taken under her and then their human form again, and as handmaids to the young Queen, what I do not know anything definite but I think the old sì.Certo this was not a witch, as people thought, but a wise woman, who meant well. Probably, the birth of the princess, had been her the gift of weeping pearls instead of tears. It does not happen now, or else the poor would soon become rich.
The blue light	1099	562	Italian	There was once a king who was a soldier in his service, and when they grew old and he could no longer work, sent him away without giving him anything. The soldier did not know how to live; He went all sad and walked all day, until the evening came to a forest. He entered and soon saw a light that guided him, and came to a house where he lived a witch. He begged her to give him a bed for the night, something to eat and drink; She refused, but then he said: -I host you for mercy, but tomorrow you have to dig my garden-. The soldier promised to do, and so he was lodged. The next day Vango witch garden and worked until evening. She wanted to send him away, but he said: -I am so tired, let me stay one more night! -. The witch did not want to, but then ended by accepting: the next day, though, the soldier had to smash a wagon full of firewood. So the second day the soldier split the wood, and in the evening had worked so hard that he did not feel to go back and begged for a third time. The next day he had, however, got out of the well the blue light. The witch brought to him so well, tied to a long rope, and he lowered himself. When he was on the bottom, he found the blue light and motioned to old to climb. The witch pulled him up, but when he was close to the edge, so close you could touch it with my hand, she wanted to take his blue light and then drop it on the bottom. But he became aware of his evil intentions and said, 'No, do not give you the blue light where before I did not touch the ground with both the feet-. Then the witch became furious, let him fall into the well with the light and left. The soldier was all sad, down there in that damp morass in the dark, and was already thinking of his end. By chance he was in his hands his pipe, still half full, and thought: "It will be your last pleasure !." He lit the blue light and began to smoke. When the smoke spread a little into the well, he appeared suddenly a black little man who asked him: -Padrone, what commands? -. The soldier replied: -What I command you? -. The little man said, -I have to do anything you want-. -So, first of all, help me out of the pit! - The black little man took his hand and led him out, taking with it, the blue light. Then the soldier said, now the witch-kill me. Having done this, the man showed him the gold and the treasures of the old, and the soldier took them caricandoseli shoulders. Then the man said: -If you need me, you have only to turn on his pipe to azzurra- light. The soldier then went to the city, in the best inn, came to make beautiful clothes, and ordered the innkeeper to arredargli a room as lavishly as possible. When she was ready, the soldier called the black dwarf and said: -The King kicked me making me starve, because I could no longer serve; tonight bring me here the princess: I will be the servant and will run attend me. The man said: -E 'What rischiosa-. However fetched the Princess; lifted from his bed while he slept, he took her to the soldier, and she had to obey him and do what he ordered her. In the morning, before the rooster singing, the little man brought her back. When the princess got up and said to his father -This night I had a strange dream: I seemed to have been taken away and he served a soldier, which I had to do serva-. Then the king said: -It 'a little hole in the pocket and fill it with chickpeas: the dream may be true, and in this case the chickpeas will come out and leave a track on the road-. The girl followed the advice, but the man had heard the words of the king, and when evening came and the soldier ordered him to go and get back the princess, he scattered chickpeas throughout the city, and those few who fell from pocket princess did not leave any sign. The next day, people washed away chickpeas all day. The princess went back to tell his father what had happened, and the king said: -Keep with you a shoe, and hide it where you trovi-. The black dwarf heard everything and when the soldier ordered him to go and get back the Princess, he said: -This time I can not be of help: you will go wrong if you scoprono-. But the soldier did not feel right. -So early tomorrow morning you will have to flee, when I have brought home- said the little man. The princess held with s, a shoe and hid in the bed of the soldier. The next morning, when she found herself back at the father, he did try the shoe of his daughter throughout the city, and found the soldier. He, though, he left the room, was soon reached and thrown into prison. So now lay in chains and, moreover, in the stampede had forgotten the better, the blue light and the gold, and had no pocket in which a duchy. While all sad, stood at the prison window, he saw passing one of his comrades called him and said: -If I go to pick up the little bundle that I left the inn, I'll give a ducato-. What he went and in exchange for a Duchy brought him the blue light and the gold. The prisoner turned his pipe and summoned the black dwarf who said: -Do not be afraid! It should be 'quietly by the court, and what he wants to happen; off only to take with you azzurra- light. The soldier was brought to trial and sentenced to death. When they led him out, he asked the king for a last favor. -What? - he asked the king. -To do once pipata for via.- -You can make even three if you want- replied the king. Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lit it at the blue light, and then she had to appear the black dwarf. -Uccidi all quantitative soldier -and said the king foul in three pezzi.- Then the man began to take out the people around, so the king asked grace and to save his life gave the soldier his kingdom and his daughter in marriage.
The sunlight will reveal him	1089	960	Italian	A tailor's apprentice was traveling the world in search of work, but he could find none, and was so poor that he had not a penny in his pocket. One day he met on the street a jew and, thinking he had much money in your pocket, drove God from his heart, he rushed on him and said: Give me your money or I'll kill you! -. The jew said -Fatemi grace of life, money I do not have; I'll have maybe eight cents in all-. But the tailor said: -Yes who have money, and must come out! -. Then he used violence and beat him so much that reduced him dying. And when he was about to die, the jew said these last words: -The light of the sun will bring - and died. The tailor's apprentice felt in his pockets, looking for the money, but he found nothing but eight farthings, as he said the jew. Then he took him up on his shoulders and carried it behind a bush and went on his way. After wandering for a long time, he came to a town, he went to work as a master who had a beautiful daughter; He fell in love, married, and lived happily together. After a long time, when they were already born two children, in-laws died, and the Government of the house alone. One morning, the man was sitting at a table by the window, and his wife brought him his coffee; when he poured it into the saucer and just going to drink, the sun shone above, and is reflected here and there on the wall, forming circles. The tailor looked up and said: -Yes, it would like very but can not! -. The wife said, Oh, dear husband, what is it? What do you mean?-. He replied: -I can not say-. But she said, -If you love me, you dirmelo- and said many beautiful words, he said that no one would know and left him no peace. Then he told her that many years before, when he was traveling around ragged and penniless, he had killed a jew, jew and, shortly before his death, he had said these words: -The light of the sun will bring -. And now the sun had just wanted to reveal it, shining on the wall in many circles, but could not. Then he begged her not to tell anyone, because he would lose his life, and she did promise. But when he went to work, she went to her great friend and told the story; But he does not tell anyone! They were the third day, that the whole town knew, and the tailor to trial and was convicted. So the sunlight revealed it.
The death of the little hen	758	2021	Italian	Once hen and rooster came to the mountain of nuts and agreed together that the two had found a kernel would score with the other. Then the hen found a pretty big nut, but said nothing because, intending to eat alone. But the kernel was so big that he could not swallow it; remained in the throat and, fearing to stifle the hen cried -Galletto, please, run as fast as you can and go get me some water, or soffoco-. The rooster running faster at the source: -Sorgente, you have to give me some water, pullet on the mountain of nuts has swallowed a large kernel and is about to soffocare-. The source said: -Before run to the bride and facts give the rossa- silk. The cock ran to the bride -Sposa, give me some red silk, red silk I have to bring it to the source, the source must give me some water, and the water will take it to the little hen who is the mount of nuts and is choking has swallowed a big gheriglio-. The bride said: -Before run and bring me my little wreath which is hanging by a salice-. So the little cock ran to the willow, and drew the wreath from the branch and took it to the bride, and the bride gave him in exchange for the red silk, which he brought to the source, who gave him in return water. Then the little cock took the water to the hen, but when he got there the hen had choked and lay there dead. The cock was so distressed that he cried aloud, and every animal came to lament the little hen and six mice built a little carriage to carry her to the grave; and when the carriage was ready they harnessed themselves and the cock drove. But the street they met the fox -Where going, little cock? -. -Vado to bury my gallinella.- Can I come with you? - -Okay, but instantly get up behind, or the mice will be too heavy! - Then the fox sat behind, after that the wolf, 'bear, the deer, the lion and all the animals of the forest. Thus continued the journey, until they came to a stream. -How do we cross it? - he asked the rooster. On the shore there was a straw that said -I will lay myself across, and you shall drive supra. But when the six mice came to the straw he slipped and fell into the water, and in water ended the six mice that were drowned. They did not know how to get on, and a coal came and said: -I am big enough, I will stretch out over the water and you pass me supra. So also the firebrand stood over the water, but unhappily just touched hissed, was extinguished and died. A stone saw that scene and wanted to help the rooster itself over the water. This time the coach pulled the cock alone; He had just passed and was to shore with the dead hen, and wanted us to come the others who were sitting behind, but now there were too many: the carriage overturned, and they all fell into the water and drowned. Now the cock was left alone with the dead hen, and dug a grave, she puts it down and made a mound. He sat up there and he was so distressed that he ended up killed him also; and so all they died.
The straw, coal, and the bean	169	295	Italian	In a village there lived a poor old woman who had gathered a serving of beans and wanted to cook them. So I prepare the fire in the fireplace, and it was burning quickly lit it with a handful of straw. While pouring the beans into the pot, accidentally he escaped him one, who fell to the ground beside a straw; and immediately a piece of burning coal jumped out of the hearth next to them. The straw said, "Dear friends, where are you from?" The coal answered, "Fortunately, I escaped from the fire, and if we had not succeeded in forcibly, she was certain death, I would have been incinerated." He said the bean: "I too have escaped, but if the old woman had gotten me into the pot I would have been cooked to mush without mercy, like my comrades. And I probably would have had better fate?" He said the straw. "All my brothers up in the old fire and smoke; sixty at once She grabbed and killed. Fortunately I slipped through her fingers." - "But now that we do?" He asked the coal. "As for we have so fortunately escaped death, I think we as comrades and, why not seize a new misfortune, emigrating together in a foreign country." This proposal pleased the other two and walked. But soon they came to a small stream and, since there was it the bridge walkway, they did not know how to cross it. Then the straw had a good idea and said, "I will lay myself across it, you can spend as on a bridge." He stretched out from shore to shore. The coal, dashing, stepped brashly onto the newly constructed bridge; but when he was in the middle and heard the water rushing beneath him, he was afraid: he stopped and did not dare go on. But the straw caught fire, broke into two pieces and fell into the stream; coal the chute behind w, hiss in contact with the water and spiro. At bean, he remained cautiously ashore, had to laugh of that adventure, and laughed so loud, unable to brake, which eventually burst. It, too, then, was beautiful and doomed if a tailor, around the world, had not fortunately rested next to ruscelo. As it was good-hearted, I pull out a needle and thread and sewed. The bean thank him warmly, but as the tailor had used black thread, since that day all the beans have a black seam.
The sweet jelly	973	565	Italian	There was once a poor little girl who lived alone with his mother; and they had nothing to eat. So the child went into the woods and met an old woman who already aware of her sorrow, and presented her with a saucepan. She had to tell him: -Cuoci the jelly, pan! - and the pot would cook good, sweet porridge; and when she said -Fermati, pan! - the pan ceased to cook. The girl took it home to his mother, their poverty and their hunger was now over, and ate sweet porridge as often as they wanted. A time when the girl had gone out, the mother said: -Cuoci the jelly, pan! -. He did cook and she eats his fill; now he wants the pot to stop cooking, but does not know the magic word. So what continues to cook the jelly, jelly and overflows and grows and fills the kitchen and the whole house, and the other house again and then the road, as if to satisfy all over the world, and is a distress, but no he knows how to handle himself. Finally, when only one single house remained, the girl returns home and says: -Fermati, pan! - and the pan stops and stops making the baby food; and who he wanted to return to the town had to eat his way.
The little goose girl	845	533	Italian	Once upon a time an old queen, a widow for many years, who had a beautiful daughter. When he was grown, the girl was betrothed to a prince who lived far away. When the time of the wedding, when she had to leave for the foreign kingdom, the old mother prepared for her precious furnishings and jewelry, gold, silver, cups and jewelry in short, all that befits a royal dowry, because he dearly loved the daughter. He also gave her a servant who was to accompany her and deliver it in the hands of the groom; and both had a horse for the journey; the princess was called Falada and could speak. When it was time to say goodbye, the old mother went to his room, took a boxcutter and cut her fingers, for they bleed; Then he puts it under a white cloth, and he will fall three drops of blood, gave it to his daughter and said, "Dear child, serbale carefully, because you'll need it." Then they said goodbye sadly; the princess put the cloth within, mounted his horse and set out to go to her husband. After riding for an hour, the princess was very thirsty and said to the servant, "Go down, and the glass that you brought for me take water from the stream: I would like to drink a little '." - "If you are thirsty," said the maid, "get off yourself from the horse, put yourself on the edge of the stream and drink; do not like to be your servant!" The princess was so thirsty that went down, bent over the water of the stream and drank without being able to use his golden glass. Then he said: "Oh, my God!" And the three drops of blood answered, "If your mother knew, her heart would break pain!" But the princess was kind-hearted, she said nothing and went on horseback. They rode for several miles, but the day was warm, the sun was hot, and soon she returned to suffer thirst. When they came near another river, she went back to tell the maid, "Go down, and give me some water in my golden cup," because long ago he had forgotten all his bad words. But the servant replied in an even more arrogant: "Are you thirsty? Come down, you as servant not take it anymore!" The princess was so thirsty that went down, bent over the water current, and she cried: "Oh, my God!" And the drops of blood again replied: "If your mother knew, her heart would break pain!" And, while he was drinking, water china, the cloth with the three drops of blood fell from her bosom and was taken away by the current, without her, in her great distress, noticing. But the maid had seen everything and was glad because now the bride in his power: he had lost the three drops of blood, and now he was weak and helpless. And when the princess wanted back on his horse, whose name was Falada, the servant said: "Falada now it's up to me, you will ride my nag!" The princess was forced to obey, and also had to take off her royal robes to wear his ugly clothes, and finally, under the vault of heaven, had to swear that the king's court would not do word of it to anyone, and if he refused to take the oath, she would be killed instantly. But Falada observed everything with great attenzione.La maid climbed into the saddle to Falada while the real wedding mounted the nag, and rode on until they came to the royal palace. There was great joy; Prince ran to meet them and helped the maid from her horse, thinking she was his bride. So it was led up the stairs, while the real princess had to stay downstairs. But the window was the old king, and saw her standing in the yard, so beautiful, fine and delicate; then went into the room and asked the royal betrothed who was the girl who was with him and that he was under in the yard. "I took it with me along the way because, I held company, give her something to do, that will not remain inactive. " But the old king did not know what job to give her, so he said: "I have a little boy who keeps the geese could help him." The boy was called Conrad, and the true bride had to help him guard the oche.Ma soon the false bride said to the young king, "Dearest husband, I beg you, do me a favor!" - "Gladly," he replied. "Do call the knacker to cut the horse's head on which I have come this far: the street has made me angry." In reality she was afraid that the horse might tell how she had treated the princess. Things had come to such a degree that never was there no escape: the faithful Falada had to die. He also learned the true princess and promised secretly to give him to the knacker a piece of gold if he had made a small service in the city there was a big dark door through which she had to spend the morning and evening with his geese; She begged him to nail down that door Falada's head so that she could see him again sometime. The knacker promised to do so, cut off his head and pinned under the buia.La door early in the morning, when the princess went along with Corradino under the door, she said, "Oh, Falada, hung up there!" And the head answered: "Oh princess who will go down there! If your mother knew, her cuoresi break from great pain!" She quietly went on his way out of town, driving the geese to pasture. And, now on the lawn, he sat up and undid her hair, which was pure silver; and Conrad saw it, and he liked, so bright, and he wanted to pull a few. Then she said, "Oh wind, you have very strong blow, his hat flying afar do so, for a long time it should cercarein I with my gold hair will play, arrange and dress up." Then came a wind so strong that took away his hat in Corradino, and he had to run after the fields. When he returned, she had finished combing her hair, and he did not pot, take even a hair. Then Conrad was angry and did not speak again; well guarded geese until evening, then returned to casa.Il next morning, as they passed under the dark gate, the girl said, "Oh, Falada, hung up there!" And Falada replied: "Oh princess who will go down there! If your mother knew, her cuoresi break from great pain!" And when he was in the middle of fields, he sat down on the grass and began to comb his hair. Corradino ran to grab her, but she said quickly, "Oh wind, you have very strong blow, his hat flying afar do so, for a long time it should cercarein I with my gold hair will play, arrange and dress up." Then the wind blew and took away his hat, so he had to run after. And when he returned, she had combed for some time and he did not pot, take even a hair; well guarded sera.Ma the geese until the evening, after they had got home, Conrad went to the old king and said: "I never want to keep the geese with that girl." - "Why, why?" He asked the old king. "Eh, it makes me angry all day!" Then the old king ordered him to tell what had happened. And Conrad said, "In the morning when we go through the herd under the dark gate, is hanging on the wall of a horse's head, and she talks to him: 'Oh, Falada, hung up there!' And the head replies: 'Oh princess who will go down there! If your mother knew, her cuoresi break from much pain!' "And Conrad went on to relate what happened when they were in the field, and how he had to chase his hat to vento.Ma the old king ordered him to lead the geese off the next day, and when it was morning, he sat behind the dark door and heard as she spoke to the Falada head; then he followed her to the camp, and hid in the bushes on the lawn. So pot, see with their own eyes the two guards lead the flock of geese grazing; and, after a while ', he saw the girl sit down and melt away the hair that shone brightest. And suddenly she said: "Oh wind, you have very strong blow, his hat flying afar do so, for a long time it should cercarein I with my gold hair will play, arrange and dress up." And behold, a gust of wind carried off his hat in Corradino, who had to striving away; and the girl quietly combed and plaited her curls, while the old king watched everything carefully. Then he turned back without being seen and, in the evening, when the guardian of the geese came home, called her aside and asked her why, to behave in this way. "I can not say no, either to you or to anyone else: I have sworn under the vault of heaven, otherwise I would have died." He insisted not give her peace. "If I do not want to say anything," he said at the old King, "confided at least the oven." - "Yes, I will," she replied. So she leaned back in the oven and freed his heart saying what had happened and how she had been deceived by the perfidious servant. But the oven had an opening at the top and the old king heard everything, word for word. Immediately put them gifts and clothes seemed a miracle, it was so beautiful. The old king called his son and told him that he had touched the false bride: these were merely a servant, while the real one was the goose girl. The young prince was happy seeing her beauty and her power. It was prepared a great feast to which friends and acquaintances were invited. A head of the table sat the groom with the princess on one side and the maid on the other; but she was blinded, and did not recognize the princess in all that splendor. When they had eaten and drunk and they were all in a good mood, the old king poses a riddle to the servant: what such a deserved that had deceived his master so and so? He told her everything word for word and asked: "What is the condemnation it deserves?" Then the false bride replied: "At least being stripped naked and thrown into a barrel lined with sharp nails; there then you have to stick two white horses that drag up and down the streets until it die." - "You're the one!" said the old king. "You have pronounced it yourself your sentence and you did what you said." When the sentence was carried out, the young king he married the true bride, and both peaceful and happy reigned.
The rain of stars	1455	779	Italian	There once was a little girl, who had no more and no father and mother, and she was so poor, did not even have a room to live in, or bed to sleep; in short, he had only the clothes I wear and holding a piece of bread which some charitable soul had given her. But it was good and good and since it was abandoned by all, wandered here and there for trusting in the good Dio.Un day he met a poor man, who said, "Ah, give me something to eat, I am so hungry!" She reached him the whole of her piece of bread and said, "Do you do well!" and he continued on his way. Then came a child who moaned and said: "I head is so cold, give me something to cover it." She took off her hood and gave it to him. After a while she met another girl, who had not even wearing a jacket and was freezing; Then she gave it her. And a little farther on one begged for a frock, and she gave her. At length he came into a forest and it was already dark, came another child, and asked for a little shirt; the good girl thought, " 'night nobody sees you can well give your shirt." If removed it and even gave camicia.E as he stood there, without wearing anything, suddenly I fell from the sky the stars, and they were hard smooth shields and though she had just given her little shirt that she had a new, it was in fine linen. He puts the money into this, and was rich for life.
The Princess and the Pea	2011	704	Italian	There was once a prince who wanted to marry a princess, but it had to be a real princess! So he began to travel far and wide across the world, but each time could not bring herself There were princesses a bit 'everywhere, but they were real princesses? He never could know for sure: every time seemed to lack something. In the end he decided to return to his house, but it was full of sadness for not being able to find a princess vera.Una night there was a terrible storm with lightning, thunder, and rain water, there was a knock at the gates of the city and the old king went to aprire.Fuori the walls there was a princess, My God, the rain and the bad weather had made her well! The water beat down on her hair and clothes; it ran into the shoes from the tips and came out at the heels but she claimed to be a real princess. "This will be seen," thought the old queen, but she said nothing, went into the bedroom , took the mattress off the bed and put it on the bottom of a pea; then she took twenty mattresses and laid them on the pea, and on the mattress then twenty eider piume.Quella evening the princess slept there.The morning she was asked how she had slept. "Very bad!" wailed the girl, "I hardly slept a wink all night! Who knows what was in the bed but I was lying on something hard and I got a black and blue bruise. It was horrible!" Now they knew that it was a real princess because she had felt the pea right through the twenty mattresses and the twenty eider feathers. Only a real princess could be as sensitive So the prince took her hand in marriage, finally convinced that he had a real princess and the pea was put in a museum, where, if no one has stolen it, you can see it ancora.E this is a true story, you know?
The turnip	1386	1737	Italian	There were once two brothers who both served as soldiers, but the one was rich and the other poor. The poor, to overcome poverty, put off his uniform and began to be a farmer. He dug and hoed his bit of land, and sowed turnips. The seed grew a turnip that became large and vigorous. He swelled visibly and never ceased to grow, so that, it could have been called the princess of turnips; for he never was no view of a similar, No, never seen again. He was so enormous that occupied alone a whole cart, and it took two oxen to pull it. The farmer did not know what to do with it, no, knew whether the turnip was his fortune and his misfortune. Finally she thought: "If you sell, what wilt thou get if thou eatest, small ones are fine the same; it's best to take it to the king and make him a present." So he placed it on a cart, he harnessed two oxen, took her to court and presented it to the king. -What kind of a strange thing is this? - said the King. -Of bizarre things I've seen many, but such a monster I had not yet never found: from that seed can be born? Or just manages to you, and you are a favorite of fortune? - Ah no! - said the farmer -not are a favorite of fortune; I am a poor soldier, unable to survive, attacked the nail uniform and began to cultivate the land. I also have a brother who is rich, and you, Your Majesty, I know well; I will, because I do not own anything, they are forgotten by tutti.- The king took pity and said: -I will take away from misery and I will make the gifts that thou shalt be equal to thy rich brother also. So he gave him a pile of gold, fields, meadows and herds, and so did the rich, that wealth of his brother he was nothing in comparison of her. When he learned that his brother had gained with a single turnip, the he envied him, and mulling how he could even get him such luck. But he would do things with greater prudence, he took gold and horses and brought them to the king, convinced of receiving in return a much larger gift. If his brother had got so much to a turnip, what would not touch him for those beautiful things! The king accepted the gift and said that, in return, she could not give him more rare and valuable than the great turnip. So the rich man was obliged on the bandwagon his brother's turnip and take it home. And here he did not know on whom to vent his anger and his anger, until bad thoughts came to him and he decided to kill his brother. He hired murderers, who were to lie in ambush, and then went to his brother and said -Caro brother, I know of a hidden treasure, we will take together and dividiamocelo-. At the other he liked the idea, and accompanied him without suspicion. But as they went out the murderers fell on him, bound him and wanted to hang him from a tree. At that while a song sounded from afar and one scalpitio, so that they, frightened, ficcarono hastily their prisoner in the bag, the hoisted on a tree branch and fled. Instead, he got busy in there until, managed to pierce the bag and put his head out. But the traveler was none other than a young schoolboy, who was riding in the woods joyously singing his song. When the man in the tree saw that someone was passing below, shouted: -Health, the early! -. The student looked around, not knowing where the voice came, and finally said: -Who is calling me? -. And he said, from the top of the tree: -Alza eyes! They're up here in plenty of wisdom; in a short time I learned these things, compared with this all schools are a jest; in a little 'I have learned everything, and then come down and I will be wiser than other men. I understand the stars and the heavenly signs, the expiration of the winds, the sand of the sea, the treatment of diseases, the properties of herbs, birds and stones. If you were here, you'd wonder is this bag! -. On hearing this, the schoolboy was amazed and said -Benedetta is the time when I met you! I could not enter the sack for a while '? -. But what above replied as if unwillingly -Paying and praying I'll let you come a little, but you have to wait an hour: there's still a piece that I have to learn-. After waited a while ', the schoolboy was bored and asked him to let him in the sack: his thirst for knowledge was too great. So he who was above pretended to surrender and said: -Why, I can get out of the house of knowledge you must loosen the rope to come down a lot, then you shall enter you-. So the student let down, untied the sack, set him free, and then cried -Now me up in a hurry! - and he wanted to get into the sack standing. -ALt! - said the other-so wrong! - She took him by the head, put it in the bag with legs up, and bound him with rope, hoisted onto the disciple of wisdom, making him dangling in the air ; then he said: -How goes, comrade? Here you feel already come wisdom: it is a great experience. It's' quiet there, until you become more furbo-. Then he mounted his horse and went schoolboy.
The queen bee	590	554	Italian	Two principles they went in search of adventure and ended up leading a vicious and dissolute life, so, never returned home. The youngest, who was called the Simpleton, went in search of the brothers, but when he found them, they made fun of him because he, with his stupidity, he wanted to make his way in the world, while they we had not succeeded despite being much more circumspect. They set out all three together and came to an ant. The two major wanted to throw it to the air, to see the ants go around afraid, and take the eggs. But the Simpleton said -Lasciatele in peace those beasts, I can not stand that disturbiate-. They went on and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming. The two brothers wanted to catch a couple to make them roast, but the Simpleton again said, -Lasciatele those beasts in peace, I will not tolerate that uccidiate-. Finally they came to a beehive, where there was so much honey dropped on the trunk. The two wanted to set fire to the tree to suffocate the bees and make honey. But the Simpleton went back to keep them away saying: -Let alone those beasts, I will not tolerate that bruciate-. The three brothers came to a castle in the stables there were only the stone horses and not be seen or heard. Through all the rooms until they came to a door with three locks; but in the middle of the door a small opening through which you could see in the room. They saw a little gray man sitting at a table. They called him, once, twice, but he did not hear. Finally they called for the third time, then got up and left the room. Without speaking a word he led them to a richly laden table, and when they had eaten and drunk, he gave each of them a bedroom. The next morning the man came to the eldest, beckoned with his head and took him to a plaque, on which were written the three companies that had to take to rid the castle. The first was this: in the forest, beneath the moss, you had to look for a thousand pearls princess; but if the sunset was missing one, the one who had the look turned to stone. The major went and tried all day but, at sunset, he had only found one hundred; He was said on the tombstone and he was turned to stone. The next day was the second brother to groped the adventure; but he was luckier than the first, in fact, found two hundred pearls, and was turned into stone. Finally it was the turn of the Simpleton; He began to search among the moss, but it was so hard to find the pearls, and it took so long! He sat down on a stone and began to cry. As she stood there came the king of the ants, which he had once saved his life. With five thousand ants, and it was not long before the little insects had found all the pearls and put them in a pile. The second task was to dredge up from the lake the key that opened the bedroom of the princess When Simpleton came to the lake, the ducks which he had saved came swimming, and dived and brought up the key from the bottom. But the third task was the most difficult of the three sleeping princesses had to choose the youngest and loveliest. They were exactly alike, and not only differed in that the major had eaten a piece of sugar, the second a bit 'of syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey. He had to admit the breath she who had eaten the honey. But on that came the queen bee that the Simpleton had protected from the fire; He tasted the lips of all three, and finally stopped on one that had eaten honey, so the prince recognized the right one. Then the spell was broken, everything was released from sleep, and took the stone regained his human form. The Simpleton married the youngest and loveliest princess, and became king after the death of her father. The brothers instead married the other two girls.
The wise Elsa	320	1450	Italian	A man had a daughter who was called Clever Else. When he grew up the father said: "We have to give her husband." - "Yes," he said the mother, "as long as someone the desire." Finally he came from far away a certain Gianni and his wife asked, but on condition that the wise Elsa was very sensible. "Oh," she said the father, "has for brains!" And the mother said, "Oh, see the wind coming up the street and hear the flies cough." - "Yes," she said Hans, "if it is not careful too, I will not have her." At the table, after eating, the mother said, "Else, go into the cellar to get some beer." She took down the jug from the wall, he went into the cellar and, on the street, rattled the lid to not get bored. When he was in the cellar, she took the stool and placed it in front of the barrel, not having to bend and risk of injury to the back, buscandosi unexpected trouble. Then he put the jug and opened the tap, and while the beer flowed, not wanting to leave idle eyes, looked up at the wall; He looked from side to side and finally caught sight, just above his head, a pickaxe that the workmen had left there by mistake. Then Clever Else began to cry and said: "If I marry Hans, and we have a child and it grows big, we send it here to draw beer, the pickaxe might fall on your head and kill it!" So he stood there crying like crazy on the imminent disaster. Upstairs, waiting for the beer, but the wise Elsa never came. Then the mother said to the servant: "It should be 'down to the cellar and see what Else." The maid went and found her sitting in front of the cask crying loud. "Elsa, why are you crying?" He asked the servant. "Ah," he replied, "I should not cry? If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, we send it here to draw beer, perhaps that pickaxe falling on his head and kill him." The servant said, "is clever our Elsa!" He sat down beside her and began to cry even the anticipated misfortune. After a while ', because the maid did not return, and above were thirsty, the man said to his servant, "Go' down into the cellar and see what Else and the maid." The boy did so, and here's the wise Else and the maid sitting crying together. And he asked: "Why do you weep?" - "Ah," said Elsa, "should not I cry? If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, we send it here to draw beer, the pickaxe might fall on your head and kill it." And the servant said, "is clever our Elsa!" He sat down beside her, he began howling. Above all waiting for him, but seeing that never came, the man said to his wife: "It should be 'down to the cellar and see what Else." The woman got out, he found all three of them to complain and asked why. Then Elsa also told her that, certainly, his future child would be killed by the pick, just was big and had to draw beer, and the pick fell. Then the mother said, "But it is clever our Elsa!" He sat and wept with them. Upstairs, the man waited a little while, but as his wife did not come back and he'd always be thirsty, he said: "I will go down the same in the cellar and see what Else." But when he arrived in the cellar and saw them all in tears, side by side, and he heard the cause, namely, that it was the fault of the child who would one day Elsa perhaps brought into the world and that he could be killed by the pickaxe if he sat down under to draw beer right in the moment when the ax fell, then said, "But it is clever our Elsa!" He sat down and began to cry with others. Above, the boyfriend was left alone for a while '; Then, as nobody came back, he thought: "I'll be waiting below; you have to get yourself to see what they do." When he came down, he found them all five sat crying and complaining to each better than the other, as to their compassion. "What misfortune has happened?" he asked. "Ah, dear John," said Elsa, "if we get married and have a baby, and becomes large and we send it here to draw beer, then the pickaxe which has remained there can cadergli on the head and spaccargliela: and we should not cry? " - 'Well', "said John," and your wisdom is enough for me, because you are so sensible, I'll take a wife. " He took her hand, carried him upstairs and sposò.Dopo some time Gianni said: "My wife, I am going out to work to earn a little ', is' you into the field and cut the corn that we miss no bread." - "Yes, my dear John," said Elsa, "I will." When Hans was gone she cooked herself some nice stew, and took her to the camp. When I first arrived, he said to himself ': "What do I do before I harvest or eat? Well', I will eat first." Thus she began to eat his soup, and when she sated, she said to herself: "What do I do before I reap or sleep? Well 'before I sleep." He lay down in the corn and fell asleep. Gianni was at home for quite a while, and Else did not return; then he said: "What has My clever! so wanted to work that does not even come home to eat!" But as Elsa never returned and darkening, Hans set out to see how much corn she had cut; but he had not claimed anything, asleep, sprawling crop. Then Hans hastened home to take a network to the birds with little bells and threw it over her that she would wake up. Then he went home, shut the door and sat down in his chair. Finally, late at night, Clever Else woke; and when he got up there was around her, the sound of bells that jingled with every step. He was alarmed, she doubts whether she really Clever Else and said, "Am I or am I not?" But he did not know what answer to make, she stood for a while '; Finally he thought, "I'll go home to ask if I have or not, it is sure to know." He ran to the door but it was locked; then he knocked on the window shouting: "Hans, is Else?" - "Yes," he replied John, "is here." She was shocked and said: "Ah, Lord, then it is not me!" And she went to another door, but hearing the jingling of bells, people would not open. So he went around a bit 'everywhere; then he fled from the village.
Clever Grethel	729	1741	Italian	There was once a cook named Grethel, who wore shoes with red heels; and when you put them, he turned this way and that, happily, and thought: "You're such a beautiful girl !." And, when he came home, to the delight drank a sip of wine, and given that wine makes you hungry, tasted the best of whatever she was cooking until she was satisfied and said: -A cook must know what they taste his dishes ! -. Now it came to pass when the boss said, -Ghita, tonight is a guest, prepare two beautiful polli-. -It will be done, patron-Ghita said. She killed the chickens, scalded them, plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them on fire to roast. The fowls began to turn brown, and were nearly ready, but the host did not come. Then Grethel called out to his master -If the guest does not come, I have to remove the chickens from the fire; but it is a pity not eaten directly, when they are well sugosi-. The master said: -Andrò to call the guest CORSA-. When the master had turned his back, Grethel laid the spit with the chickens and thought, "Standing so long by the fire is hot and thirsty; who knows when! Meanwhile I jump into the cellar to take a drink." He ran down, set a jug, said -Good pro makes you, Ghita! - and took a long draft. -A drink pulls the other-he added-and no good interrompersi.- Then he went back into the kitchen, put the chickens on the fire, and anointed them with butter and drove the spit merrily. But the roast meat smelt so good, Grethel thought, "Something might be wrong, I have to try it !." He licked his finger and said: -How good fowls are! It 'a shame not eaten directly! -. He ran to the window to see if the master and the guest arrived, but saw no one; went back to the fowls and thought: "This wing is burning, you'd better eat it." So he cuts it and ate it in taste; when he had finished he thought: "I must also make the other disappear, otherwise the landlord becomes aware that something is missing !." After eating the two wings, he looked for her master, but did not see him. "Who knows," she remembered, "perhaps are not at all and I went to eat somewhere else." Then he said: -Animo, Ghita, is' cheerful, one you've already started, beviti another drink and finish it; when it is eaten you peace, why waste all that good God? -. He ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate happily chicken. When he had swallowed, still her master did not come, Grethel also looked at the other chicken and said, -must keep each other company, where one has to be the other; what suits the one, it's good to another; I think if I drink a sip will not make me bad-. So she took another hearty drink, and sent the second chicken rejoin the first. Right at that moment, while he was eating, he came quickly master, saying -Svelta, Ghita, the guest is going to directions.- -Yes, master, get ready now! - Ghita replied. Meanwhile the master went to see if the table was properly laid, and took the great knife to carve the chickens, and began to sharpen it. In that the guest came, and knocked politely on the door. Grethel ran to see who it was; seeing the host, he put a finger to his lips and said, -Shut up! Shut up! Flee quickly, and woe to you if my master catches you If he invited you to dinner, it's just because he's going to cut off your two ears. Listen to how he is sharpening the knife! -. The guest heard the noise and rushed down the stairs as fast as he could. Ghita, without losing time, he ran screaming to her master and said -Bell'ospite you invited! -. -Why, Ghita, you mean? - -not -si- said she did it take from the serving plate the two chickens that I was going to bring to the table and ran via.- -What ways! - he exclaimed the master , lamented the fine chickens. -If least I had left one, I would have been something to eat! - He called to him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand shouting: -One only! one! - meaning that the guest would leave the least a chicken and did not take them away both the guest, however, he thought of having to leave one of his ears, and ran away as if he had the fire at his heels, to take them to home both.
The choice of the bride	1475	1452	Italian	There was once a young shepherd who would happily married, and knew three sisters, one more beautiful than the other, so that the choice was difficult, and he could not decide who to preference. Then he asked advice of his mother, who said -Invitale all three, offered them cheese and looks like tagliano-. And so he did; but the first he swallowed the cheese with the rind; the second cut off the crust in great haste, so Fury who left attacked the cheese, and threw it all together; The third however, raised the crust right, n, n too little. The pastor told everything to his mother, who said -Sposa the terza-. So he did, and he lived with her, happy and content.
The white snake	159	673	Italian	There was once a powerful and wise king who every day, at lunch, when the table was cleared and there was no one, he was still carrying a plate, covered by one of his most loyal servants. Only he ate it, then shut, and no one knew what was inside. It was a day when the servant, when the king gave him the pot to take away, could not resist the temptation, took him to his room, opened it and found inside a white snake. Seeing he was such a desire to eat than pot, restrain it cut off a piece and ate it. But just he touched it with his tongue, he heard clearly what you were saying sparrows and other birds at the window and realized how he understood the language of animali.Ora happened that on that day the Queen got lost one of its most beautiful rings, and suspicion fell on that servant. The king rebuked him harshly and threatened to condemn him as a criminal, if by that day he had not shown the wrongdoer. And the servant was frightened and did not know what to do. Restless, he went down in the yard: there, near a stream, the ducks were resting quiet and did their confidences. He was moved with one that said: "What I have weight on the stomach! In my haste I swallowed a ring that was under the queen's window." Immediately the servant grabbed her by the neck, carried her to the cook and said: "Kill before this, it is well-fed." The cook cut off her neck, and when he was found in the stomach sbuzzata the ring queen. The servant brought him to the king that he was very glad, and wanting to repair his mistake said, "Ask what you want, and 'which charges you want to court." But the servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse and money for the trip, because, wanted to travel around the world. So he went on horseback and came to a pond where three fish were caught in the reeds and gasping out of water, complaining of having to die so miserably. He understood their words and had compassion, so dismounted and put them in water. Then the fish shouted: "We will remember and we will reward you !." He went on and soon heard, at his feet, a king of the ants said: "If the man was running off with his beast! I trample so many ants!" He looked down and saw that his horse had entered into an anthill, then swerved his way and the king of the ants shouted: "We will remember and we will reward you!" He went on and came to a forest; Beyond two ravens, father and mother, threw their young out of the nest and said, "You are old enough to work out on your own, we can no longer sfamarvi." The children were lying on the ground, flapping their little wings and shouted: "How can we keep us alone! We do not know fly procacciarci the food! We are forced to starve!" He fell to the ground, killed his horse with his sword and gave it as food to small crows. They all leapt over, were satisfied and said: "We will remember and we will reward you!" Now he went on foot, walking walking, he came to a great city. A man on horseback was saying that the one who wanted to be the husband of the young princess had to perform a task that she would have awarded; but if it undertook not led him to the end, he lost his life. No one wanted to introduce themselves, because many had already put us life. The young man thought: "What have I got to lose? Let us try!" So he went before the king and his daughter, and announced himself as pretendente.Allora led him by the sea; They threw a ring into the water and ordered him to get it back again. The also said that if he dived and returned to the surface without the ring, they would have thrown back down to kill him. Then he was left alone, and while lying on the shore, and thought what it could do to take the ring, he saw approaching the three fish that he had drawn from the barrels and put back in the water. The middle had a shell in his mouth, which he laid on the shore at the foot of the young; and when he opened it he found us inside the ring. Full of joy carried him to the king and asked his daughter in marriage. But this, when he heard that he was not a prince, did not want it. He went out in the garden, overthrew ten sacks of millet grass and said: "It will have to pick it up tomorrow morning, before the sun rises, and do not miss even a speck!" The young man would not be able to complete the task if the faithful animal had not helped him. At night was the king of the ants and, with its thousands and thousands of ants gathered up all the miles, I piled into bags and, before the rise of the morning sun, had finished the job without so much as a grain was lost. When the princess came into the garden and saw all this, he marveled and said, "Although he has performed this task well, and is young and beautiful, do not marry him unless he first has brought me an apple of the tree of life." But the crows that had been thrown from the nest and that he had nurtured, had grown up and had heard what he wanted the princess. They flew off and soon one of them came back carrying an apple in its beak and dropped it in the hands of the young. When they took her to the princess she accepted it with joy and became his bride. On the death of the old king, the prince inherited the crown.
The spike	1837	779	Italian	In the times in which God still walked on this earth soil it was more fertile today: then the ears did not give fifty or sixty grains, but four or five hundred, because all the stem was a spike and the grains grew from the top down to the ground. But so are the men in abundance forget that this blessing comes to them from God and become indifferent and no conscience. One day a woman walked past a cornfield when his son, who was with her, he fell in a puddle and dirtied her dress. Then the mother took a handful of ears and used them to clean it. Our Lord, who also was passing by, saw that he was angry and said, "From now on, the wheat stem hath no stalk, since men do not merit the gifts of heaven." The people who were around there, to hear these words fell on his knees and begged him to leave a little 'beans on the stem because even if men did not deserve them, at least the chickens, which were innocent, would not die of hunger . The Lord, foreseeing the misery that would have condemned them, relented and granted their prayer: so the ear grew only on the top of the stem, as we see it today.
The white bride and the black	1282	403	Italian	One day a woman went to the fields to cut hay with his daughter and stepdaughter. He went to meet them the good Lord, looking like a beggar, and asked: -Where is the road leading to the village? -. -Cercatevela alone! - said the mother, and the daughter added: -If you're afraid not to find it, take a guide! -. But the daughter said: -Do you bring me, poor man, come with me. Then God was angry with the mother and daughter, and turned his back on them and wished that become as black as night and as ugly as sin. With the poor daughter, however, he was merciful, followed her, and when they approached the village, blessed her and said: -Choose three things and I'll concederò-. Then the girl said, -Desidero become beautiful as the sun-. And instantly she was white and beautiful as the day. -Then I want a purse that is not empty mai.- The good Lord also gave her purse, but she said: -Don't forget the better, my daughter! -. She said: -As the third wish, I desire to go to Heaven after my death-. It was also promised that, and God turned away. When the step-mother came home with her daughter and saw that they were ugly and both turned black as coal, while the daughter was white and beautiful, wickedness increased in his heart, and thought of nothing else than to do her bad. But her stepdaughter had a brother named Reginald; She loved him very much and told him everything that had happened. One day Reginer said -Cara sister, I want to make a portrait, always having before our eyes; because my love for you is so great, that I would always guardarti-. The girl answered -provided, you do not show it to no-. So he had painted his sister and hung it in his room in the castle of the king, it was his coachman. And every day he stopped in front of the picture, and thanked God for the good fortune of his dear sister. The King whom he served, had just lost his wife; and she was so beautiful that you could not find another that it was the same, and the king was very distressed. Meanwhile, the court servants had noticed that the coachman stood daily before this beautiful picture, they were jealous of him to the king. These he asked for the portrait and saw that looked across to his dead wife, it was still more beautiful, so, fell madly in love. He asked the driver who he was, and when he said that it was his sister, the king decided to take no one except her wedding. She gave him a carriage and horses and splendid golden robes, and sent him to take his bride. When Reginald came with the message, the sister was happy; the black girl, however, went on a rampage with jealousy and said to his mother: -A serving all your limbs, if you can not procure such luck! -. Then the old woman said: -He 'the quiet that you procurerò-. And with his wizardry clouded eyes to the coachman, who became half blind, and his ears to the white girl who nearly became deaf. Then they got into the carriage, first the bride in her noble royal apparel, then the step-mother with her daughter; Reginaldo and sat on the box to drive. When they had gone a stretch of road, the driver shouted, and -Dolce, my sister dear well the cape, the rain may not wet thee, That the wind with dust, when King t'accoglierà, see you all beautiful! -The bride asked: -What is my dear brother? -. -Ah- said the old-said that you should take off the robe of gold and give it to your sorella.- Then she took it off and handed it to the black girl, who gave it in exchange for an ugly gray cloak. They went on and, after a while ', the brother again cried-and Dolce, my sister dear well the cape, the rain may not wet thee, That the wind with dust, when King t'accoglierà, see you all beautiful! -The bride asked: -What is my dear brother? - -Ah- said the old-says that you should get out the gold cap and give it to your sorella.- and she took off the hood and gave it to black girl and stood uncovered head. They went on and, after a while ', the brother again cried, and -Dolce, my sister dear well the cape, the rain may not wet thee, That the wind with dust, when King t'accoglierà, all beautiful see you! - the bride asked: -What is my dear brother? -. -Ah- said the old -ti said to look out of your carriages At that moment they were passing over a deep river, and as the bride got up to look out, the other two pushed her, so that she fell into the water. He went to the bottom and, at the same time, came up on a white duck Snow, who swam down the river. The brother had not noticed anything, and continued driving until they reached the court. Then the king took the black maiden, as if she were his sister, and thought that it was really, because his eyes were dim, but he saw the glint of gold robes. When you saw the boundless ugliness of her who believed his bride, the king flew into a rage and ordered the coachman to be thrown into a pit full of vipers and snakes. But the old witch knew so well and deceive the king with his limbs, he's kept with the mother and daughter, he would eventually find tolerable and she really married. One evening when the black bride was sitting on the knees of the king a white duck came into the kitchen, swimming up the drain, and said to the kitchen boy -Soon, light the fire. Next to it I want it dry and warm up very well! -The kitchen boy obeyed and lighted a fire in the fireplace; then came the duck and sat down by it, and shook herself and smoothed her feathers with its beak. As she stood there to rest, -Reginaldo asked, what is he doing? -The kitchen boy answered: -E 'in the pit of torment and with snakes! -L'anitra asked again: -What does the black witch? -The kitchen boy He said: -In the arms of His Majesty, the warmth he is! 'said the duck: Oh God, have mercy on me! -and went out to swim by the sink. The following evening he returned and made the same questions, and so did the third evening. The kitchen boy could not bear it, and went to the king and told him everything. The next evening the king went into the kitchen, and when the duck introduced the head in the sink, took his sword and cut off his neck. And immediately the duck became the most beautiful girl in the world, and it was very similar to the portrait that his brother had painted. The king was full of joy, and as she stood there quite wet, he caused splendid When she had worn the clothes, told him as he was falling into the river; and, first of all, she begged him to free his brother from the snake pit. Having heard his prayer, the king went into the room where the old witch and asked: -What deserves one who does things so and so? - and told her what had happened. She was dazzled, you do not notice anything and said -Merita to be stripped naked and put in a barrel lined with nails; and the barrel sticking a horse that drag dappertutto-. So this was done to her and to her black daughter. But the King married the beautiful maiden, and rewarded her faithful brother with riches and honors.
The bride of the hare	627	311	Italian	There was once a woman who had a daughter and a beautiful cabbage. On came a rabbit and ate up all the cabbages. Then the woman said to her daughter: -It 'in the garden, and drive away the leprotto-. The girl said to the hare: -Via, street, rabbit, do not eat all the cabbage! -. The hare said, -Come, girl, sit on my tail and go in my casetta-. The girl would not. The next day the rabbit came to eat the cabbage, and the woman said to her daughter: -It 'garden and casts out leprotto-. The girl said to the hare: -Via, street, rabbit, do not eat all the cabbage! -. The hare said, -Come, girl, sit on my tail and go in my casetta-. The girl would not. On the third day the hare came to eat the cabbage. Then the woman said to her daughter: -It 'garden and casts out leprotto-. He said the maiden -Via, street, rabbit, do not eat all the cabbage! -. The hare said, -Come, girl, sit on my tail and go in my casetta-. The girl sat on the tail of the hare and they took her far away, in his house and said, now prepares cabbage and millet, I will make invitations for the wedding albums. And all the guests came together. (And who were they? You will tell me as they told they were all hares, the crow served as parish priest to marry them, and the fox for the clerk, and the altar was under the rainbow.) But the girl was sad because it was so lonely. The rabbit goes to tell her: -Open, open up! invitees are allegri-. The bride says nothing and cries. The rabbit went away, then he comes back and says: -Open, open up! guests were fame-. The bride says nothing and cries. The rabbit went away, then he comes back and says: -Open, open up! aspettano- guests. The bride says nothing, and the rabbit went away; but she made a figure of straw, and puts his clothes, gives a ladle, the door opposite the pot of miles and goes from the mother. The little hare comes back and says: -Open, open up! aspettano- guests. He gives a slap to the doll and drops the headset. Then the rabbit thought that the bride is gone and it's all sad.
The beam of the rooster	1415	1290	Italian	There once was a magician who performed his wizardry in the midst of a large crowd. And he brought a cock brought in, which lifted a heavy beam and carried it as if it were a feather. But there was a girl who had found a four leaf clover, and had thus become so wise that before her there was no magic that would take; in fact he saw that the beam was nothing but a piece of straw. Then he shouted: -Gente, do not you see? E 'is a straw, it is not a beam that carries the cock! -. Immediately the enchantment vanished, and the people saw that it was, and the magician was kicked badly. But, full of anger, he said to himself, -I vendicherò-. After some time the girl was to be married, and all well-dressed, he went to the fields with a grand procession to the village where the church was. Suddenly they found themselves in front of a very swollen stream, and there was no bridge and no plank to cross. The bride nimbly took her clothes wanted to wade through. But as it was in the water, a man next to her, and it was the enchanter, he cried mockingly: Hey, where did your eyes to believe it's water? -. Then her eyes opened and she saw who was standing with her clothes lifted up in a blue field flower flax. They saw all the others, and drove away with ridicule and laughter.
The old woman in the woods	1162	442	Italian	There was once a poor servant girl who through a great forest with his masters; and when there is found in the middle, they emerged from the thicket of the robbers and killed everyone they found. All they perished together except the girl, who had jumped out of the carriage and was hiding behind a tree. When the robbers had gone away with their booty, she came out and beheld the great disaster. Then he began to weep bitterly and said, "poor girl like me do now? I do not know how to get out of the forest, there are no houses, and I must certainly starve !." He went here and there looking for a way, but could not find her. When it was evening, he sat down under a tree, gave herself to God and decided to stay there and not go away, no matter what happened. After a while ', it was flying a small white dove carrying in its beak a tiny golden key. He puts the hand and said: "Dost thou see that great tree? Is a little lock, it opens with the key: there is enough food and not patirai more hunger." She went to the tree, he opened it and found a small bowl of milk and white bread to break into; so he could eat their fill. When she was satisfied, she said: "This is the time when the hens at home go to sleep. I'm so tired I could lie down in my bed, too !." Then the dove in its beak another gold stick and said, "Open that tree there, and you will find a bed." She opened it and found a beautiful white bed, prayed to God to protect her during the night, he lay down and fell asleep. In the morning the dove came for the third time, brought a little key, and said, "Open that tree over there find clothes." When she opened it, he found the ornamented with gold and precious stones, so beautiful that even the daughter of reli had. So he lived for some time, and every day the dove came and provided her with everything you need; and it was a quiet life and felice.Un however, the dove came and said, "Would you do me a favor ?." - "With all my heart," said the girl. Then she said the little dove, "I will lead you to a little house, enter it, and in the middle, by the stove, there will be an old woman sitting you will say, 'Good morning'. But you take heed to give her answer, whatever I do, and continue to his right is a door, open it and you will find yourself in a room where there will be piled up on the table rings of all kinds; there will be gorgeous with sparkling gems, but you leave them alone, look for a smooth that there must be in the middle and bring it to me as quickly as you can. "The girl went to the house and entered it; there was an old woman who did so much of eyes to her, and said: "Good morning, my child." But she did not give her answer, and opened the door. "Hey, where are you going?" He shouted one and grabbed her skirt, trying to restrain her. "This is my home, and no one can go in there if I want to!" But the girl was silent, got away and went straight into the room. There, on the table, there was a large amount of rings that gleamed and glittered before his eyes; She turned them over for the plain one, but could not find it. As he searched he saw the old woman who was trying to go back another way, with a cage in his hand. Then the girl came up to her, out of her hands and took the cage, and she raised it up and looked inside, he saw a bird that had the plain ring in its beak. He picked it up and, happily, ran away thinking that the pigeon would come and get; and yet he never came. The girl leaned against a tree to wait for him; and here it seemed as if the tree was soft and supple, and bowed its branches. And, of a sudden, the branches of the narrowed, and were two arms; and when she looked around, the tree was a handsome man, who embraced and kissed her tenderly and said, "You have freed me from the spell: the old is a witch who had turned me into a tree, and every day i was for some time a white dove; and as long as she possessed the ring i could not regain my human form. " Even his servants and his horses were freed from the spell, they were no longer the trees and stood beside him. Then they all left together in his kingdom, for he was the son of a king; they married and lived happily ever after.
The Fox and the Crow	8952	57	Italian	Messer raven had found on the windowsill a nice piece of cheese: it was her passion and flew on the branch of a tree to eat it in peace. And here go beyond a cunning fox, which at first glance saw that beautiful yellow cheese. Immediately he thought as steal it. "I can not climb the tree" is the fox said, "because he would fly away immediately, and I have no wings ... Here you have to be clever!" .- What beautiful black feathers have! - she exclaimed loud enough to be heard by the raven; - if your voice is as beautiful as your pens, you certainly are the king of the birds! Let me hear it, please! That vain Raven, feeling praise, could not resist the temptation to hear his bad cra cark !, but as soon as he opened his beak, the piece of cheese fell and the fox was very deft grasp it and run away, laughing at him.
The fox and the cat	710	105	Italian	One day the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought that it was wise, experienced, and great was its prestige in society, she spoke to her gently, saying: Good day, dear lady fox! How are you? How are you? How are you getting through this dear season? -. The fox, full of self-importance, looked at the cat from head to foot, and for a while it was uncertain whether to answer or not. Finally he said, Oh you, miserable beast spotted, starved, rat catcher, that comes to your mind? You dare ask me how it is that a hundred arts teacher! -. The cat was about to answer modestly, came running when a dachshund dog. When the fox saw him, immediately he went to take refuge in its den, while the cat jumped briskly on a shaft, going to sit on top, where the branches and the foliage hid it completely. Soon after came the hunter and the dachshund sniffed the fox and took it. The cat, seeing the scene, shouted: Hey, lady fox! You are trapped with your hundred arts. If you had been able to climb like me, you would not have the life-.
The Fox and the godmother	700	4	Italian	A she-wolf brought forth a young one, and invited the fox to be godfather. -E 'our relative said closely-is smart and has great judgment: will instruct my little son, and help him forward in mondo.- The fox was very honored for the invitation and said: -Thank you for the tribute that I do; I conduct myself so contentarvi-. During the banquet ate greedily and made merry, then said -Cara Mistress Gossip, it is our duty to provide for the small; because you have to be well fed and invigorated. I know a sheep pen which we might fetch a nice bocconcino-. The idea appealed to the wolf, and went to the farm with the fox. This showed her the fold from afar and said, -From that part can creep in there unnoticed; in the meantime I will look 'about on the other, to try to catch a pollastrello-. Actually he did not go there went down at the entrance to the forest, stretched his legs and rested. The wolf crept into the stable but there was a dog that did so much noise that the peasants came running out, caught Gossip and removed the hair with a stick. Finally she managed to escape and dragged out; there he found the fox lying on the ground and complaining said: Ah, dear Mistress Gossip, I went wrong! The farmers have surprised me and I have broken all the bones! If you do not want me to lie where to starve, you have to take away-. The she-wolf she was advancing well with difficulty, but such concern about the fox that she took him on his back and slowly, was able to bring back home the gossip, healthy as a horse. There, the fox shouted: Good-bye, dear lady gossip, and good may it do the roast! -. And he ran away laughing like crazy.
The crumbs on the table	1802	2075	Italian	One day a farmer said to his dogs, "Come into the dining room to eat the bread crumbs left on the table. The hostess went to make visits." The Cubs responded: "No, no. We come not. If the mistress finds out, beats us. "and the farmer:" you will not know, and after all, you never give anything good to eat. "" no, no, we should not go: we must leave it alone, " he said the cagnolini.Ma the farmer would not leave them in peace and in the end they decided to get on the board and to devour ravenously briciole.In that moment the mistress came, and he took a stick and began to beat them a thrashing. "Ouch ouch ouch! Did you see ?, "said the cubs." ha ha ha! that's not what you expected? " He replied the contadino.E those no choice but to run off the runway.
the crows	1012	613	Italian	An honest soldier had earned the money and had put aside because it was sloppy and not scialava, like the others, at the inn. Two of his comrades had a bad heart and wanted to take away his money; in appearance, however, they behaved very amicably. One day they said to him: -Listen, what are we doing here in the city, closed as if we were prisoners? And moreover someone like you, who at home could earn well and live contento-. They insisted so long with such talk, until he consented and ran with them. But the other two had no other intention than to steal money out of town. When they had gone a stretch of road, the two comrades said: -We must take the road to the right if we want to get to the confine-. -But No way! - answered the other -of straight back here in the city: we must continue to left.- -What? Perhaps you want to bully? - cried the other two, he is hurled on him, beat him until he fell to the ground and took the money out of pocket. But it was not enough: gouged out his eyes, dragged him to the gallows and I tied the strait. He left there and went back to town with the stolen money. The blind man did not know what he was sad place; He felt around s, and understood to be sitting under a wooden beam. Then he thought that it was a cross and said: -E 'was good of you having me at least tied under a cross: God is with me- and began to pray. When he was about to get dark, he heard a whirring were three crows that came to rest on the gallows. He heard a saying -Sorelle, what news are you taking us? Ah, if people knew what we know! The princess is sick, and the old king has promised in marriage to the one who heals. But this can not because nobody, healthy again become princess only if the toad is in the pond will be reduced to ashes: and she berrà-. The second raven said, Ah, if people knew what we know! This night will be a dew from heaven healthy and portentous, and who is blind and rubs his eyes with it, regains view-. The third said: Ah, if people knew what we know! The toad can be of help to a single person and even the dew is a remedy for a few, but in the city there is great danger: all the wells have dried up and no one knows that if you take away the large square stone that is located on the square market, and will it dig in, I will pour forth the excellent water-. When the crows had spoken these words, he heard them fly away with a whirring. Gradually he freed himself from the ropes, then bent down, picked up some grass and rubbed his eyes with the dew that had fallen over. Immediately he came to see us, and since in heaven there were the moon and the stars, saw who was at the gallows. He tried then a clay pot and picked as much pot, the precious dew; then he went to the pond, removed a little 'water, pulled out the toad and after being reduced to ashes, he went to the king's court. There he drink the ashes to the princess, and when she recovered and asked her to wife, as was promised. But since he was dressed miserably, he pleased the king, so that, they made it known that he who wanted to have his daughter in marriage had to first provide water to the city; so he believed to be rid of him. But he went to the market place and told people to lift the square stone and seek scavandovi water below. So they did and soon found a nice source that gave plenty of water. The king he could no longer refuse him his daughter, and they married and lived happily together. One day, as he went for a walk through the fields, he met the two comrades of a time that had been so unfair to him. They did not recognize him, as he identified them immediately went to them and said, -Vedete, am your comrade of old, which you have gouged out his eyes so vile; but the good Lord, fortunately, I did ricrescere- made them. Then they fell at his feet and asked pardon; and as he had a good heart, he had compassion on them took her with him and gave them clothes and food. Then he told how it had happened and how he arrived at such luck. Having learned everything, the other two took no peace and they too wished to spend a night under the gallows to see if they felt something interesting. When they were under the scaffold, they heard a whirring overhead was three crows. The first said to the other: -Ascoltate, sisters, us must listen to anyone, because the princess is healed, the bullet has disappeared from the pond, a blind man came back to see us and the city they have freshly dug a pit; Come and try, perhaps we will find the one who has heard us! -. The three crows in flight went down and found the two soldiers; before they could defend themselves, they rested on their heads and gouged out their eyes by dint of pecks, then continued to catch them until, killed them. So the two were lying under the gallows. Not seeing them come back for two days, their old comrade wondered where they ended up and began to look for them. But he found nothing but their bones, took away from the gallows and put them in a pit.
The heavenly wedding	1954	767	Italian	Once, in church, a poor peasant heard the priest saying: -Who wants to get into the kingdom of heaven must always go diritto. Then he went on his journey and went straight on, without ever turning over hill and dale. At the end of the road he led him into a large city in the middle of the church, where it was just celebrating mass. When he saw all the magnificence, he believed to have arrived in heaven, sat up and was joyful. After the Mass, when the clerk told him to get out, he replied: 'No, I will not go out, I'm happy to finally be sky-. Then the clerk went to the priest and told him that in the church there was a child who would not go out because he believed he was in the kingdom of Heaven. The pastor said: -If you believe it, Pure-let. Then he went to the boy and asked him if he wanted to work. Yes, he replied the boy, he was used to work, but the sky did not want to leave. So he stayed in the church, and when he saw the people who were going to kneel and pray before the image, carved in wood, of the Madonna and Child Jesus, she thought it was the good Lord and said, -Look a bit ', good God, how you're skinny! Surely make you go hungry: I'll take you, every day, half of my meal-. From then on, every day, took half of his meal to the statue, and the statue began to eat. After a few weeks, people noticed that the statue had become bigger and became strong and robust, and marveled. Even the pastor could not understand it, so he remained in the church, followed the boy and saw he shared his bread with Madonna, and it accepted it. After some time the boy fell ill and not pot, leave the bed for eight days; but as he got up, the first thing he did was bring her food to Our Lady. The priest followed him and heard him say: -Good God, do not take it amiss if for so long I have not brought you anything: I was sick and I could not alzarmi-. Then the stone replied: -I have seen your good will, and that is enough for me. Next Sunday you come to the wedding with me-. The child was delighted and said to the priest, and they begged him to go by the statue and ask if he could go there too. No, he answered the statue -tu solo.- The pastor wanted to prepare and give communion, and the boy was glad. The following Sunday, when he received the consecrated host, fell down dead: it was the eternal wedding.
The shoes worn by the dance	1262	306	Italian	There was once a king who had twelve daughters, each one more beautiful. Their twelve beds were together in one room, and when they went to sleep, the door was closed with clasp. However, every morning their shoes were worn out with dancing, and no one knew where they went and how they could get out. The king proclaimed that whosoever could discover where the princesses danced at night, should choose one for his wife and would become king after his death; but whosoever came forward, and after three days and three nights he had not discovered anything, would lose their lives. Not long after that he showed a prince; It was well received and the evening was led into a room that was opposite to the one where they slept the princesses. There had prepared his bed, and he was to observe where they went and danced; and why, could not do anything secretly or go away, the room door was left open. But the prince fell asleep and in the morning, when he awoke, all twelve had been to dance, because the shoes were there with holes in the soles. The second and third night spent like the first, and so they cut his head. After him there came many others who attempted the enterprise, but all forfeited their lives. Now it happened that a poor soldier, who had been injured and could serve no longer, found himself on the road that led to the city where the king lived. There he met an old woman who asked him where he was going. -I do not know well neanch'io- said the soldier-but I'd like to become kings and discover where the princesses wear out scarpe.- -not so difficult- said the old-not to drink the wine that take you in the evening, and pretend to be sound addormentato.- she gave him a cloak, and said: -When you put on, you will be invisible, and so you can steal after the twelve fanciulle-. Having received this good advice, the soldier took it seriously; took courage, went to the king and himself as a suitor. It was as well received as the others, and royal garments were put. In the evening, when it was bedtime, they led him to his room, and when he was about to go to bed, the eldest came to bring him a glass of wine. But he had tied a sponge under his chin, will let the wine run and I did not drink a drop. Then he lay down and after a while, 'he began to snore as if he were sleeping soundly. The twelve princesses heard that, and laughed, and the eldest said -Avrebbe also could have saved his life! -. Then they got up, opened cabinets, boxes and bins and brought out pretty dresses; They dressed themselves before the mirror, and jumping for joy thinking of the dance. Only the youngest said, -I do not know, you are happy, but I feel very strange: There definitely will happen disgrazia-. -You're a goose that is always afraid of everything! - said the eldest. -You may already forgotten how many were here for nothing? At the soldier I would not even have to give something to sleep: so he would not wake comunque.- When they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier, but he had not moved, so they felt themselves quite secure. The eldest then went to her bed and beat you over immediately sank into the bed and opened a trap door. The soldier saw them down one after the other, and the largest in the head. There was no time to lose: he got up, put his cape, and came down too, behind the minor. Halfway up the stairs, the trod a little on her dress, and she was frightened and cried: -There is something wrong pulling my robe! -. -Don't be so sciocca- said the increased -ti six entangled in a uncino.- They went down to the bottom and when they were there, they found themselves in a beautiful avenue where all the leaves were of silver, and shone and glistened. The soldier thought, "must carry a token." He broke a branch; then he heard a big roar coming from the tree. The youngest cried out again -There's something wrong, did you hear the crack? It was not yet never happened! -. The eldest said: -I am a gun fired for joy, because we have got rid of our principi-. Then they came into an avenue where all the leaves were of gold, and lastly into a third where they were of bright diamonds; in each he broke off a branch, and every time they heard a roar that startled the younger of the sisters; but the greatest he kept saying he had a gun fired for joy. They went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve little boats, and in each one there was a handsome prince: they had been waiting for the twelve, and each took one with s, while the soldier sat down next to the child. The prince said: -I feel stronger than ever, and yet the boat is so much heavier, and I shall have to row with all my forze-. -The only possible reason is the large warm- said the youngest -Anch are flushed! - On the other side there was a castle all lit up, from whence resounded the joyous music of drums and trumpets. They rowed there, entered, and each prince danced with his beloved. But the soldier danced with them unseen; and if one was holding a glass of wine, when they took him to his mouth, he emptied it; the youngest was alarmed at this time, but the eldest was always silent. They danced until three in the morning when all the shoes were worn out, and they had to stop. The princes rowed them back again over the river, and this time the soldier seated himself by the eldest. On the shore they took leave of their princes, and promised to return the following night. When they reached the stairs the soldier ran ahead and sat on his bed, and when the twelve had tired, walking in small steps, he was snoring strong again, so they said: -How to him, we can be tranquille-. They took off their beautiful dresses, laid them away, they put the worn-out shoes under the bed and lay down. The next morning the soldier was resolved not to say anything, but to watch again the strange thing; so he went with them also the second and third night. It all went as before, and each time they danced until their shoes. The third night, however, he took away a glass as evidence. When it came time to answer, he took her with him the three branches and the glass and went to the king, but the twelve stood behind the door to hear what he would say. When King asked: -Where have worn the shoes my twelve daughters? - he answered -Ballando with twelve princes in a castle sotterraneo-. And she told him everything, the tokens. The king summoned his daughters, and asked them if the soldier had told the truth, and they saw that they were discovered, and that denying it was no use, confessed everything. The king asked what he wanted in a wife. He answered: -Since you are no longer young, give me greater-. Then the wedding was celebrated on the same day, and he was promised the kingdom when the king died. But the princes were bewitched for as many days as were the nights when he had danced with princesses.
The three spinners	129	501	Italian	There once was a lazy girl who would not spin; the mother could say anything, but she could not persuade her. One day his mother was angry and out of patience, so that, beat her, and she cried out loudly. In that time was passing by the queen, and she heard the crying stopped the car, he went into the house and asked the mother why she was beating her daughter, so that he could hear her cries fuori.Allora the woman was ashamed to reveal the laziness her daughter and said, "I can not release it from spinning, and always wants only to spin and I'm poor and I can not procure the flax." - "Ah," replied the queen, "there is nothing that more pleasure make me hear the spin and nothing pleased me more than the wheels hum, give me your daughter, bring her to the castle, I have flax enough because, wires because he feels like it. " The mother agreed to the heart and the Queen took the girl. When they came, he led her up into three rooms filled from top to bottom of the finest flax. "Spin me this flax," he said, "and when you're done you shall have my eldest son; even if you're poor, it does not matter: your untiring zeal is sufficient dowry." The horrified girl in his heart because he could not spin that flax even if she had lived three hundred years, sitting there every day from morning to night. When she was alone she began to cry, and so he was three days without lifting a finger. On the third day came the queen and when she saw that he had not yet spinning she was surprised, but the girl excused herself by saying that she could not begin because of the sadness of being away from his mother's house. The queen accepted the apology, but going away he said: "Tomorrow you must begin to work." When the girl was alone again, she did not know which way to turn and, sad, she went to the window. She saw three women: the first had a broad flat foot, the second had his lower lip that hung down over her chin, and the third had a remarkably broad thumb. When they were at the window, stopped, looked up and offered their help to the girl, saying: "If you invite to the wedding, if you do not be ashamed of us, if you call us cousins ​​and we'll sit at your table, you Fileremo all linen in no time. " - "Of all my heart!" said the girl. "Come on in and begin work immediately." These same women in the first room, took a bit 'of space and them to sit and carry on their spinning. The first drew the thread and trod the wheel, the second moistened, the third twisted and pounded with his finger on the table and each time it beat, fell to the ground a quantity of very thin yarn. The queen the girl hid the three spinsters, and when she came, showed the pile of yarn, so that was no end to the praises. When the first room was empty, it was the turn of the second, then the third, and soon was cleared this too. Then the three women took leave and said to the girl: "Do not forget what you have promised us will be your fortune." When the girl showed the queen the empty rooms and the great heap of yarn, this prepared the wedding; the groom was happy to have a wife so clever and diligent and praised. "I have three cousins," said the girl. "They were very good to me and I would not want to forget them in my happiness: let the wedding invitations and sit at our table?" The queen and the bridegroom willingly gave their consenso.Quando the feast began, the three maids entered strangely attired, and the bride said, "Be welcome, dear cousins." - "Ah," said the groom, "What binds you to these women so ugly?" He went to the one with the broad flat foot, and asked: "How come you have such a broad foot?" - "A limestone fury," she answered, "by scale fury." Then the bridegroom went to the second and said, "How come you have that lip sagging so?" - "By dint of licking," she answered, "by dint of lick." Then he asked the third, "How come you have such a broad thumb?" - "By dint of twisting the wire," he said, "by dint of twisting the wire." Then the prince was horrified and said: "From now on, my beautiful bride should never touch a spinning!" And so I liberated that tiresome.
The three leaves of the serpent	149	612	Italian	There was once a poor man who could no longer support his only son. The son then said -Caro father, things go so badly and you can not give me the bread; I want to go and see how I can get by in the world-. The father gave him his blessing and took leave of him with great sadness. The son became a soldier and reached the battlefield. When he faced the enemy, the situation became difficult rained bullets and his comrades fell on all sides. Finally also he fell their captain and the rest wanted to escape, but the young man came out of the ranks and encouraged them, saying: -Do not let our fatherland! -. Then the others followed him, and he went back the onslaught of the enemy and defeated him. When the King heard that he only had the victory, he made a powerful man and respect, and gave him the great treasures. The king had a daughter, beautiful but extravagant. She had made a vow to those who wanted to become his master and groom had to promise not survive her. If she was dead at first, he was to be buried alive with her. In the reverse case, she would do the same. This vote had discouraged all suitors, because everyone was afraid to go down to the grave. The young man was one of the first to see the court of the king's beautiful daughter, and was so charmed with her beauty that the wife asked his father. Then the king answered: -Who marries my daughter must not be afraid to get down alive in the tomb- and told him the strange vow that she had made. But his love was so great that he gave his promise without thinking of the danger and the wedding was celebrated with great pomp. They lived for a while 'happily ever after; but it came about that the young queen fell ill and no physician, heal her, so that he died. And, in front of the dead, the husband remembered with horror that he had promised to leave buried alive with her. The old king had placed sentries at all the gates, not flee and said that he had to keep what he had promised. The day when the corpse was buried in the royal crypt, he was taken down, and the door was shut and bolted. Near the coffin stood a table, on which were four candles, four loaves of bread and four bottles of wine. When this provision, he would die of hunger. Now she stood there, near the coffin, in great grief and sadness, and every day he ate only a piece of bread, drank only a sip of wine, and nevertheless saw death approaching more and more. One day it happened that he saw a snake creep out of a corner of the vault and approach the corpse. And when he thought it came to gnaw, he drew his sword and said: -Until, I am alive, not the toccherai- and cut the snake into three pieces. A little later a second snake crept out of, but when he saw the other lying dead and cut to pieces, he left and returned almost immediately with three green leaves in the mouth. Then he took the three pieces of the snake, riaccostò them, and every injury put a leaf. Soon the pieces come together, the snake moved, and became alive, and ran away together. But the leaves were left on the ground and the man, who had seen everything, he thought: "What wondrous power of the leaves! If you have raised the serpent, could not likewise be a human being." So I picked it up and put her on the mouth of the dead, the other two on the eyes. And the blood immediately moved into the body, came to the pale face, and colored it pink. Then she drew breath, opened his eyes and said, Ah, God, where am I? -. -Are you with me, dear wife- he said, and gave her a bit 'of wine and a bit' of bread because, resumption force, and told her everything that had happened and how he had resurrected. Then she got up happy and together they knocked on the door, so loud that the guards heard and warned the king. And the king same worm to open the door. Li found both fresh and healthy, led them upstairs and they rejoiced together because, all penalties were won. But the young king took the three leaves, gave a faithful servant and said -Serbale carefully and always take them with you who knows, maybe will help us anchored. After the man had been restored to life, it seemed as if her heart was changed. And, after a certain period of time, when they set out to sea to go to the old father to him, she forgot all about the great love and loyalty, and conceived a wicked inclination for the pilot. And once the young king lay sleeping, he was so treacherous to say the pilot: -Come and help me: I will throw into the water and coming back. I will say that he is dead and that you are worthy to become my husband and inherit the crown of my father-. Then a man grabbed her by the head, the other to his feet and threw him into the sea because, drowned The crime would have succeeded if the faithful servant had not seen it all. He broke away in secret a little boat from the ship and went in search of the body until, I fished. Then he took the three leaves of the snake, put them to him on the mouth and eyes, and he soon returned to life. Then he asked the servant -Remeremo day and night to arrive before the others from the old re-. But the king when he saw them coming, he marveled and said: -What happened to you? -. Then the young king told him everything, and the old man said: -I can not believe that my daughter acted so bad-. He brought the men into a secret chamber and keep themselves hidden at all. Shortly after the ship arrived and the woman appeared before her father ruefully. He said my -Figlia because, come alone, where is your husband? -. -Ah- she answered simulating -you sadness suddenly fell ill during the trip and died; This good driver has rescued me and know how was your cose.- The king opened the room and brought out the two. Seeing her husband the woman was as if struck by lightning, fell on his knees and begged for mercy. But the king said: -No mercy! He was ready to die with you, and you killed him in his sleep. You must receive the reward that you meriti-. The they placed with her accomplice in a ship that was leaking and pushed them into the sea.
The three feathers	600	402	Italian	There was once a king who had three sons, two were clever and wise, while the third spoke little, was simple, and was called the Simpleton. When the king became old and thinking of his end, he did not know which of his sons should inherit the kingdom after his death. Then he said to them: "Go, one who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be King after my death." And why no dispute amongst them, brought them before the castle, blew three feathers flying in the air and said: "You have to follow their flight." A feather flew to the east, the other to the west, but the third flew straight up and did not fly far, but soon fell to the ground. So one brother went to the right, the other went to the left; the Simpleton instead was mocked because he had to stop where he was the third fall piuma.Il Simpleton sat up all sad. Suddenly he saw a trapdoor next to the feather. He opened it and descended a staircase venendosi find in front of another door; He knocked and heard screaming from inside: "Oh, green and Donzelletta piccinaDalla dried paw, emaciated dog, just you Hey, listen to me, Who is out there I have to say!" The door opened and he saw a big toad and big, with lots of little toads around. The fat toad asked what he wanted. He said: "A carpet that is the most beautiful and the most subtle of all." Then she called one of her toads and said, "Oh, Donzellettaverde and piccinaDalla dried paw, emaciated dog, just you Hey, listen and listen, Just the box you have to carry me!" The beast went to get the box and the big toad opened it and gave the Simpleton a carpet, beautiful and slim as any on earth. The Simpleton thanked him and returned to casa.Gli other two brothers believed that the child was so silly that it would not have been able to find anything. "Why bother to look so much!" they said; They removed from the first shepherds who met the rough clothes and brought them to the king. In the meantime came the Simpleton also with his beautiful carpet, and when the king saw it he marveled and said, "The kingdom belongs to the young." But the other two gave him no peace, saying it was impossible for the Simpleton to become king; and they asked him to put another condition. Then the father said, "will inherit the kingdom he who brings me the most beautiful ring." He led the three brothers out, and blew into the air feathers, which they were to follow. The two major went back toward the east and west, and Simpleton's feather flew straight and fell down near the door. He went down again to the fat toad, and said that he needed the most beautiful ring. The toad that he brought the box and gave him a beautiful ring, that no goldsmith on earth would have been able to do. The two eldest laughed at Simpleton for going to seek a golden ring, and did not give it much knocked the nails out a ring from an old carriage and took him to the king. But when his golden ring that his father again, he said: "The kingdom belongs to him." But the two major tormenting the King until he made a third condition, and declared that it would get the kingdom who had brought home the most beautiful woman. He again blew into the air three feathers, which flew like other volte.Allora the Simpleton went for the third time by the bullet and said: "I have to take home the most beautiful woman." - "Damn!" He replied the animal, "the most beautiful woman! Will you to have her." She gave him a pumpkin which six mice were harnessed. "What do I," Then Simpleton said quite sad. But the toad said, "Now put one of my little toads." He took one at random and put it in the pumpkin; but as soon as he touched, the toad turned into a beautiful maiden, the turnip into a coach, and the six mice into horses. They got into the carriage, and he kissed her and took her to the king. They reached the brothers, who had undervalued to the point his brother to be conducted with s, the first peasant women they met. Then the king said: "After my death the kingdom belongs to the child." But the two major afresh with their protest saying that they can not admit that the Simpleton to become king, and claimed that he had a preference one whose wife was able to jump through a hoop hanging in the middle of the room. They thought: "The farmers are strong enough, but the delicate maiden will jump herself to death." The king agreed likewise to this. The two farmers jumped, and jumped through the ring, but were so clumsy that they fell, arms and legs broke. And then the pretty maiden whom Simpleton had brought with him '; He jumped through the ring with extreme agility and conquered the kingdom. On the death of the king, so the Simpleton inherited the crown and ruled a long time with great wisdom.
The spirit in the bottle	938	331	Italian	Once there was a poor woodcutter who worked from morning until late at night. When he had finally saved up some 'money, he said to his son: "You are my only son, the money that I earned with the sweat of my brow I want to spend on your education; if you learn an honest trade so you can support old, when my limbs have grown stiff and I have to stay home. " So the young man went to university and studied diligently, earning the praise of the masters, and remained there for some time. He had already attended a few classes, but was still not perfect in everything, he already what little money earned by his father had faded, and he had to return home. "Ah!" He said the father sadly, "I have nothing more to give, and in these hard times I can not earn a penny more than the daily bread." - "Dear father," answered the son, "do not worry so much if this is the will of God, will be for my best; I will adapt. I will stay here and I will come with you to pile into the woods and cut down wood." - "But my son," he said his father, "you do too much effort; you're not used to hard work, not resisteresti; and then I have only an ax and I have no money to buy another one." - "go to the neighbor," answered the son, "I impresterà his ax until I have earned enough to buy one." Then the father went to the neighbor, he borrowed an ax and the next morning, at dawn, they went into the woods together. The son helped his father and was quite cheerful and full. When the sun was directly above them, the father said, "Let us rest and eat Then all will go twice as well." The son picked up his bread and said, "rest, father, I'm not tired, I'll go a little around the woods looking for nests." - "Oh, you fool!" said his father. "Why do you want to run about? Then you get tired and you can no longer raise his arm; stay here and sit beside me." But the son went into the woods, ate his bread, was very cheerful, and looked between the green branches to see if he could find a nest. So he went to and fro until she came to an enormous oak that was certainly many centuries, and that five men could not encircle. He stopped to look at her and thought that a bird must have built its nest. Suddenly it seemed to him that he heard a human voice. He listened, and felt like a grim cry: "Let me out, let me out!" He looked around, but saw no one; and it seemed that the voice came out from under the ground. Then he shouted: "Where are you?" The voice answered, "I am stuck down here among the oak roots. Let me out, let me out!" The student began to scrape about beneath the tree and searching among the roots, until he found a small bottle. The rose and putting it against the light, he saw something shaped like a frog jumping up and down. "Let me out, let me out!" She cried again; and the student, thinking no evil, pulled the cork from the bottle. Immediately a spirit that began to grow, and grew so fast that in a moment in front of the student was a hideous monster, half the size of the tree. "You know," he cried in an terrifying voice, "what your reward is for having let me?" - "No," he replied the student fearlessly. "How would I know?" - "Then I'll tell you!" He shouted the spirit. "I must break your neck!" - "You should have told me sooner," replied the student, "and I would have left you shut up. But my head remain where it is, until more people have." - "What the others!" He shouted the spirit. "You have to have your reward! Do you think I've been locked up a long time to pray? No, it was a punishment. I am the mighty Mercurius whomsoever releases me, I break your neck." - "Plan," replied the student, "not so fast! First I need to know if you're really in that bottle and if you are the right spirit; if you can again, then I believe you will do with me what you want . " - "Oh!" The spirit said arrogantly, "nothing easier!" Shrank and became so thin and short as he had been at the beginning, so you can go through the neck of the bottle. It was scarcely inside when the student put on his cap, threw the bottle to its place among the roots of the plant, and thus the spirit was ingannato.Lo student wanted to return to his father, but the spirit cried out pitifully: "Ah! Let me out, let me out! " - "No," he replied the student, "not a second time. Who tried to kill me, if captured him get back into the wild." - "free," she cried the spirit, "I will give you for the rest of your life." - "No," he replied the student, "you would cheat me like the first time." - "You're wasting your fortune," he said the spirit, "I will not do anything to you, and instead will reward you richly." The student thought, "I groped perhaps holds the promise and do not hurt me." He removed the cap and the spirit came out as the first time, extended himself, becoming like a giant. He handed the student a rag like a patch and said: "If a head touches a wound heals quickly, and if with the other touches of iron or steel, the silver changeth." - "I must first try!" said the student; went to a tree, scratched the bark with his ax, then he rubbed it with one end of the patch: once the wound is closed and healed. "It's really true!" He said to the spirit. "And we can part." The spirit thanked him for having freed him, and the student thanked the spirit for his gift and returned to his father. "Where have you been?" his father asked. "Have you forgotten your work I had said that you would not get anything done!" - "concerned, father will make it." - "Yes, make up!" said the father angrily. "Do not bother" - "Just watch, father, I want to throw down with one hit that tree, and make it crash." He took his bandage, rubbed the ax and struck a mighty blow; but because the iron had turned into silver, the cutting edge bent back. "Daddy, look up 'bad ax you've given me has been folded over!" The father was shocked and said, "Ah, what have you done! Now I have to pay for the ax and do not know how to do: this is the good I have from your work!" - "Do not get angry," said the son, "I will pay for the ax." - "Oh, you fool!" cried the father, "How will you pay? You have nothing except what I give you; you have students 'tricks stuck in your head, but what about chopping wood, I do not understand anything!" After a while' the student said, "Father, I can not work any more, we stop." - "Such as!" said his father. "Do you think I can stand around with my hands in my pockets like you? I have to work again, you go if you want." - "Father, this is the first time I've been in the woods, and I can not find the way alone, come with me." His anger had subsided, so the father at last let himself be talked into going home with him. He said to his son: "Go 'to sell the damaged ax and see a bit' all we revenues; the rest I will have to earn in order to pay." The son took the ax and took it into town to a goldsmith, who tested it, he puts it on a scale and said: "It is worth four shields, but I do not have that much cash." The student said, "Give me what you have; the rest do you credit." The goldsmith gave him three hundred talers and a hundred debt. Then the student went home and said, "Father, I have some money Go and ask the neighbor what he wants for the ax." - "I already know," he replied the old man, "a shield and Sixpence." - "Then give him two talers, twelve money; it twice and I think that's enough. Look, I have plenty of money!" He gave the father a hundred crowns, and said, "You will not ever fail, you live comfortably." - "My God," the old man said, "how did you get all that wealth?" Then the son told him what had happened, and what a catch he did by trusting in his luck. With the rest of the money, he returned to the University and went on to study; and since with his patch he could heal all wounds, became the most famous doctor in the world.
The wonderful musician	69	151	Italian	There was once a wonderful musician, who went alone through a forest and thought to this and that; and when his mind had nowhere to rest, he said to himself: "I get bored a lot here in the forest, I will fetch a good companion." He pulled off the violin and began to ring, so that the sound echoed through the trees. Shortly after, there came a wolf, trotting through the thicket. "Ah, is a wolf! What do not want to own," said the musician. But the wolf approached him and said: "Oh, dear musician! Sounds as well! I want to learn, too." - "is soon learned," the musician replied, "thou hast only to do everything that I bid thee." - "Oh, musician," said the wolf, "I will obey you as a scholar his teacher." The musician bade him follow, and when they had gone part of the way together, they came to an old oak tree, which was hollow inside, and cleft in the middle. "Look," said the musician, "if thou wilt learn to ring the fiddle, put thy fore paws into this crevice." The wolf obeyed, but the musician quickly picked up a stone and at one stroke the dug her paws so fast that he was forced to stay there like a prisoner. "Wait here until I return," said the musician, and went for his strada.Dopo a bit ', he again said to himself: "I get bored a lot here in the forest, I will look for another partner." He took his fiddle and again spread the sound in the woods. Shortly after, here is a fox came creeping through the trees. "Ah, is a fox," said the musician, that does not want her own. But the fox came up to him and said: "Ah, dear musician, how it sounds good! I want to learn, too." Is soon learned, said the musician you just need to do everything that I bid thee. "Oh, musician," he said the fox, "I will obey you as a scholar his teacher." - "Follow me," said the musician, and when they had gone part of the way, they came to a path lined with tall bushes. There the musician stood still, from one side bent down to the ground a young core and he pressed the top of his foot; on the other hand he curled another tree and said, "Now little fox, if thou wilt learn something, give me one of your legs in front of the left." The fox obeyed, and he fastened his paw to the left stem. "Little fox," he said, "Now hand me the right." And he tied it to the right bough. And, after making sure that the nodes of the strings were strong enough, he left the outlet, and the saplings stood up and jerked up the little fox, so that it hung struggling in the air. "Wait here till I come back," said the musician, and went for his strada.Di again said to himself: "I'm bored here in the forest, I will look for another partner." He took his fiddle, and the sound echoed through the forest. Then here came springing towards a rabbit. "Ah, a hare is coming!" He said the musician, "I do not want him." - "Ah, dear musician," said the hare, "sounds as well! I would like to learn, too." - "It's easily done," said the musician, "thou hast only to do everything that I bid thee." - "Oh, musician," said the hare, "I will obey you as a scholar his teacher." They made part of the way together until they came to a clearing in the woods, where there was a flickering. The musician tied a long string round the little hare's neck, and he fastened the other end to the tree. "Briskly, little hare, now run twenty times round the tree!" She cried the musician, and the little hare obeyed, and when he had done his twenty laps, it was attorto string twenty times around the trunk; and the little hare was caught, and let it pull and tug as it only cut into its tender neck with string. "Wait here until I return," he said the musician and proseguí.Intanto the wolf had pushed and pulled, had bitten the stone, and had worked so long that eventually struck from pulling out the legs from the split. Full of anger and rage, hurried after the musician and wanted to tear him to pieces. When the fox saw him, they complained and shouted with all his might, "Brother wolf, come to my help, the musician has betrayed me." The wolf drew down the little trees, with a bit the cord and freed the fox, who went with him to take revenge of the violinist. They found the tied hare, whom likewise, and then all together they went in search of their nemico.Per the road the violinist had begun to sound, and this time had been more fortunate. The sound reached the ears of a poor woodcutter, who instantly, whether he wanted to or not, interrupted his work and with the ax under his arm came up to hear the music. "Finally comes the companion that suits me," said the musician, "a man was looking for, not wild beasts." And he began to sonar so well and with such sweetness, that the poor man was delighted and felt my heart expand with joy. And as he stood so, came the wolf, the fox and the hare, and he saw that they had some evil. Then raised his glittering ax and placed himself before the musician, as if to say: "Who wants him let him beware, this will have to do with me." Then the beasts were terrified and ran back into the forest; but thanks to violinist sounded another piece and then went on his way.
The knapsack, the hat, and the handset	513	569	Italian	There were once three brothers so poor and when their misery grew to the point that they no longer had nothing to put in their mouths, they decided to go around the world to seek their fortune elsewhere. Walk, walk through fields and roads, and finally came to a great forest where there was a silver mountain. The eldest, satisfied, took what could trasportarne and returned home; the other two instead We want something more luck, so they do not touched the silver and continued. After a nice piece of road, they came to a hill which was all gold. The second brother said: -What should I do? I enrich myself with this gold, or go on? -. He stopped to think, but in the end he pocketed all that pot, and they returned home. The younger brother, however, thought: "Gold and silver do not affect me: I will not lose my luck, maybe I expect something better-. He left the gold where it was, and went after three days came to an immense forest that is not He never ended, and as he had nothing to eat nor drink, was on the verge of starvation. Then he climbed up a high tree, to see if there could see the tree line, but saw that peaks d 'trees out of sight. She got down from thinking: "If I could stop eating once !." When he was on the ground, his wish was fulfilled: at the foot of the tree was a fact abundantly table set with food of all sort whose scent reached his nostrils. -Comes own way! - he said, approached the table and ate taste until, it was got away hungry. when he had finished, he took the napkin, folded it carefully and put it in the bag. Then he went on and in the evening, when he was hungry again, he pulled out The placemat, unfolded it and said -Desidero you to cover for you to squisiti- foods. And suddenly it appeared a large number of serving dishes full of all good things. Then he saw that it was a magical place mat and exclaimed: -I six far more expensive gold and silver! -. But he did not return home and went on his way around the world. One evening he came from a charcoal burner he was doing and had put coal on the fire of potatoes for dinner. They chatted a bit '. Then the charcoal invited the young man to eat potatoes with him. No, answered-I not want to take your dinner; to you to be my ospite.- -Who prepare? - said the coal. -I see very well that you have nothing with te.- -Eppure will be an excellent dinner- replied the youth. He took from his bag the mat, spread it, he formulated his desire, and you will see the plates already ready-ready. The charcoal eyes widened in surprise, but then reached out and helped himself. When they had finished eating, the charcoal burner said: -Your mat like, if you want to give you change an old military backpack that has magical powers and I do not use more-. -In What is its virtue? - he asked the young man. The coal replied: -If you strike him with her hand, appears every time a corporal with six men equipped with rifles and hand weapon, and they do what you ordini-. -If so it must be-answered the other -the change is bene.- I Thus, the charcoal was held the cloth, while the young man went away with the backpack. When he did a stretch of road he said: -I have to experience the magical powers of backpack- and knocked. Immediately the seven warriors, and the corporal said: -What does my lord? -. -Go from coal and riprendetegli the placemat magica.- left, and it was not long before they returned with the requested object, removed from the charcoal-burner without asking many questions. He ordered them to withdraw and continued, hoping that luck always favored. At sunset he came to another charcoal burner who was preparing dinner on the stove. -Health you! - said the coal. -If you want to eat potatoes without lard with me, you have only to servirti.- No, answered he -for this time you'll be my ospite.- He stretched out his cloth, which was instantly covered with every gift of God, and they ate and drank together happily. After dinner, the charcoal burner said -Darei the soul to have your mat! There is a hat I do not need anything: if one puts it on and it does turn, the culverins shoot as if they had stationed twelve in a row and destroy everything. If you leave me the mat will give the hat-. The young man agreed, took his hat and left the mat. But he had come a long way to beat on his backpack and said to the corporal: -Go with your six men and bring back the tablecloth magically. The soldiers brought it to him so he earned us the hat. However he did not want to return home and thought: "It is not yet time to come back; I have to go." But the wood had no end, and he still had to walk for a whole day. The evening came to a third charcoal burner who, like others, invited him to potatoes without dripping. But he shared dinner with him the magic tablecloth, ate well and charcoal taste, which ended coll'offrirgli a handset. To play it collapsed all the forts, cities and villages. He let the mat to coal, but made her claim immediately after the soldiery, so that at length he had the knapsack, hat and horn together. -Now are place- said -it is time that makes coming home to see how they pass my fratelli.- Upon arrival, he found that they were living in luxury thanks to the accumulated wealth. But when they saw him, in old clothes and tattered, they would not recognize him and cast him out. Then he was angry and beat her on the backpack until he had not before one hundred and fifty men. He ordered them to give a lesson to the two brothers, because you remembered who he was. He broke a racket, and the whole country came to the aid of the two unfortunates; The soldiers, however, were invincible. He was informed that the king sent a captain with his troops. But the man with the magic tools, seeing them come, knocked on the backpack and gathered more soldiers and knights, so that, the captain and his men were repulsed and had to retreat with his face bruised. The king said: -You must absolutely submit it! - and the next day he sent troops against more numerous. But the young man knocked on the backpack as long, he found himself in front of an entire army deployed, who ordered him to lash out at the enemy. Then he turned a couple of times on its bonnet: then began firing heavy artillery and the king's men were defeated and put to flight. -Now I do peace- he said -if you do not give me the princess in marriage, and the whole kingdom to rule in the name of re.- The king said to his daughter: -E 'hard to digest, but if I want to keep peace and retain the crown, I have to cederti-. So the wedding was celebrated, but the princess did not accept that she was forced to marry a man so disagreeable; brooded day and night on the way to get rid of it and no thought was the most liked. He tried to find out what it was based on his power, and he himself ended up reveal the magic backpack. Then she took him to a thousand blandishments to have it to give and when I finally got it, he abandoned her husband. Then he gathered the army, but beat her princess backpack on increasing double the number of its soldiers. He would be lost if he had not had the hat. He put it on his head and spun him around a few times: immediately began to thunder of the artillery and everything collapsed; so, the princess herself had to go and ask for grace. He was persuaded and granted peace. Before long, the princess began to make inquiries and, conscious of the hat powers, was able to convince her husband to have it give dint of chatter. But as soon as he got, he hunt groom, thinking that they have it checked. But he took the phone and began to play it: and immediately all walls, fortifications, towns and villages, burying the king and princess. And if he did not put down the horn and had blown just a little ', everything would be over in a pile of rubble and would not remain one stone upon another. Then no one opposed him and reigned over all the land.
Mother Hulda	224	480	Italian	A widow had two daughters, a beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. But she much preferred the latter because it was his own daughter, and touched each other all the work as the Cinderella of the house. She had to sit every day next to a fountain, on the high road and spin until her blood spurted from his fingers. One day when the distaff was all bloody, she bent over to wash source; but the distaff from her hand slipped and fell into the water. Weeping ran by her stepmother and told her about the accident, but that scolded her and told her harshly: "If you've dropped the distaff, goes' to ripescarla!" Then the girl went back to the fountain and not know what to do, so, nell'affanno, he jumped in. When he returned to his happiness, he found himself in a beautiful meadow where the sun was shining and there were flowers in the thousands. He walked across the lawn and came to an oven full of bread; but the bread cried out: "Oh, take me out, take me out, or I shall burn am baked enough already!" Then she came up and took out the loaves. Then he went forward and came to a load of apple tree that cried: "Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all ripe!" She shook the tree and fell a shower of apples, and kept shaking it as often as he was not on any plant, then went on his way. Finally he came to a house where he spied an old woman with teeth so long that she was frightened and wanted to run away. But the old woman cried out: "Do not be afraid, dear child, stay with me; if sbrigherai for good all the housework, you'll be happy. You just take care of make my bed well, and shake it carefully so that the feathers fly . Then it will snow on the ground. I am Mother Hulda. " The old woman spoke so kindly, the girl accepted the proposal and entered his service. He arranged to everything to the satisfaction of the lady and always sprimacciava the bed with a lot of energy. So she lived well with the old, never a harsh word, and every day boiled and roasted. He stayed with Mother Hulda for a certain period of time, then his heart became sad and, although there was a thousand times better than at home, but felt desire to return. Finally he said to the old: "I feel nostalgia for my home and, although I am here so well, I can not stay." Mother Hulda said: "You're right, and because you have served me so faithfully, I will bring you to myself." He took her hand and led her to a large door. The door was open, and while the girl was there, there was a great shower of gold, and the gold remained hanging and covered with it. "You deserved it because you were so diligent," said Mother Hulda, and also made the distaff that had fallen into the fountain. Then the door was closed and the girl found herself on the ground not far from her mother's house; and when he entered the yard, the rooster on the well and cried: "doodle-doo! Our golden girl has come home!" Then she went to her mother, and as she had returned covered with gold, was received benevolmente.Quando the mother heard how she had earned that great wealth would bring the same luck to the other ugly and lazy daughter. He too had to sit by the well and spin; and, to her spindle bloody pricked fingers chasing his hand through the brambles. Then she threw the spindle into the well and jumped in herself. She found herself, like her sister, the beautiful meadow, and followed the same path. When it came to the oven, the bread cried out: "Oh, take me out, take me out, or I shall burn am baked enough already!" But the lazy girl answered, "As if I had no desire to black!" and he went on. Then came the apple tree that he cried: "Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all ripe!" But she answered: "That's right: it could cadermene a head!" and he continued on his way. When he reached the house of Mother Hulda, she was not afraid because he already knew of his teeth, and entered immediately from her service. The first day strove to be diligent, and obeyed Mother Hulda told her something, because, thinking of all the gold she expected; but the second day she began to be idle and the third even more: he did not want to get up in the morning, it hurt the Mother Hulda bed and not shaking him well by flying feathers. Mother Hulda he grew tired and resigned. The girl was very happy because he expected the gold rain. Mother Hulda also led her to the door, but when the girl was there, however the gold overthrew him in a great kettle of pitch. "This is a thank you for your services," said Mother Hulda, and shut the door. Then the lazy girl came home all covered with pitch, and was unable to get rid of it for life. And the rooster on the well seeing her, cried: "doodle-doo! Our dirty girl has come home!" And the pitch remained sticking to her and would not leave until he lived.
Messer Babau	388	210	Italian	There was once a cock and a hen who wanted to take a trip together. The cock built a beautiful carriage with four red wheels, and harnessed four mice to it. Then he went with the hen and left. They met a cat who said to them, -Where are you going? - The cock answered -Via! As lightning! At home Messer Babau waiting for me! - Take me with you-said the cat. The cock answered -Volentieri; salts behind, in order not to fall before: Beware you! Hear! My red wheels I want to clean! Or should turn! The whistling rats! And go! As lightning! At home Messer Babau wait! -Then they came a millstone, an egg, a duck, a pin and then a needle. Everyone got into the carriage; but when they came to the house of Messer Babau, Messer Babau was not there. The mice drew the carriage into the barn, the rooster and the hen flew on a stick, the cat sat on the hearth, the duck perched on the handle of the pump, the pin stuck itself into the chair cushion, the needle in the the bed, the mill stood over the door and the egg is wrapped in the towel. At that moment Messer Babau came home, went to the fireplace to light the fire and the cat threw the ashes in the face. So he ran to the kitchen to wash but, when approached at the pump, the duck splashed water on him; would dry in the towel and egg rolled up against him, he broke, and glued up his eyes. He wanted to rest, and sat down, and stung the pin; angry then went to bed, but as he put his head on the pillow, the pricked the needle. Full of anger, he was rushing out of the house, but when he reached the door, the millstone leapt down and struck him dead.
One-eye, Duocchietti, Treocchietti	1232	511	Italian	There was once a woman who had three daughters, the elder was eye, because he had only one eye in the forehead; the second, Duocchietti, because he had two eyes like everyone else; and the third, Treocchietti because he had three eyes, and the third in the middle of his forehead. But since, Duocchietti was just like all the others, his mother and sisters could not suffer, and they said: -With the two eyes, you are better than the common people! You have nothing to do with us-. And they pushed here and there, the threw old clothes, gave her to eat but what they left, and did all sorts of harassment. One day she had to go into the fields and tend the goat, but she was still quite hungry because her sisters had given her so little to eat. He sat on the edge of a field and wept and cried so much that his eyes two streams ran. When he looked up, he saw a woman beside s, who asked -Duocchietti, why are you crying? -. She replied: -Do I have to cry? Because I have two eyes like everyone else, my sisters and my mother can I suffer, they hunt here and there, they throw me their old clothes and give me to eat only leftovers. Today they gave me so little that I am still quite fame-. The sorceress said -Duocchietti, dry your eyes: I'll tell you one thing so you should not go hungry. You only have to say to the goat, "Bela, goat, Cover the table!" And you will find yourself in front of a little table ready-made, covered with delicious food, and you can eat it as often as you want. And when you're satisfied and little table not need any more, you just have to say: "Bela, goat, I pray, And take the table!" And the little table sparirà-. That said, the witch departed, while Duocchietti thought, "I right away if it's true what you said, because I am far too hungry !," and said -Bela, goat, Cover the table! -He had just uttered these words, which appeared a little table on which was spread a placemat candida, and above there was a plate with knife, fork and spoon, and all around the most delicious dishes, which were still warm, as if they had just been brought from the kitchen . Then Duocchietti said the shortest prayer she knew: -Sir, you're always our guest, Amen! - you served and ate heartily. And when they were filled, he said, as he taught the magician: -Bela, goat, I pray, table quite -E immediately take the table disappeared and all that was on it. "It 'sa nice way of keeping house" Duocchietti thought, and was quite glad and happy. The evening brought home the goat and did not touch the small earthenware dish with the food that her sisters had set aside. The next day he went out again with her goat, and left stand even the few bites she had been given. The first and the second time the sisters did not notice either, but as it happened every time, noticed him and said: -Here's something strange: Duocchietti not touch the food, but used to eat up everything we gave: He must have found another systematic. And to find out the truth, One-eye had to accompany her when she went to the pasture, to take care of what he was doing, and if someone brought him food and drink. When Duocchietti went on his journey with the goat, eye went to her and said, -Verrò in the fields with you, to see if the goat is well kept and if you do it pascolare-. But the other understood his mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, -Come, One-eye, let's sit down a bit ', I'll sing you something-. One-eye sat down and was tired from the journey which was not used and the heat; Duocchietti and continued to sing: -Occhietto, watch you? One-eye, are you asleep? -So-eye shut her one eye and fell asleep. And when he saw that the other fast asleep, and could discover nothing, she said, -Bela, goat, Cover the table! -You sat down and ate and drank their fill, then returned to say -Bela, goat, I pray, the table with something - and everything disappeared. Then he awakened One-eye and said -Occhietto, you tend the goat, and sleep! In the meantime the goat might run all over the world! Come, let's go back home-. They returned home and left again Duocchietti feel her small bowl; and eye could not tell her mother why, she would not eat, and said: -I fell asleep out there! -. The next day the mother said to Treocchietti: -Accompagnala you, and makes' attention if Duocchietti eat out and if someone brings something to eat and drink, for she must eat and drink well in some way! -. Then Treocchietti walked over to his sister and said -Verrò with you to see if a good care goat and if you do it pascolare-. But the other knew her mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, We will sit a bit ', Treocchietti, will sing something-. Treocchietti sat down and was tired from the journey and the heat; intoned the sister of his new song and sang -Treocchietti, watch you? -But instead of singing: -Treocchietti, are you asleep? -cantò distraction: -Duocchietti, are you asleep? -and went on singing: -Treocchietti, watch you? Duocchietti, are you asleep? -Then to Treocchietti closed both eyes, but the third, when the song had not revolt, he fell asleep. But Treocchietti shut him cunningly, as if asleep too, but it blinked, and could see everything. And when Duocchietti thought that his sister was asleep, said his magic words: -Bela, goat, Cover the table! -I eat and drank at will, and made disappear everything: -Bela, goat, I pray, And take the table! -And Treocchietti he had seen it all. Then Duocchietti approached her and said, Hey, Treocchietti, you fell asleep? A good care taker! Come, let's go home again. And when they got home, Duocchietti did not eat this time, but Treocchietti said to his mother: -Now I know, finally, that, that superb does not eat! When it's off, says the goat: "Bela, goat, Cover the table!" And appears in front of a little table, covered with delicious food, better than what we eat; and when it satisfies said: "Bela, goat, I pray, And take the table" and all disappears. I watched everything closely had fallen asleep two eyes with a little song, but one in my forehead kept awake Fortuna-. Then the mother, furious, shouted: -You want to be better than us? It will pass the voglia-. She retrieved a knife and thrust it into the heart of the goat, which fell down dead. At this sight, Duocchietti went out full, sat on the edge of the field, and wept bitter tears. But, suddenly, here again the witch beside her, who said -Duocchietti, why are you crying? -. -Do I have to cry? - she replied. -My mother killed the goat, that every day I prepared such a nice table, when I said your song: now I have to go back to suffer fame.- The sorceress said -Duocchietti, I want to give you good advice: please your sisters to give you the entrails of the goat and sotterrale front of the house shall be your Fortuna-. Then he disappeared and Duocchietti went home and told the sisters: -Care sisters, give me something of my goat I do not expect anything good but give me the interiora-. Those laughed and said: -If you want nothing, the ones you can just dare-. And she took the entrails and, in the evening, buried them quietly in front of the house, according to the advice of the sorceress. The next morning, when everyone woke up and went to the house, here is a magnificent tree, which had leaves of silver and hung in the middle of the golden fruit, and nothing in the world was more beautiful to behold and more precious. But they did not know how he had come there during one night; eyes saw that it had grown from the entrails of the goat, for it was there dov'essa she had buried them. Then the mother said to One-eye: -Sali tree, my child, and gather the frutti-. Eye climbed up, but when he wanted to take one of the golden apples, the branch escaped from her hands, and went back to escape every time he tried, so, he failed to grasp even an apple, as he would do. Then the mother said: -Treocchietti, climb onto you with your three eyes can look about you better than Occhietto-. One-eye slid down and went Treocchietti; but if the more skilful, and might search as she view, the golden apples always escaped her. Eventually the mother grew impatient, and climbed her, but it did not catch more fruits daughters, and always clutched empty. Then Duocchietti said: -I want to go myself, perhaps I find it more fast-. The sisters exclaimed: -What will you do with your two eyes! - But she climbed up, in front of her, apples do not retreated indeed seemed that came into her own hands, so that she could pluck them one after another and brought down a full apron. The mother took them to him; and instead of treating better, as they should, the mother and the sisters became jealous of Duocchietti, because only she could get the fruit, and they treated her still more. One day, who were all standing together by the tree, here comes a young knight. -Svelta, Duocchietti- cried the two sisters -nasconditi down here, because we should not be ashamed of you- and speed they turned an empty barrel the poor girl who was near the tree, and they pushed below even the golden apples ch 'she had caught. As the rider approached, they saw that it was very nice; He admired the magnificent gold and silver tree, and said to the two sisters -Who this fine tree belong? Who I bestow one branch might ask in return any thing-. One-eye and Treocchietti replied that the tree belonged to them, and that they would give him a branch. They gave a lot to do, but without being able to deal with them, because the branches and the fruits retreated each time ahead of them. Then the knight said -Strano that the tree belongs to you and you can not branch off it! - They again asserted that the tree was their property. But as they talked, Duocchietti he rolled out of the barrel of golden apples, which rolled to the feet of the knight, for she was vexed that One-eye and Treocchietti not speaking the truth. Seeing apples, the knight was astonished, and asked where they came from. One-eye and Treocchietti answered that they had another sister, who was not to be seen, for she had only two eyes like ordinary people. But the rider wanted to see her and cried -Duocchietti, come out! -. Then she stepped out from beneath the barrel, full of hope, and the knight was surprised at her great beauty, and said -Definitely you will know dell'albero- break off a branch. -Si- said the girl-I can do it because the tree belongs to me.- He climbed and ease broke off a branch with silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave the knight. Then he said: -Duocchietti, what should I give you in return? -. -Ah- said the girl -patisco hunger, thirst, and all sorts of hardships all day long if you wanted to take me away with you, and free me, I'd be felice.- Then the knight put her on his horse and brought her to the castle of his father; there he gave her beautiful clothes, to eat and drink their fill; and because he loved her so much he married her, and the wedding is celebrated with great joy. When Duocchietti was taken away by the handsome knight, her sisters very envied his fortune. -At least we have left the tree wonderful- thought-and even if we can not reap the benefits, all stop here before, and will be with us to sing her praises: who knows that luck can not arriderci yet! - But the next morning, the tree was gone, and with it, were also dashed their hopes. Duocchietti lived long happy. One day they came to the castle two poor women and asked for alms. She looked in their faces, and recognized her sisters, One-eye and Treocchietti, become so poor that they were forced to go door to door to beg for bread. But Duocchietti received them graciously, made them good and took care of them, so that, the two sisters hearts repented the evil that they had done in his youth.
Louse and Little flea	280	2022	Italian	A louse and a Little flea lived together and were brewing beer in an egg shell. The louse fell in and we are scalded. Then the Little flea began to cry loud. The door said: "Little flea, why are you crying?" - "Because the louse has burnt." Then the little door began to creak. He said a little broom "Porticina because, creaks?" - "I should not creak? Louse has run seared, Little flea tears shed." Then a little broom began to sweep frantically. He spent a cart and said, "a little broom, because sweep?" - "I should not sweep? Louse has run seared, Little flea tears shed, Porticina creaked." He said the cart: "And I start to run," and began to run wildly. Said the heap by which it ran: "Barrow, why are you running?" - "I should not run? Louse has run seared, Little flea tears shed, Porticina creaked, then a little broom swept." Said the heap by: "And I will get to burn," and began to burn terribly. There was near a map that said: "heap, why burn?" - "I should not burn? Louse has run seared, Little flea tears shed, Porticina creaked, then a little broom swept, Carrettino career goes." He said the plan: "And I will shake myself," and he shook so much as to fall the foliage. He said a little girl with her brocchino: "tree, why art thou shaking thyself?" - "I should not shake? Louse has run seared, Little flea tears shed, Porticina creaked, then a little broom swept, Carrettino career goes, heap by burning all day long." Said the little girl: "And I will break my brocchino , "and she broke the brocchino. Then he said to the water: "Girl, why you break your jug?" - "I should not break my jug? Louse has run seared, Little flea tears shed, Porticina creaked, then a little broom swept, Carrettino career goes, heap by burning from morning to night, map shakes in one piece." "Well , "said the fountain," and I will put myself reading. " And he began to slide terribly. And all were drowned in the water: the little girl, the seedling, the heap by which the cart, a little broom, the little door, the Little flea, the louse, everyone.
Tom Thumb	348	700	Italian	There was once a poor farmer who one evening he was sitting by the fireplace to poke the fire, while his wife was spinning. At one point he said: -How sad not to have children! It 's so quiet our house, while the other is so noisy and fun! -. -Si- she said sighing -fosse even one and even tiny, no bigger than a thumb, I'd be happy, and we would like a large bene.- Now it happened that the woman began to feel ill, and after seven months gave birth to a child who was perfect, but no bigger than a thumb. Then they said -E 'just as we wanted, and we will love figlioletto- and stature, they called Tom Thumb. They do not skimp on the food, but the baby did not grow and remained as it was at birth. He had an intelligent look and soon showed a little man careful and prudent, so that in everything he undertook. One day his father made ready to go into the forest to cut wood, and murmured: -If there was some one to bring the cart! -. Oh babbo- exclaimed Tom Thumb -l will do it; the wagon will be in time to the woods debito.- The man laughed and said: -How is that possible? You're too young to ride a horse with redini-. -Do not do anything, Dad, if Mom wants to attack him, I will get in the horse and suggest where should andare.- -Be'- -proviamo replied the farmer, for a volta.- When the time came, the mother attacked and placed Tom Thumb in the horse, and the little shouting at him where he was going: Uh and oh! to the right and to the left!-. Everything went as regularly as if there had been a coachman, and the carriage was going straight into the woods. Now it came to pass at a turning point, and the little fellow shouted: -A left! - went from there two strangers. My-God! - said one -who is this? There is a wagon and an invisible carter riding the horse! - -There is something VA- said the other -seguiamolo and see where it ferma.- Meanwhile, the wagon went right into the woods where they smashed the wood. When Tom Thumb saw his father, he shouted: -You Look, father, here I am with the cart, now put me down-. The farmer grabbed the horse with his left hand, and his right ear pulled down her son, who cheerfully sat on a piece of straw. When two strangers saw him they were struck dumb with wonder The one took the other aside and said, -Listen, quell'omuncolo would make our fortune if we will see a fee in a big city: us buy it! -. They went to the peasant and said -Vendeteci the little man, treat him well! -. No, answered the father-not sell it the root of my heart for all the gold in mondo.- But Tom Thumb, hearing the deal, the he climbed up the folds of her dress, sat on his shoulder and whispered to 'ear -Babbo, sell me as well, so I will come to you-. Then the father gave it to those two for a beautiful gold coin. -Where do you want to wear? - they asked. Ah, posatemi on the brim of the hat; There I can walk up and down like in a gallery, and will admire the paesaggio.- he wished, and when Tom Thumb had taken leave of his father, they took away. They walked until dusk, then the little fellow said, -Tiratemi down, I need- it. Li also -Rimani said the man who wore on his hat-not care; even the birds drop something every tanto.- -NO- said Pollicino -so what is becoming; get me down, hurry! - The man took off his hat, and put the baby in a field along the way; and that he penetrated a little between the plates here and there; then all of a sudden he slipped into a rat hole, he'd tried on purpose. Good evening, gentlemen, I can go home without me! - shouted at them. Those ran and ransacked the den with sticks, but it was wasted effort: Tom Thumb crept deeper and deeper, and as soon as it was dark, they had to leave filled with anger and with an empty bag. When Tom Thumb found they were gone, he came out of the underground tunnel. -E 'dangerous to walk across the fields to the dark- said -it is so easy to break your neck! - Luckily he met in a snail shell, "Praise be to God!" I think. "Here I can stay safe!" and he entered it. Soon after, he was about to sleep, he heard two men pass by, one of whom said: -How are we going to steal the gold and silver of the rich pastor? -. -I could tell you I- cried Tom Thumb. -What was it? - said one of the robbers, frightened. -I heard someone parlare.- They stopped listening, and Tom Thumb once more said -Prendetemi with you, aiuterò-. -Where are you? - -Try to the ground and listen to where does the voice- answered. Finally they found him, and lifted him up. -But how can you help you little worm! - they said. -Guardate- he said -within dall'inferriata in the priest's room and you lean out what volete.- -Be'- said those -vedremo what you're capable of do.- When they came to the parish, Tom Thumb crept into the room, but immediately he shouted out loud if they wished for all that is here? -. The thieves said, frightened: -Speak plan, which no one will feel! -. But Tom Thumb pretended not to understand, and shouted again: -What do you want? You want all there is? -. The heard the cook who was sleeping in the next room, and sat up in bed and listened. But for fear the thieves had run back part; they took courage again and thought, "That little guy wants to make fun of us." They came back and whispered: -Now is' seriously and give us something-. Then Tom Thumb cried louder as he could: -There will give everything; ! Give only your hands! -. The woman who was listening to the distinctly heard, jumped out of bed, and burst into the room. The thieves ran off as if they fire their heels; but the woman, unable to see anything, she went to strike a light. When she returned, Tom Thumb, unseen, into the barn; and the woman, when she had looked in all the corners, went back to bed, thinking he had been dreaming with open eyes. Tom Thumb crept among the hay, where he had found a nice place to sleep: he wanted to rest until day before returning parents. But other things were! Yes, there are tribulations and troubles in this world! At dawn, the servant got up to feed the beasts. First he went to the barn, where he took a handful of hay, just the one in which he slept poor Tom Thumb. But he was so fast asleep that he did not notice and awoke only mouth of the cow, who had taken the hay. Ah, my God! - he shouted. -How did I fall in the manger? - but soon realized where he was. He had to be careful in order not to get between the teeth and be crushed; he had to descend into the stomach. -In the closet have forgotten the windows! - -and not told us the sun comes in, No, you can have a light! - The house did not garbava at all, and what was worse, the door constantly coming in and the hay space was being filled up. At last he shouted at the top of his voice: -Do more hay! No more hay! -. The maid was then milking the cow at that time, and when he heard without seeing anyone, and he recognized the same voice he had heard during the night, she was so frightened that she fell off her stool, and spilled the milk. He ran from the master in a hurry, shouting: -God, master dear, the cow spoke! -. -You're impazzita- replied the pastor, but he went in person to the barn to see what there was. No sooner he had he set foot, than Tom Thumb cried out again: -No more hay! No more hay! -. Then the parson himself was frightened, supposing that it was an evil spirit, he killed the cow. So it was killed, but the stomach where it was Pollicino was thrown into the dung heap. Tom Thumb had to pull out with great difficulty; finally he managed to make his way, but just as he was about to stick his head out, when a new misfortune. He came running a hungry wolf swallowed the whole stomach at one gulp. But Tom Thumb did not lose heart. "Maybe the wolf will listen to reason" and he thought, from the belly, shouted -Caro wolf, I know where you can find a squisito- food. -Where? - asked the -In wolf that house so and so, you have to introduce you to the basement and there is cake, bacon and sausage volontà.- And he described in detail the house of his father. The wolf did not need to be told twice: at night, going from the basement, went into the pantry and ate their fill. When he was satisfied, but had become so fat that he could no longer go out by the same way. Tom Thumb had reckoned upon, and began to make a lot of noise in the wolf, crying and calling as loud as he could. -Want to be quiet? - said the wolf, the -svegli padroni.- -How! - -You said the baby you ate out loud, now I want to have some fun 'too! - and began again to shout with all his forces. At last his father and his mother woke up, ran to the door and peeped through the crack. When they saw that a wolf was inside, they were frightened, and her husband ran to get the ax, and the wife the scythe. -Stammi behind- said the man entered the room -if not kill him the first time, by him and pezzi.- foul to Tom Thumb heard his father's voice and shouted: Dear father, I'm here, I'm inside the wolf! -. -God be praised! We found our dear child! - the man answered, full of joy. And he told his wife to keep the scythe not to hurt him. Then he gave a blow on the wolf's head that he fell down dead; and, taken knife and scissors, cut off the belly and pulled out the baby. -Ah- said the father-as we were worried about you! - -Yes, Dad, I have traveled the world far and wide, thank God again breathe fresh air! - But where have you been? - Ah , dad, I was a rat hole, in the belly of a cow, and in the belly of a wolf, now I stay with you.- -And we will not sell you again for all the gold of the mondo.- then kissed and hugged their Thumb, they gave him to drink and eat and made him do some new clothes because his were soiled with travel.
What does the father is always right	2525	1415	Italian	Now I want to tell you a story I heard when I was little, and since then every time I thought about it, I found it more beautiful; because the stories as happens to many men: they earn with age, and this is nice! You are certain state in the country, and you've certainly seen an old farmhouse with a thatched roof; moss and grass growing there alone and a stork's nest is located right at the top of the stork can not do without. The walls are dangling, low windows, in fact there is only one that can be opened; the oven to bake bread in the check out as a round belly, and elderberry bush bends over the hedge toward a small puddle of water with a duck and the ducklings, just below the knotty willow. Yeah, and then there's the chained dog, barking at tutti.Proprio a similar house was located in the country, there lived a couple, a peasant and his wife. With what little possessions they could well do without a horse grazing right next to the road ditch. The farmer sat on him to go into town, the neighbors borrowed and then reciprocated with something else, but for them would certainly have been better to sell the horse or exchange it for something else that would prove more useful. But what? "That you understand you better, Dad!" said his wife. "Now there is a market in the city, go there with horses and sell it in exchange for money or something else good. What you do is all right. Go to the market!" And so she wrapped a handkerchief around his neck because what I could do better than him, even he made him a double knot, which was more elegant, then wiped his hat with the palm of his hand and kissed him on the mouth. So he set off on horseback had to sell or trade; was a man of him it could fidare.Il sun was burning and there was no cloud. The street was full of dust; there were many people who went to the market in the carriage, on horseback or even on foot. It was an exceptional warm and there was not even a little 'shadow on strada.Passò one with a cow, just as pretty as it can be a cow. "This certainly gives good milk!" thought the peasant, he could be a great deal to have it. "Hey, you with the cow!" said "we need to talk. See this horse? I think most of a cow costs, but for me it's the same. I back more useful to the cow. They exchange?" "Sure!" He said the man with the cow, and so scambiarono.Ormai them was made and the farmer could very well go home: he had got what he wanted; but having thought about going to the market, he wanted to go there anyway, just to see him. So he went with the cow. He walked the cow and sent with him. They reached a man who was driving a sheep. It was a beautiful sheep, fat and with a nice woolen cloak. "I'd like to have it!" He thought the peasant. "There is plenty of grass for the winter ditch and could stay at home with us. In the end it would be better for us to have the sheep, not a cow." - "The exchange?" "Yes!" Of course the man readily agreed. So was made the change and the farmer went with the sheep along the road on a wall maestra.Vicino saw a man with a big goose under his arm. "It's heavier than you have there!" the farmer said, "fat is beautiful and full of pens. Would be just fine when the weather is good, next to our pool of water. So the mother could save the skins for someone! He always said:" If only we had a 'goose !, "now could have it and will. Let's return? I give you goose, sheep and more thank you." Imagine if the other did not accept; and so they did change and the farmer got the goose. Near the city traffic became more intense, it was a real bustle of people and beasts. The road flanked by a ditch to the potato field where the tax collector had tied her hen why not fly away in confusion. It was just a beautiful hen, with twinkling eyes. "Cluck!" he said. What he meant, I do not know, but the farmer when he saw her he thought: "It's the best chicken I've ever seen, it is much more beautiful than the hen of the priest; I'd like to have it! A hen can always find a grain, can think for herself to herself, would be a great deal if the ottenessi instead goose. " - "Let's change?" churches. "Let's do it" the other "is not a bad idea!" and so did cambio.Il tax collector got the goose, and the peasant gallina.Aveva embraced many business going in the city; Now he was hot and he was tired, and she felt like a brandy and a piece of bread; so, passing by a tavern, he wanted to enter, but the boy was coming out with a sack full of something and the two clashed. "What have you got there?" asked the farmer. "rotten apples" replied the boy. "A full bag for the pigs." "And how many are! I'd love to show her mom. Last year we only got an apple from the old tree near the bog; we retained and kept on the pantry until they rotted." It gives a feeling of well-being! "said the mother; here could just see him being! Yeah, I would show them." "what do you offer in return?" asked the boy. "Offer? I give you my hen" and did so, took the apples, entered the inn, he came up to the counter, put the stove on, the lot of apples and thought no more. There were many foreigners in the inn, many matchmakers of horses and oxen, and two Englishmen so rich that they had smashed the pockets from the golden coins. The English like to gamble, and now you hear what accadde.Suss, Suss! that noise came from the stove? apples were beginning to roast. "What's that?" they asked, and soon came to know for the whole history of the horse changed to a cow, to get to the bad apples. "Ah, the beccherai certainly be your wife when you get home!" said the British. "I'll give you a lot." "It will give me kisses, not blows," said the farmer. "The mother will say," What does the father is always right! "." "Bet?" They asked those. "A mountain of gold coins: one hundred coins are a hundred pounds!" "A full bushel!" said the farmer. "I can only fill it with apples, and with myself and my mother for good measure." "All right!" they said, and so scommisero.La carriage innkeeper was prepared, the British went there, even the peasant got its bad apples, and so came to the house of the farmer. "Good evening, Mom!" "Good evening to you , father! "" I made the change. "" Ah, well! " she said, and hugged him forgetting the sack and the strangers. "I changed the horse for a cow." "Great for the milk!" said the woman. "Now we will have milk, butter and cheese on the table a great return!" "But then I exchanged the cow with a sheep!" "And this is even better!" the woman said, "You always think of everything; we have just enough pasture for a sheep. This will give us sheep's milk and sheep's milk cheese and then some nice wool socks, yes, even of from woolen nightgowns. And this cow does not give of course not! the cows lose their hair. you're full of attention! "" But then I changed the sheep with a goose! "" So finally we'll have roast goose for St. Martin, my father! you think always make me happy: it is nice of you! the goose can be linked and will become even more fat to San Martino! "" Yes, but I changed the goose with a hen! " the man continued. "A hen! its a nice change," said his wife. "The hen lays eggs, the hatching, so we will have chicks, and we can put on an entire chicken coop is what I always wanted!" "Yes, but then I did return with a bag of apples!" "Now so I give you a kiss! " the woman said. "Thank you, husband mine! I'll tell you now something. When he was away, I thought I'd get you a dinner frittata with onions. I had the eggs, but I missed the onions, then went to the teacher's house; they have them, I know, but his wife is very stingy, poor thing! I asked her to prestarmele. "lend?" she said "in our garden does not grow anything, even a rotten apple, not even this could lend!" Now I can lend him ten, a whole lot! It has to laugh, Daddy! " and so he planted a kiss on the mouth. "It's just beautiful," they commented the British. "Worse are and are happy. Our money is well spent" and so gave a bushel full of gold coins to the farmer who had received kisses and not always botte.C'è to gain when the wife recognizes and declares that the which makes the father is the thing migliore.Vedi, that's the story! I heard it when I was little and now you also have heard you; now you know what makes your dad is always right.
Rapunzel	109	310	Italian	There was once a man and a woman who had long wished in vain for a child. Finally she discovered she was expecting. On the back of their house there was a small window from which you could see in the garden of a sorceress, full of flowers and greens of all kinds. No one, however, dared enter. One day the woman was standing at the window and looking at the garden he saw some wonderful rampions in a flowerbed. Immediately he wanted to eat, and because he knew he did not have them, it became thin and gaunt to the point that her husband saw it and, frightened, she asked him the reason. "Ah! I'll die if I can not eat a bit 'of those rampions growing in the garden behind our house." The man, who loved his wife, he thought to himself ': "Whatever it takes, you have to be able to bring him some." So, one evening, climbed over the wall, plucked hastily a handful of rapunzel and took them to his wife She immediately prepared a salad and ate it greedily. But the rapunzel liked them so much that the next day his desire tripled. The man realized that he would not be calmed so penetrated again in the garden. But great was his fear when he saw before the sorceress who began to rebuke him harshly for daring to enter the garden to steal the fruits. He excused himself as pot ', telling the desires of his wife and how dangerous it was to deny her something during that time. Finally, the magician said: "I'm happy with what you say, and allow you to take away all rampions you want, but on one condition: you will give me the child that your wife will give birth to." He Frightened, the man accepted everything and when his wife gave birth, immediately appeared at the magician, he named Rapunzel to the child and brought via.Raperonzolo became the most beautiful girl in the world, but as soon as it was twelve years old, the enchantress He locked her in a high-high tower that had no ladder, door, but only a tiny window at the top. When the enchantress wanted to go up, from below called: "Oh Rapunzel, dissolve your capelliche for salir I will use those." Rapunzel had in fact long and beautiful hair, fine as spun gold. When the sorceress called, she loosened her braids, knotted the top hair, the buttress of the window, so that they would fall for a distance of twenty fathoms, and the sorceress you arrampicava.Un day a young prince found himself in forest where was the tower, saw the beautiful Rapunzel the window and heard her sing with such a sweet voice that soon fell in love. He was in despair because the tower had no door and no scale was high enough. Yet every day he went into the woods, until he saw reach the sorceress who spoke thus: "Oh Rapunzel, dissolve your capelliche for salir I will use those!" So he understood thanks to what scale you could enter the tower. It was good in my mind the words I needed to say, and the next day, at dusk, he went to the tower and cried: "Oh Rapunzel, dissolve your capelliche for salir I will use those!" And here, she let down her hair and as soon as they touched the ground he will clung firmly and was raised in alto.Raperonzolo was frightened at first, but soon the young prince she liked and together they decided that he would come every day to visit her . Thus they lived happily for a long time, wanting well as husband and wife. The sorceress did not notice anything until one day Rapunzel began to tell her: "Tell me, Madame Gothel, how come you are so much heavier to lift the young prince?" - "Ah, wretched girl!" replied the magician, "What's this I hear!" She understood she was deceived and went on a rampage. Then he grabbed the beautiful Rapunzel braids, wrapped two or three times around the left hand, took the scissors with the right and "zic zac," cut off. Then took Rapunzel into a desert where she was forced to live miserably, and after a certain period of time, gave birth to twins, a boy and a femmina.La same evening of the day when he had cast Rapunzel, the enchantress fastened the braids cut the buttress of the window and when the prince came and said, "Oh Rapunzel, dissolve your capelliche for salir I will use those!" She sank down your hair. As the prince was surprised when he found the sorceress instead of his beloved Rapunzel! "Do you know what?" said the sorceress furious "for you, ribald, Rapunzel is lost forever!" The Prince, in despair, he threw himself down from the tower was spared, but lost the sight in both eyes. Sad wandered for only feeding woods of herbs and roots and doing nothing but crying. Some years later, she happened in the same desert where Rapunzel lived in hardship with his children. His voice seemed known, and at the same time she also recognized him and fell on my neck. Two of her tears moistened eyes; they lit up again, and he pot, see us as before.
Sleeping Beauty	473	410	Italian	Once upon a time a king and a queen who every day said, "Ah, if we had a child!" But the boy never came. One day, when the queen was bathing, here a shrimp jumped out of the water and said, "Your wish shall be fulfilled you will give birth to a girl." The Shrimp prophecy came true, and the queen had a little girl so beautiful that the king was no longer in the skin for joy, and ordered a great feast. Not only he invited his relatives, friends and acquaintances, but also the wise women, that they might be kind and favorable to the child. In his reign there were thirteen, but as he had only twelve golden plates for lunch, had to be left una.Dopo the party, fairies gave the child their wonderful gifts: one bestowed virtue, the second beauty, a third riches, and so on, everything you could want in the world. Ten of them had said their say, in came the uninvited thirteenth to revenge herself, had not been invited. She said aloud: "At fifteen, the princess will prick with a spindle and fall down dead." Then there came out the twelfth, which was to give its vote; certainly could not the evil prophecy, yet she could soften and said, "The princess will not die but fall into a deep sleep that will last a hundred years." The king, hoping to protect her child from that great misfortune, he ordered all time of the kingdom should be burnt. Meanwhile, the girl was with all the gifts of the fairies: she was so beautiful, virtuous, kind and intelligent, that you could not look at her without loving her. It happened one day when he was fifteen, the king and queen were out and she was alone in the castle. Tour all the nooks and every room in his pleasure, and finally came to an old tower. He climbed a narrow staircase that led up to a door. In the lock there was a rusty key, and when she turned it, the door swung open: in a small room sat an old woman with a spindle that diligently spinning her flax. "Oh, grandmother," said the princess, "what are you doing?" - "Wire," said the old woman, nodding her head. "How to turn this thing!" He exclaimed the girl, and picked up the thread to spin too. But as soon as he touched it, the spell was fulfilled, and she pricked her dito.Come felt the sting, fell to the ground in a deep sleep. The king and queen, who were returning home, they also slept with the whole court. The horses fell asleep in their stalls, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, the flies on the wall; even the fire that blazed in the fireplace died down and fell asleep, the roast stopped sizzling, and the cook, who wanted to take to the hair one garbage boy caught red-handed, let go and fell asleep too. All that had semblance of life, silent and dormì.Intorno the castle grew a thick hedge of thorns, which every year became higher and higher until, came to completely encircle and to cap it all; so there he saw nothing, not even the flag on the roof. But in the country spread the legend of Sleeping Beauty, the sleeping beauty, as it was called the princess; and sometimes was a prince who ventured through the bush trying to get to the castle. But they could not penetrate because, for the thorns held them as if it were his hands, and they tangled and died miseramente.Dopo many, many years, arrived in the country another prince; an old man told him about the brier that surrounded a castle in which a beautiful princess named Rosamond slept with the whole court. Already his grandfather had told him that many princes had tried to penetrate among the thorns, but had been imprisoned and had died a miserable death. Then the youth said, "I have no fear: I will cross the bushes and see the lovely Rosamond." The old man tried to dissuade him in all ways, but he gave him no retta.Ora, the very day when Rosamond the company had passed a hundred years. When he approached the bush, he found it beautiful flowers that spontaneously moved away in its path, rejoining behind him, so he went unscathed. Coupling in the castle courtyard, he saw hunting horses and dogs spotted sleeping, lying on the ground; on the roof the pigeons were sitting with their heads under the wing. When he entered, the flies were asleep on the wall and the cook in the kitchen had his hand to grab the garbage boy, and the maid was sitting in front of the black chicken that was spennare.Egli went over and saw sleeping through the courtyard and up, on thrones, they slept the king and queen. He went again and was so quiet that he could hear her breathing. At last he came to the tower and opened the bedroom door where Rosamond lay. He lay there, and it was so beautiful that he could not take your eyes out. He bent down and gave her a bacio.E, when he had kissed her, Briar Rose opened her eyes, awoke and looked very kindly. Then they went down together, and the king, the queen and the whole court waked up and looked at each other amazed. The horses in the courtyard stood up and shook themselves; hunting dogs jumped up wagging his tail; doves on the roof raised the head from under the wing, looked round, and flew into the field; the flies to move on the walls; the kitchen fire flared up, began to burn and continued to cook the dinner; the roast began to sizzle, the cook gave the scullion such a slap that made him cry out, and the maid went on plucking the pollo.Poi was celebrated with great pomp the wedding of the Prince and Rosamond, who lived happily until death.
St. Joseph in the forest	1897	480	Italian	There was once a mother who had three daughters, the eldest was rude and wicked, the second much better, although she had her faults, but the youngest was a pious, good child. But the mother was so strange, that their daughter more and could not bear the youngest. For this reason she often sent the poor child in a large forest, to get rid of her; he thought that he would be lost and never come back again. But the guardian angel, that every good child has s, did not leave her, but always brought on the right track. However, once the child could not find the way out of the woods, and the angel pretended not to be there. So she kept walking until evening; then he saw a small light burning in the distance, he ran towards it and arrived in front of a small hut. He knocked, the door opened and she came to a second door, which knocked again. He opened an old man who had a white beard and looked venerable, and it was no other than St. Joseph. He said quite kindly -Come, dear child, sit on my chair by the fire, and warm; If you're thirsty I will fetch a little 'of clear water; Instead of eating here in the forest, I have nothing for you that little roots; and before you have to scrape and boil. St. Joseph gave her the roots; She scraped the far right, then took a piece of pancake and the bread that had given the mother, put it all together in a pan, and cooked herself a thick soup. When it was ready, St. Joseph said, I am so hungry, give me a bit 'of your dinner-. The child was quite willing, and gave him more than he kept for himself, but with the blessing of God was satisfied. When they had eaten, St. Joseph said, now we go to sleep, but I have only one bed, lay thyself, I stretch out on the ground on the straw. No, he answered the child stay in your own bed; for me the straw is soft enough But St. Joseph took her in his arms and carried her into bed, and the girl said her prayers, and fell asleep. The next morning, when he awoke, he wanted to say good morning to St. Joseph, but did not see him. He got up and looked for him, but could not find it anywhere; at the end saw behind the door with a lot of money, but so full that she could just carry; on it it was written that it was for the child who had slept there that night. Then she took the sack, ran off and got safely to her mother; and as she gave all the money, she could not help, but be proud of herself. The following day the second daughter she wanted to go into the woods. Her mother gave her a piece of omelet much bigger and bread. Things went as the other sister. In the evening he came to the hut of St. Joseph, who gave her roots for feeding. When it was ready, he likewise said to her: I am so hungry, give me a bit 'of your dinner-. The child replied: -Eat well with me-. Afterwards, when St. Joseph offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw, she replied: 'No, you come in the bed, there is room for both. St. Joseph picked her up, put her in the bed and lay down on the straw. In the morning when the child awoke and looked for St. Joseph, he was gone; but behind the door she found a money bag along a palm, and it said it was for the little girl who had slept there that night. She took the bag, ran home and brought him to his mother; But he held for himself, secretly a bit 'of money. Now he was curious about the oldest child, and the next morning wanted to go into the woods, too. The mother gave her pancakes at will, bread, cheese and more. In the evening, just like the other two, she found St. Joseph in his little hut. When the soup was ready and St. Joseph said, I am so hungry, give me a bit 'of your dinner- the girl replied: -Wait I am satisfied I will give you what avanzo-. And he ate almost everything, it, and St. Joseph had to scrape the dish. Then the good old man offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw; She took it without, lay down in bed, and left the hard straw. The next morning, when he awoke, St. Joseph was not there, but she did not care; instead he tried lots of money behind the door. It seemed that there was something on the ground, however, because he could not see clearly what it was, bent down and struck it against the nose. And the nose remained hanging, and when he stood up, he saw with horror that was another nose, firmly stuck on her. He began to shout and complain, but to no avail: he always saw that nose, that stretched out so far. Then he ran away screaming, till she met St. Joseph; She fell at his feet, and besought him much that he moved to pity and took the nose off and gave her two more cents. When she got home, her mother was standing in the doorway and asked, -Cos'hai received as a gift? -. Then she lied and said, -A great bag of money, but I lost it on the way. -Perso! - he cried the mother. Oh, you will meet! - He took her hand and wanted to seek it with her. At first she started crying and did not want to go, but at last moved; but the street were filled with so many lizards and snakes, they did not know how to save themselves. The bad child to death by their bites, and the mother was bitten in the foot, because he had not brought her up better.
Sun, Moon, and Talia	3363	410	Italian	There was once a fine gentleman to whom was born a daughter, whom he named Talia, and sent for the wise men and soothsayers from all parts of his kingdom because predicessero fate. And they, after consultation, concluded that Talia would be in mortal danger from a linen-bone: why the father ordered that his palace would not enter flax, or hemp, or anything like it, to escape this disaster. But one day, when he was now grown and was at the window, he saw Talia pass an old woman who was spinning, and as he had never seen a distaff or a time it seemed that a nice little tool that swirled and twirled it between his fingers the old. She felt a desire to try so hard brought up the old on her, and took the rock in his hand, began to pull the thread, but unfortunately one of the linen-bone tucked under the nail and she fell down dead. The old seeing this scene took the stairs and took to his legs. When his poor father learned of the accident, having shed so many tears that he was flooded with sadness, and arranged the beautiful Talia sitting on a velvet chair, under a brocaded canopy, in the same building that was in the countryside then he tightened all the doors and abandoned forever home where she had suffered too much, to forget the pain and lose even the memory of that cruel fate. But after a time a king was hunting, and he missed the falcon flew from a window in the palace and did not return his call. The king knocked repeatedly at the door, believing that someone lived there, and then he asked for a scale grape-picker to enter the building to see what was there. Arrived above, after touring all the rooms, was amazed because he had not met a soul, and in the end I enter the room in which it was Talia as enchanted as the king saw her, thinking she was asleep, called her, but she not wake up to when you called her and shook, and as they turned for her beauty took her in his arms and carried her on a bed where he caught the fruit of his love. Then he left her lying on the bed and went back to his kingdom, where for a lot 'of time not thought about what had successo.E her after nine months gave birth to a pair of twins, one male and one female were two splendid jewels, which were looked after by two fairies appeared in the palace, and attacked the children to the mother's breast. Once the kids wanted to breastfeed but could not find the nipple, they took his finger and sucked so much that they pulled out the linen-bone. For Talia was like waking from a long sleep, and seeing those beautiful next joys gave them her breasts, and he loved them as his own life. While she did not know what had happened, being all alone in that building, with two children next door, seeing bring good things to eat and never see anyone, the king remembered Talia, and the first chance went hunting to see it. Having lived Wake found with two dolls so beautiful, she was so happy she was going to faint with joy. And after Talia told what had happened, they became friends and great alliance, and spent a few days together. Then, after it has been greeted with a promise to return to pick her up, he went to his kingdom, where appointed continuous Talia and children, to the point that he ate had on Talia lips, Sun and Moon, so he called the children, and if he fell asleep He called the one and the other. The king's wife, who had become suspicious, seeing that he had returned late from the hunt, feeling this call Talia, Sun and Moon, lit jealousy. So he called the secretary and said: - Listen to me, my friend, now you are between Scylla and Charybdis, between a rock and a hard place, between the door and the jamb. If you tell me who it is in love with my husband, and I'll be rich if I do not hide I'll find more living or dead. The servant, terrified on one side and greedy for wealth on the other, put aside the honor, Hooded Justice and canceled loyalty, he said everything he wanted to know. The Queen Talia sent by the secretary, who introduced himself by saying that the king asked her to send him the children because he wanted to see them. She happily sent them to him, and that Medea's heart gave orders to the cook because scannasse them and did pastas and sauces, to serve the poor husband. The cook, who was soft-hearted, seeing those two beautiful dolls had compassion, and after having been entrusted to his wife because they hid them, and made two kids in a hundred different ways. When he reached the king, the queen made very pleased to serve on the table, and the king ate taste saying: - Oh, my gosh, how good this! my mom, this other thing is really delicious! And her every time she repeated: - Eat, eat, it's all In the beginning your stuff! The king took no notice, but then, as always felt this chant, answered: - I know very well that what I eat is my stuff, because you have brought nothing into this building! He arose from the table he went to his villa in the countryside to masquerade anger. But still it was not enough that the queen had done, and called the secretary sent him to call Talia with the excuse that the king was waiting. Talia left immediately, all eager to see the light in his eyes, not knowing it was there was a fire waiting. But as soon as he arrived in front of the queen, with her face all enraged by Nero said: - Welcome Madame Tummistufi! You're the one so cocky that he tricked the king, the bitch who enjoys my husband! It is to you, Ms. porcella who has spent many nights while I tossed and turned in my bed? Now you arrived in purgatory, and I'll make you pay for everything you've done to me! Then Talia began to apologize, saying it was not his fault and that her husband had taken possession of its territory while she slept. But the queen, who did not want to hear excuses, did turn in the courtyard of the building a great fire, and ordered that we would throw the inside. Seeing that things were not going well, Talia knelt at the foot of the queen and begged her to at least give her time to take off the clothes she wore. The queen, not out of compassion for the poor girl, but why not burned her robes embroidered with gold and pearls, said- right, stripped. Talia began to undress, and every piece of clothing that rose throwing a scream: So, when he had already raised the coat, skirt and jacket, when he was raising her petticoat, launched last shriek, while taking and they dragged where it would become the embers for the hell boiler, noticed the king. Seeing the show, wanted to know what had happened, and when asked of his children, his wife herself, rinfacciandogli his betrayal, told him he had made them to him mangiare.Sentito this poor King, in desperation, he began to say: - I was the werewolf of my lambs! Alas, how can my veins have not recognized their own blood? Ah, Turkish denying that heinous crime you did? but will not have time to expiate your guilt, I will not send you to Jerusalem to do penance! He ordered that the queen was thrown in the same fire that had lit for Talia, together with the secretary who gave her hand to weave this plot wicked, and he wanted let us also lay the cook who thought she had cooked her children. But this threw herself at the feet of the king and said: - Actually, sir, it would be just reward for the service I rendered to reduce me you a heap of embers, the place I it is precisely to be tied to a stick in flames, about the ceremony that is just to blacken and sizzle in the fire, I have a right promotion if my ashes were mixed with those of a queen! no, that's not the prize that touches me for having saved the children in spite of the inhuman heart, he wanted to kill them because they came back into the body to you the flesh of your flesh. When the king heard this speech, he remained strasecolato and could not believe his ears, and turning to the cook said: - If it is true that you have saved my children, you can be sure that I will stop turning the skewers and put you to kitchen of my chest because you do turn my heart as you like, giving you an award that will be the happiest man in the world! While the king spoke, the wife of the chef, seeing what happened to her husband, led the Sun and Moon from the father, and the king was spinning like a top to embrace Talia and her children, in a flurry of kisses. After assigning a rich annuity to the cook, who appointed first gentleman of the court, he married Talia, who could enjoy a long life with her husband and children, recognizing that as we have always known if luck is down from heaven even while sleeping good.
History of the youth who went in search of fear	30	326	Italian	A father had two sons. The eldest was smart and sensible, and could do in any situation, while the younger was stupid and could neither learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they said, "It will be quite a burden for the father!" If there was something to do, always touching and great: but if his father bade him to take something in the evening or even at night, and the road led through the churchyard or some dismal place, he answered: "Ah, father, I get goose skin !," because it was scary. Or when in the evening, by the fire, he told stories as to shiver, the listeners sometimes said "Oh I get goose bumps!" The younger sat in a corner, listening and did not understand what that could mean. "They always say: I get goose bumps! I get goose bumps! I is not: this will also be an art of which I understand nothing." One day his father told him: "Listen, you in that corner it will become big and strong, and it is time you learned to earn your bread. See how your brother is being done; but with you it is wasted effort. " - "Yes, father," he replied, "I want to learn something, and indeed, if it were possible, I'd like to learn how to make me goose bumps; this does not know anything." The elder brother smiled when and thought to himself ': "My God, how stupid is my brother, never did pull through anything. A good day starts in the morning." His father snorted and replied, "The creeps will learn to have it, but with this you do not earn your bread." A short time later he came to visit them the sacristan; and the father bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learned nothing. "Just think, when I asked him how he wanted to earn his bread, he actually wanted to learn to get goose bumps!" - "Oh!" replied the sexton, "they can learn from me; affidatemelo, the sgrosserò." The father was happy because he thought that the young man would put judgment. So if the clerk took it home and he had to play him the bells. A couple of days later I woke up at midnight, ordered him to get up, to go up the tower and play. "You will learn what the creeps!" and he thought, to make him a scare, preceded him in secret, and stood before the crack of the door: the young man had to believe he was a ghost. These quietly climbed up on top of the bell, and when it was over he saw a figure in the crack. "Who is there?" he shouted, but the figure did not answer No, he moves. Then he said: "What do you want here at night? Go away or I'll throw you down." The sexton thought, "will not that evil intentions," fell silent and stood still. The boy called to him for the third time, and as that was also no answer, took a running start and jumped off the ghost who broke his legs and neck. He rang the bells and then, soon after, came down and went back to sleep without saying a word. The sacristan's wife waited a long time husband, but he did not come. Eventually you uneasy, and wakened the young man and said, "You do not know where my husband is? And 'climbed to the tower before thou." - "No," he replied the boy, "but there was by the sounding hole, and since I was going and he did not answer me, I threw it down. Go see if it's him." The woman ran, full of fear, and found her husband lying on the ground, morto.Allora went screaming from the boy's father woke him up and said, "Ah, what a disaster caused your bum! He knocked my husband from the bell tower, and now lies dead in the cemetery. " The father became frightened, ran to the boy and told him, scolded: "These wickedness must avertele inspired by the Devil!" - "Oh, father!" he replied, "I am innocent: he sat there at night, as one who has bad intentions. I did not know who he was and Did I asked three times because, no he's gone?" - "Ah," said the father, "you have nothing but unhappiness, get out of the way, I do not want to see you again." - "Yes father, willingly, wait only until it day and I'll go, and I will learn what it is to have goose bumps, understand one art which will give me food." - "Learn what you like," said the father, "for me does the same. Here's fifty crowns, grab them and get out of my sight; and do not tell anyone where you come from and who your father is, because I am ashamed of you." - "Yes father, as you want; if you do not ask for more, I can easily keep it in mind." At daybreak, the young man pocketed his fifty shields and went on the high road saying to himself ': "Ah, if I could but shudder! If I could but shudder! " He caught a man who heard this speech; When they had gone a little way and were in sight of the gallows, he said to the boy: "See, that's the tree where seven men have married the daughter of funaio: sit down there and wait till night comes, and you'll see that What is the goose bumps. " - "If it's all here," he said the young man, "it is easily done; if I learn so quickly what the creeps, you will have my fifty crowns: come back to me early tomorrow morning." The young man went to the gallows, he sat down and waited in the evening. As he was cold, he lit a fire; but at midnight the wind blew so cold that he could not get warm despite the heat. When the wind knocked the hanged men against each other, and they swing up and down, he thought: "You frosts here by the fire, who knows which ones have cold up there! And as we flounder!" And because he was good-hearted, he leaned the ladder to the gallows, went up, took them one by one, and brought down all seven. Then stirred the fire, he blew on it, and we them all round it to warm themselves. But they were sitting without moving and the fire caught their clothes. Then he said: "Be careful, otherwise you will hang you up again." But the dead do not hear, silent, and let it burn in their rags. On this he grew angry and said: "If you do not want to pay attention, I can not help I do not want to burn with you." And he hung up them one after another. Then he sat by the fire and fell asleep. The next morning was the man who wanted the fifty shields and said, "You have learned what the creeps?" - "No," he replied. "How could I learn it? Those fellows up there did not open their mouths, and they are so stupid as to let it burn the few old rags on their backs." The man saw that that day could not get the fifty shields, went away and said, "I've never come across a similar type." The young man went on his way and began to mutter to himself ': "Ah, if I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!" The heard a carter who was walking behind him and asked, "Who are you?" - "I do not know," he replied the youth. The wagoner asked, "Where are you from?" - "I do not know." - "Who is your father?" - "I can not say it." - "What you are muttering between your teeth?" - "Ah," the young man replied, "I would come get me goose bumps, but no one can teach." - "Stop talking nonsense," said the Carter. "Come with me, I'll find a job." The youth went with the wagoner, and in the evening came to an inn where they wanted to spend the night. Upon entering, he said aloud: "If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!" The host who heard this, laughed and said, "If that is your desire, here would be a great opportunity!" - "Oh shut up!" said the landlady. "Too many inquisitive persons have already lost their lives. It would be a shame if such beautiful eyes as these should never see the light of day!" But the young man said: "Although it is difficult, I will learn it again: I left home for this." He let the landlord until the latter told him that not far from there was a haunted castle where any one could very easily learn what had goose bumps, provided that he would but watch three nights. To those who had such courage, the king had promised his daughter in marriage, the most beautiful girl that existed in the world. In the castle they were also hidden the fabulous treasures guarded by spirits, and would become the property of those who had passed the test. Already many men had gone into the castle, but none had come out. The next morning, the young man went to the king and said, "If it were possible I would watch three nights in the haunted castle." The king looked at him and since he liked it he said: "Thou mayest ask for three things to take with you to the castle, but they must be things without life." Then he answered: "I ask for a fire, a lathe, and a cutting cabinetmaker with his knife." The King had these things carried into the castle during dusk the day the young man went in, he lit a fire in a room there stood beside the bench cabinetmaker with the knife, and sat on the lathe. "Ah, if I could but shudder!" he said. "But I do not learn it here either. "Towards midnight he was poke the fire, while he was blowing it, something cried suddenly from one corner," Au, meow! how cold we are! "-" idiots, "he said," why, you cry? If you are cold, come, sit by the fire and warm. "As he said this, two big cats blacks came up with a start and sat down at the sides looked savagely with their fiery eyes. After a while, when you were heated, they said: "Comrade, shall we play cards?" - "Yes," he replied, "but show me your paws." then they stretched out their claws "Oh," he said, "what long nails you have! Wait, I must first cut "Li then grabbed by the collar, put them on the bench and their feet fast." I have kept an eye on, "he said," and I passed the desire to play cards. "Li killed and jumped into the water them. but he had made away with these two, and was about to sit by the fire, when they emerged from all over dogs and cats blacks, hot chains, and they were many, many that he did not know where plunging. they shouted terribly, and got on his fire, they pulled the embers and they wanted to shut it down. For a while 'watched quietly, but when they were going in, he seized the knife, he shouted: "Let's stop, rogue!" and jumped on them . Some ran away, the others he killed, and threw them into the pond. As he returned, rekindled the fire by blowing on the embers and warmed. and while he was sitting so, he realized that he could no longer keep my eyes open and he wanted to sleep. Then gu Ardo's around, he saw a large bed in the corner and we went to bed. But as he wanted to close his eyes, the bed began to move by himself and went for a walk around the castle. "Very well," said the young man, "even faster!" Then the bed rolled up and down thresholds and stairs, as if it were drawn by six horses; suddenly hop, hop, he turned over upside down, and he threw it in the air remained addosso.Allora blankets and pillows, got out and said: "Now go for a walk who wants to do!" He lays by the fire, and slept till day. In the morning the king came and when he saw him lying on the ground thought it was dead and that the evil spirits had killed him. Then he said: "What a pity! Such a beautiful boy!" The youth heard it, got up and said: "We are not there yet!" The king was astonished, but very glad, and asked how it had gone. "Very well," he said, "the first night is over, and also pass the other two!" When he returned from the publican, these made-eyed and said, "I never expected to see you again alive; you've finally learned what the creeps?" - "No," the young man replied, "I do not know, if only someone would tell me!" The second night went back to the old castle, sat down by the fire and said, "If I could but shudder! " About midnight he heard a noise and bustle, softly at first, then louder and louder; then a brief silence, finally, half man fell screaming from the chimney and fell before him. "Hey there!" cried he, "another half, so it is too little." Then the uproar began again, there was a roaring and howling, and the other half fell down. "Wait," he said, "I want attizzarti a little 'fire." When he had finished and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together and a horrible man was sitting in his place. "I did not mean to say this," said the young man, "the bench is mine." The man wanted to push, but the young man did not let him, pushed him away forcefully and seated himself again in his place. Then they fell down other men who had nine legs and two skulls, and set them up and played skittles. The youth also wanted to play and said "Hark you, can I play too?" - "Yes, if you have money." - "The money I have enough," replied, "but your balls are not quite round." Then he took the skulls and put them on the lathe and rounded them. "Now they will roll better!" She said. "Hey there, now we'll have fun!" He played and missed a bit 'of money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his eyes. He lay down and fell asleep peacefully. The next morning the King came to inquire: "How you got this time?" he asked. "I played skittles" he said, "and I lost some money." - "Do not you come up with goose bumps?" - "not at all," he said, "I have made merry; if you only knew what the creeps!" The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly, "If I could but shudder! " Late at night, six tall men came in and brought a coffin. Then he said: "Ah, ah, it is certainly my little cousin who died a few days ago." He motioned with his finger and shouted: "Come, little cousin, come!" They placed the coffin on the ground, but he came and took the lid off inside was dead. She touched his face, but it was cold as ice. "Wait," he said, "I want to warm up a bit '." He went to the fire and warmed his hand and put it on the face, but the dead man remained cold. Then he pulled it out, sat down before the fire, took him on his knees and rubbed her arms to warm him, But since even this did no good, he had an idea: "If two are in bed together, they warm. " She took him to bed, covered him and lay down beside. After a while, 'even the dead was warm and began to move. Then the youth said, "See, little cousin, if I had not warmed thee?" But the dead man answered and said: "Now will I strangle thee." - "Thing?" he said. "And 'this is my reward? Go back well in your coffin!" Him up, he threw him inside and closed the lid: the six men returned and took him away. "I do not want to become the goose bumps," he said, "here not ever learn." Then came a man who was bigger than all the others, and looked terrible; but he was old and had a long white beard. "Oh you, dwarf, soon you learn what the creeps because you must die." - "Not so fast!" he replied. "To die I have to be there too." The man said, "I'll get you!" - "Plan, do not give you many tunes, they are as strong as you, and maybe even more." - "We shall see," said the old man, "if you're stronger than me, I will let you go, come, we try." By dark passages led him to a forge, took an ax, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground. "I can do better," said the young man, and went across the anvil; The old man placed himself next to see, with dangling white beard. The young man then grabbed the ax, with a blow split open a rock and I clamped in the beard of the old. "Now I have him!" the boy said. "Now it's your turn to die." He grabbed an iron bar and beat the old man until they whimpered and begged him to stop, and he would give him great riches. The youth drew out the ax and let the old man led him back to the castle and showed him in a cellar three gold chests full. "Of these," he said, "is a part of the poor, the other for the king, the third is yours." At that moment he struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the young man was left in darkness. "I'll be fine too," he said; groping found the path that led him to his room, where he fell asleep by the fire. The next morning the king came and said, "Now you will have learned what the creeps!" - "No," he replied, "what can it be? It 'been here my cousin died and came a bearded old man who showed me a lot of money down below, but what is the goose bumps not taught me nobody." The king said: "You have loosed the spell of the castle and marry my daughter." - "All this is fine, but I still do not know what the creeps." The gold was brought up and the wedding was celebrated, but the young king, although he loved his wife and was happy with her, she always said: "If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!" The bride ended coll'infastidirsi. Then her maid said, "he'll do it: learn what the creeps!" He went out and did fill a bucket gobies. At night, while the young king was sleeping, his wife took the blanket and threw him full of cold water bucket with gobies, so that the little fish darted around. Then he woke up and cried: "Oh, you goose skin, which goose bumps, my! Yes wife, now I know what the creeps."
Rumpelstiltskin	523	500	Italian	There was once a miller who was poor, but he had a beautiful daughter. One day he happened to talk to the king and said: "I have a daughter who can spin straw into gold." The king, who liked the gold, it pleased, and ordered that the miller's daughter was conducted before lui.La led him into a room full of straw, gave her a spinning wheel and a reel, and said, "If at all the night, until dawn, do not spun this straw to gold thou shalt die. " Then the door was shut and she was alone. The poor miller's daughter stood there not knowing how to save, because she had no idea how to spin straw into gold; his fear grew so much that he ended up going to cry. Suddenly the door opened and in came a little man who said, "Good evening, Miss miller, why are you crying so much?" "Ah," he said the girl, "I have to spin straw into gold, and are not capable of!" He told the man: "What do you give me if I spin it?" - "My necklace," said the girl. The little man took the necklace, sat down in front of the wheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr pulled the wire three times, and time was full. Then he introduced another and frr, frr, frr, pulled the wire three times and also the second time was full; this went on until the morning: and when all the straw was spun, and all the bobbins were full of oro.Quando the king went to see, he marveled and was very happy, but his heart became even more greedy. So he brought the miller's daughter in a much larger room filled with straw, which this time had to be spun in one night if she valued her life. The girl did not know which way to turn and wept; but suddenly the door opened and the little man appeared and said: "I if I spin the straw into gold?" "The ring from my finger," answered the girl. The little man took the ring, the wheel began to buzz, and in the morning all the straw was spun into glistening gold. At the sight of the king he went into raptures but not yet satisfied, he brought the miller's daughter in a third room even larger than before, filled with straw, and said, "You'll have to spin this too straw by tonight; if you succeed you will be my bride. " In fact he thought that anywhere else would find such a rich woman. When the girl was alone, he returned for the third time the man and said, "What do you give me if I spin the straw this time?" - "I have nothing left," said the girl. "Then promise me," said the little man, "when you are queen, to give me your first child." - "Who knows how it will end!" thought the miller's daughter, and, moreover, when pressed, he did not know what else to do, so little man granted his promise that, once again, the spun straw into gold. When the morning came the king and found that everything had been done according to his wishes, he married her; and the beautiful miller's wife became regina.Dopo a year she gave birth to a baby boy, and did not remember no more of the day he came suddenly into the room to reclaim what had been promised. The queen was terrified and offered him all the riches of the kingdom if he would only leave the child; but the little man said, "No, something alive is dearer to me than all the treasures of the world." Then the queen began to weep and complain, so much so that the little man took pity and said, "I leave you three days: if you can find my name, so you can keep the baby." The queen spent the night trying to recall all the names she had ever heard, and sent a messenger through the land to ask far and wide for all the names you could find. The following day, when it was the little man, she began with Caspar, Melchior and Balthasar and said throughout a long string of names, but each time the little man said, "is not my name." On the second day, she sent to ask his name people around the little man and the most unusual and strange names such as: Star Of Bethlehem, leg of mutton, whale bone. But he always answered: "not my name." On the third day he returned the messenger and told: "New names have not been able to find, but at the foot of a great mountain, at the turn of the forest, where the fox and the hare say good night, I saw a little house, and before the house burned a fire around which danced a little man all the more funny, screaming, hopping on one leg, "Today fo the bread, beer tomorrow, and the best for mee having the day after the son of re.Nessun knows, and this is the superfine, that I harbor the name Rumpelstiltskin! "on hearing these words, the queen was delighted and a little later when the little man came in and said to her," Then, queen, my name? "she asked from the beginning:" is your name Conrad? "-" No. "-" Your name is Henry? "-" No. "-" is your name perhaps Rumpelstiltskin? "" did he he said the devil, the devil told you that! "cried the little man; and the anger in stomped the ground right foot so hard that it went to the waist, then he seized it with ni the left foot and was torn.
