Allerleirauh	624	510B	German	Once there was a king who had a wife with golden hair, and she was so nice to peers that did not find on earth more. It so happened that she was sick, and when she soon felt that she would die, she called the King and said: "If you want to marry you again after my death, so take any which is not as beautiful as I am , and not those hair has, as I have, you have to promise me! " After it had promised the king, she did eyes and starb.Der King could not be comforted long time and did not think to take a second wife. Length his councilors said, "There is no other way, the king must marry again, that we have a queen." Now messengers were sent about far and wide to seek a bride who equaled the late Queen in beauty. But it was not to be found in the world, and yet if they would have been found, it was not there, the same golden hair would have had. So the messengers thing came back heim.Nun the king had a daughter who was just as beautiful as her dead mother, and had the same golden hair. When she grew up, she saw the king once and saw that she was like his late wife, and suddenly felt a violent love for her. Then he said to his advisers, "I will marry my daughter, for she is the counterpart of my late wife, otherwise I can find no bride who resembles her." When the councilors heard that, they were troubled, saying: "God has forbidden that a father to marry his daughter from sin no good can arise, and the kingdom is drawn to destruction." The daughter was still more shocked when she heard the decision of her father, but hoped to turn him from his purpose. Then she said to him, "Before I fulfill your wish, I have only three dresses have: one as golden as the sun, one as silvery as the moon, and one as bright as the stars; also I wish for a mantle of a thousand fur and incense assembled, and each animal in your kingdom must give to a piece of his skin. " but they thought: to create is quite impossible, and thus I bring my father from his wicked intentions from. But the king did not let down, and the cleverest maidens in his kingdom had to weave the three dresses, one as golden as the sun, one as silvery as the moon, and one as bright as the stars, and his hunters had all animals throughout the empire collect and remove them a piece of their skin; it was a mantle of a thousand incense made. Finally, when everything was ready, the king left fetch his coat, it spread out before her and said: "Tomorrow will be the wedding" Now when the king's daughter saw that all hope was to convert her father's heart, she took to escape the decision. At night, while everyone was asleep, she got up and took three things from her treasures: a gold ring, a golden spinning wheel and a golden reel; The three dresses of the sun, moon and stars she put into a nutshell, put on his coat of all kinds of fur, and blackened her face and hands with soot black. Then they said a prayer and went away and went all night until they came to a large forest. And because she was tired, she sat down in a hollow tree and fell asleep ein.Die sun rose, and she slept on and was still sleeping when it was full day. Since it came to pass that the king, whom this forest belonged, was hunting in it. When his dogs came to the tree, they sniffed, and ran barking round about it. The King said to the huntsmen, "Just see what's hidden there for a game itself." The huntsmen obeyed his order, and came back when she, said, "In the hollow tree is a strange creature, as we have never before seen one; at his skin is a thousand fur, but it is sleeping." The king said, "To See if you can catch it alive, and then fasten it to the car and take with it." When the hunters laid hold of the girl, she awoke in terror and cried to them, "I am a poor child, deserted by father and mother, you pity me, and take me with you!" And they said. Allerleirauh, you're good for the kitchen, come with us, and you can sweep up the ashes "So they put her in the car and drove home to the royal palace, where she showed her a closet under the stairs. where no daylight entered, and said, ". Hairy animal, there canst thou live and sleep," Then it was sent to the kitchen, and there she carried wood and water, swept the hearth, plucked the fowls, belas the vegetables', returned the . ash and did all the dirty Arbeit.Da lived Allerleirauh long time quite poor Oh, you beautiful princess, how about you yet but it happened once that a feast was held in the palace, and she said to the cook, "May I go upstairs for a and watch? I want to externally introduce the door "The cook answered." Yeah, just go, but in half an hour you need to be back here and sweep the hearth "Then she took her oil-lamp, went into her den, put the! fur coat and washed the soot off her face and hands, so that her full beauty back to the day came. Then she made the nut, and took out her dress which shone like the sun. and how that was done, she went up to the feast, and all went out of her way, for no one knew her, and thought no otherwise than that it was a king's daughter. the king came to meet her, extended his hand and danced with her, and thought in his heart.. So beautiful my eyes have never yet seen was when the dance ended, she curtsied, and when the King looked round again she had vanished, and no one knew where the guards who stood outside the palace were called and questioned, but no one had seen .They had run into her little den, had quickly pulled her dress, made her face and hands black again, put the fur coat and was back Allerleirauh. When she came into the kitchen and go to her work and sweep up the ashes, the cook said, "Leave that alone till morning, and make me the soup for the king, I also once a little peep above, but let fall into me no hair, or you'll in the future nothing to eat! " Then the cook went away, and Allerleirauh made the soup for the king, and made bread soup and the best she could, and how it was done, it took in the little stable, his gold ring and put it in the bowl, into which served the soup was. When the dance was over, the king left his soup brought and ate it, and liked it so much that he thought he had never tasted better. But when he got to the bottom, he saw a golden ring lying, and could not understand how it could have got. Then he ordered the cook to appear before him. The cook was terrified when he heard the order, and said to Allerleirauh: "Certainly you let a hair fall into the soup, if it's true, you get hits" When he came before the king, asked who had made the soup. The cook replied: "I have cooked them." The king said, "That is not true, because she was in a different way and much better cooked than usual." he replied: "I must confess that I have not cooked, but the hairy animal." The king said. "Go and let it come up" came as Allerleirauh the king asked, "Who are you?" - "I am a poor child who has no father or mother more." he asked, "Why are you in my castle?" She answered, "I'm good for nothing but to be thrown at my head the boots." he asked, "Where did you get the ring, whose height was in the soup?" She answered: "From the ring I know nothing." So the king could learn nothing, and had it again fortschicken.Über a time was another hard since asked Allerleirauh the cook to be allowed as vorigesmal for permission to watch. he replied: "Yes, but come in half an hour again and make the King the bread soup which he likes so much." Then she ran into her den, washed herself quickly, and took from the nut the dress which was silver as the moon, and put it on. And she went up and was like a princess, and the King came to meet her and was pleased that he saw her again, and because the dance just beginning they danced together. But when was the dance ended, she disappeared so quickly that the king could not observe where she went. but she jumped into her den and made herself a hairy animal, and went into the kitchen to cook the bread soup. When the cook was upstairs, she fetched the Golden Spinning Wheel and put it in the bowl so that the soup covered it. Then it was brought to the king, who ate it, and liked it as much as before, and had the cook brought, who also had time to confess that Allerleirauh the soup had cooked. Allerleirauh again came before the king, but she answered that she would only serve that you would be thrown to the head, the boots and that they did nothing wüssteAls the king for the third hired a celebration of the golden spinning wheel, as there was no other way as the previous times. The cook said, "You're a witch, hairy animal, and always do what is in the soup which makes it so good and tastes better king than what I cook." But because she begged so hard, he let her go up at the appointed time. Now put on the dress which shone like the stars, and thus entered the hall. The king danced with the beautiful maiden, and thought that she never yet had been so beautiful. And while he danced, he put her without her noticing, a gold ring on his finger and had ordered that the dance should last a very long. When it was over, he wanted to hold hands, but she broke free and jumped so quickly through the crowd that she disappeared before his eyes. They ran as fast as she could into her den beneath the stairs because they had remained too long and about half an hour, so she could not take off the beautiful dress, but only threw the coat of fur about and made in haste they are not quite sooty but one finger remained white. Allerleirauh ran into the kitchen cooked the king the bread soup and wondered how the cook was away, the golden reel into it. The king, when he found the reel at the bottom, call let Allerleirauh because he saw the white finger and saw the ring which he had put on it during the dance. Since he took her hand and held her, and when she wanted to free herself and run away, her mantle of fur opened a little, and the star-dress shone forth. The king took the mantle and tore it off. Then her golden hair shone forth, and she stood there in full splendor, and could no longer hide herself. And when she had washed her face soot and ashes, she was more beautiful than you nor anyone has seen on earth. And the king said, "You are my dear bride, and we never divorced from each other!" Then the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happily until their death.
Anne Lingemann	8973	60	German	One day reaped the spider Anansi delicious and tasty vegetables in her garden. She prepared it with care in the oven, so it smelled delicious. She could not wait to sit down at the table and eat. There was a knock at the door. It was the tortoise, who had been out all day and therefore was very tired and hungry. "Hello, Anansi," said the tortoise. "I've been traveling a long time. Since I got the smell of delicious vegetables in the nose that I have ever smelled. Would you be kind enough to share the food with me?" Anansi could not refuse because it is in their country the custom commanded at mealtime take the meals with visitors. But she was not particularly pleased, because Anansi was pretty greedy and wanted all the delicious vegetables for themselves. She thought for a while and finally forged a plan. "Come in, turtle. It to me is an honor that you're evening my guest today. Take a chair and sit down. Help yourself! The turtle came in and sat down, but when she was about to cost of the vegetable, called Anansi: "turtle, do not you know that it does not belong, to come up with dirty hands at the table?" the turtle looked at her hands and saw that they were dirty She had been traveling all day and had not. had the opportunity to wash. she got up and went to the river to wash his feet. she went all the way back to the house, slowly like all turtles, and came back when she, Anansi had already begun to eat. "I did not want this delicious vegetable is getting cold, so I had ever start," Anansi said. "But please, sit down to me now, turtle. The turtle sat down again and reached for the vegetables, but again called Anansi "! Turtle, you have not listened to me It's rude to sit down at the table with dirty hands" She looked down at himself and saw that her clean hands had become dirty again, as they had crawled on them to return to the house of the spider. So she went down to the river to wash again. This time, she took care of the way back up and ran on the land, so remained clean their hands. But when she came back and sat down at the table, Anansi had already down to the last bite eaten the delicious vegetables. The turtle looked Anansi for a moment and then said, ".. Thank you for sharing your meal with me, if you're anywhere near my house, let me return the favor" Then they slowly left the house and went their Ways. The days went by and Anansi thought more and more to the meal that the turtle had offered her. grew their interest in a free dinner, and finally she could stand it no longer. So she set out one day on the way to visit the house of the turtle. She found the turtle on the banks of a river, where it just at dinner time sunbathing took. The turtle looked up, saw the spider and said, "Hello, Anansi, you're come to have dinner with me?" "Oh, yes yes!" said Anansi, who was hungrier by the minute. The turtle dove under water to her house to meet around the table for dinner. A little later she came back to the bank and said, "Your place is decorated and the food is ready, Follow me, Anansi.." She dipped and began to eat slowly. Anansi jumped into the water, but she could not get to the bottom of the river. She tried to swim to the bottom, but she was so light that it rose each time back to the surface. She tried to swim to dive and on the back. She tried to run, but to no avail, she did not get to the bottom of the river. In the meantime the tortoise ate their food slowly. Anansi did not want to miss the free meal. She ran on the banks up and down, wondering what she should do. Finally, she had an idea. She collected stones and rocks and stuffed them in her jacket pocket. When she jumped into the water, she sank to the ground and was able to at the table of the turtle take place. The table was festively set and full of delights. Anansi could not believe that so many delicious dishes were served before her. She could not wait to start eating it. But just as she took the first bite to his mouth, the turtle stopped eating and said, "In my country we do not retain table our jacket." Said Anansi that the turtle had taken off her jacket before she sat down , Anansi began to take off his jacket, but once they had pulled it off his shoulders, it rose again to the surface. She stuck her head into the water and watched as the turtle calmly delicious feast enjoyed.
To travel	1364	1696	German	There was once a poor woman who had a son, who much wished to travel. Then the mother said, "How can you travel We have no money at which you can take with you?". Then the son said, "I'll give me, I will always say: Not much, not much, not much!" There he was a good time and always said, "Not much, not much" Came he said to some fishermen and "God speed you Not much, not much, not much!" - "What do you say, guy, not much?" And when they pulled the Fischergarn (network), they had not caught much fish. One of them fell then with a stick on the youth and said, "Now you will look at your thrashing see!" and thrashed him miserable. "What should I say?" the boy asked. "You shall say: Get it full, full!" Then he went back for a while and said, "Get it full, full," until he came to the gallows, where just a poor sinner should be addressed. He said: "Good morning, get it full, get it full." - "What do you say, guy, get it full Should there be bad people in the world even more Is not that enough???" And he again got some on his back on it. "What should I say?" - "Thou must say, God have pity on the poor soul." The boy went back a while and said, "God have pity on the poor soul." So he came to a ditch, there was a slave driver (Skinner), who moved a horse from the skin. The boy said, "Good morning, God comfort the poor soul!" - "What are you saying, silly fellow?" said the knacker and hit him with his slave-hook on the ear that he could not see out of his eyes. "What else should I say?" - "You shall say, 'There lies the carrion in the pit" He went on and kept saying: "there lies the carrion in the pit there lies the carrion in the pit!" Then he came to a cart full of people, and said, "Good morning, there lies the carrion in the pit!" Since the car to fall into a ditch, the driver took his whip and cracked it upon her the boy so that he had to crawl back to his mother. And he's never gone all his life traveling again.
Bluebeard	1983	312	German	In a forest lived a man who had three sons and a beautiful daughter. Once, a golden carriage with six horses and a lot of servants approached, stopped in front of the house quiet, and a king got out and asked the man, he would give him his daughter in marriage. The man was happy that his daughter happened to such happiness, and immediately said yes; it was nothing to complain about even on the free, than that he had a very blue beard, so you got a little scare, it often looked at him. The girl was frightened and initially before and was afraid to marry him, but on her father's coaxing it agreed last one. But because there are so felt a fear, it went first to his three brothers, took her alone and said, "Brothers, if you hear me screaming, wherever you are, let everything stand and lie and come to my aid." The promised his brothers and kissed it. "Farewell, dear sister, when we hear your voice, we jump on our horses and will soon be with you." Then she sat down in the car to the Bluebeard and continued with him. How did it come to his castle, everything was gorgeous, and what the queen just wish that happened, and they would have been quite happy if they only had the blue beard of the king can get used to, but every time she saw the, frightened them inside it. After some time granted, he said, "I have a long journey to make because you have the key to the whole castle, you can unlock all out and see everything except the chamber, which includes this little golden key, I forbid you; you close on, so your life is forfeited. " She took the keys, promised to obey him, and when he was gone, she closed one after the doors and saw so much riches and glories that she said, from all over the world if they were brought together here. There was now nothing left but the forbidden chamber, the key was of gold, as they thought, in this the Allerkostbarste may be closed; curiosity began to plague her, and she had not seen all the others prefer if they only knew what was in it. For a while she resisted the desire, but at last it was this so powerful that they took the key and went to the chamber, "Who will see it that I open it," she said to herself, "I want even a glance put in. " Since unlocked it, and saw the door open, her Schwomm a current blood counter, and on the walls around she saw hanging dead women, and some only the skeletons were left. She was frightened so hard that she slammed the door again, but the key here jumped out and fell into the blood. She quickly picked it up and tried to wipe the blood, but it was free when on the wiped it one side, it came on the change back to light; she sat all day back and rubbed it and tried everything possible, but it did not, the bloodstains were not to bring down; Finally in the evening they put him in hay, which should take off the blood at night. On the following day Bluebeard came back, and the first was that he demanded the keys from her; her heart beat, she brought the change and hoped he would not notice that the gold was missing. He counted them all, and when he was finished, he said: "Where is the secret to the chamber?" He looked her in the face. She was blood red and replied, "He is at the top, I have laid him, and tomorrow I will look for him." - "Go rather just, dear wife, I'm going to need it today." - "Oh, I want to tell you's, I lost it in the hay, because I have to look first." - "You have it not lost," Bluebeard said angrily, "you have put him there, so that the blood stains are to pull out, because you have transgressed my commandment and have been in the chamber, but now you shall bring it, if you do not want." Since they had to get the key that was still blood stains. "Now prepare yourself to death, thou shalt die today," said the blue beard, took his great knife and led them to the house EHRN. "Let me do just before my death my prayer," she said. "So, go but ecause you, because I have no time to wait long." She ran up the stairs and shouted as loud as she could, out the window, "Brethren, my brethren, coming together with me!" The brothers were sitting in the forest in cool wine, as saying the youngest: "I feel as if I had heard of our sister's voice; we need to come to her aid!" As they jumped on their horses and rode as if they were a whirlwind. but her sister was in fear on his knees; since the Bluebeard shouted down: "Well, you will soon be ready?" Here, she heard he was sharpening his knife at the lowest level; she looked out, but she saw nothing but distance from a dust, as were a herd drawn. She cried again: "Brothers, my dear brothers come together with me!" And over their fear was greater. but the Bluebeard shouted, "If you do not come soon, so I'll get you, my knife is whetted!" As she looked out and saw her three brothers ride through the field, when they were flying like birds in the air as they shouted for the third time in the greatest need and with all his might: "Brothers, my dear brothers come together with me! " And the youngest was so close that she heard his voice: "Be comforted, dear sister, for a moment, we are with you!" but the Bluebeard shouted, "Now prayed's enough, I do not want to wait any longer, you do not come, so I'll get you!" - "Oh, only for my three beloved brothers let me pray." but he did not hear the stairs came up gone and pulled them down, and even he had taken her by the hair and wanted her poking a knife into the heart because beating the three brothers to the front door, broke in and tore it from his hand, then they drew their swords, and cut him down. And when he was in the blood chamber hung with the other women he killed, but the brothers took their dearest sister home, and all the riches of Bluebeard's hers.
Bluebeard	3846	312	German	There was once a knight who owned many houses in the city and many castles in the country, and silver and gold plate and furniture very precious embroidery and gold-plated bodies and box full of money - but he also had a blue beard, and that gave to him so repulsive appearance that women and girls suffer neither him nor see mochten.Eine its neighbors, a noble but poor lady who had two beautiful daughters. He campaigned with her, leaving it to the mother, who would both give it to him. but you want both of them know nothing about this game, and wanted him the other aufreden because no could decide to marry a man with a blue beard. it had something deterrent also that Bluebeard been married several times and that no one knew what had become of his previous wives. It was that in any case a suspicious Umstand.Blaubart but knew the women and the means to twist their heads. He invited the mother and daughters together with some of her friends and several young men on one of his palaces, where you talked to most pleasantly by eight days. As it walked up and funny; nothing but picnics, balls, meals, board games, teasing, this well-mounted gifts to the girls and to the parent and to the friends that the sisters are more influential hatten.Kurz, after eight days was the younger sister that the beard their host only bluish, and that he himself was not blue on the whole, a very gallant knights and highly acceptable husband. A few weeks after this merrymaking was Hochzeit.Nach during the honey moon Bluebeard told his wife: "I have to make a longer trip to a very important matter that will probably separate me six weeks of you, my angel, and my young happiness. Grieve not therefore too much; on the contrary, may bring your girlfriends and talk in my absence as well as possible. Here I give you the keys to my inventory and treasuries, because what's mine, is yours, and unlock and you holds sway with it at will. This key leads to the hall of the gold and silver utensils, you do not need every day, that of the master key that opens every door to my coffers full of gold and silver, this, and this one is at the boxes in which I keep my diamonds. As for this little tiny key, it leads into the little room at the end of the great gallery. You go everywhere, wherever it pleases you, open all doors as you want, but I forbid you most strictly to enter that little cabinet. Should you encounter yet that you open it, then know that you've got to expect the most terrible of my anger. "She promised and swore to observe its regulations on conscientious. He tenderly embraced her, got on his horse and rode off. The neighbors, gossips and girlfriends did not wait until you pick it up. No sooner had Bluebeard ridden than they already brought came, curious as they were to see all the riches and glories of the young woman while she had not yet dared to visit them, for fear of the blue beard. There they ran with curiosity through rooms and little room, through halls and Sälchen and treasuries and could not admire it enough, and some envied the happy Blaubärtin. These tapestries, these sofas, armchairs, this, this designed tables - it was all rich beyond description and beautiful, each one Kabinettchen Green Vault. The most beautiful but the big mirror with the magnificent setting where the ugliest woman rooms looked lovely were. They were all intoxicated by the beautiful things, and some regretted that not many least those blue beards in the world gab.Am the envied, the woman talked with all the of the house itself. She was distracted, she could not expected to descend into the galleries and open the small cabinet. Curiosity consumed them, and in the end they could not stand it any longer, left unartigerweise their society and slipped over the hidden spiral staircase down so fast that she was two or three times in danger of breaking his neck. It was only at the door of the small cabinet, she came somewhat to his senses and wondered whether it was lawful to leave the prohibitions of her husband so much ignored, and if you do not etwelches from their disobedience misfortune grown könne.Sie remembered the face, the Bluebeard had made when he enjoined her not to open the cabinet, and she shuddered. But the temptation was too great. She could not resist - and she held the little tiny key in her hand, and she had already, though trembling, the door geöffnet.Zuerst she saw nothing, nothing at all, because the windows were closed. After a few minutes she saw that the floor was covered with clotted blood and were in the room dead women. These were the women who Bluebeard married earlier and he all, one after the other had killed. She was half dead with fright, and the little key, which she pulled out of the castle., Fell from her Händen.Nachdem they caught up, she lifted the little key on, closed the door and ran to her room to gather and to recover their terror. But that did you not succeed, so very scared and excited sie.Da she was noticed that the little key was stained with blood, she wiped it two and three times, but the blood would not go away. She liked it so much to wash and rub with sand and pumice, the blood stain still remained, for the key was a magic key, there was no use. And if the blood stain disappeared at one point, he came to Vorschein.Blaubart returned the same evening of the trip and told us that he brought through letters he received on the way learned that the journey superfluous, and again in another that his affairs were organized in the best way. His wife did everything possible to make him believe her over his early return delighted sei.Am following morning he demanded the keys back. They gave him, but that he easily guessed with so badly trembling hands, what had happened. "How come," he asked, "that the little key to the Cabinet missing here?" "I'll put it well on top of the table . who are let "" do not forget to bring it to me immediately, "said Blaubart.Sie ​​pushed it several times, but in the end she had the key because herbeibringen.Blaubart but looked at him and then said," How does blood on this key ? "" I do not know, "replied the poor woman, pale as death." you do not know, "cried Blue beard," I but know I! You wanted the Cabinet! Well, you should your will have, you're going to get into this cabinet and will take your place next to the ladies that you see there had the pleasure. "She threw herself at his feet, wept and begged forgiveness and grace with all Act of contrition. She cried, as you can imagine, in vain, for Bluebeard had a heart of stone. "You must die," he said acted, "and indeed the same." "If I must die," she said shaking with tears voice , "so I let only so much time to my prayers do to '' I grant you half a quarter of an hour and not a minute" When he left her alone, she called her sister and said to this:.. "sister Anna, I ask you to climb up the tower as high as you can and see if does not come my brothers. They have announced on today to visit, and if you see them coming, they make a sign that they hurry up. "Sister Anna climbed to the tower as high as she could, and the poor afflicted cried from time to time up to her "Anna, sister Anna see, you get nothing," and sister Anne answered: "All I see is the sun that shines, and the green grass that sparkles" Meanwhile stood Bluebeard, with a large knife in his hand, below. and called all his might to his wife; ! "Come quickly down, or I get up" "One moment," replied his wife, and then she called softly, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anything coming," And sister Anne answered: "I can only see the sun shimmering, and the green grass that sparkles "" So do come, "cried Blue beard," or I ascend '' I'm coming, "answered his wife, she cried:".! Anna, sister Anna, you look nothing coming? "" I see, "replied sister Anne," a great dust that rises from that side. "" is it my brothers? "" Oh no, my sister, it is a flock of sheep. "" Do not you want ? finally come. "cried Bluebeard" one more minute, 'said his wife, then she called: "Anna, sister Anna, do you see anything coming" "I see," replied sister Anne, "I see two knights from that side? come, but they are still very far, "And a moment later she cried." Thank God, there are the brothers. I make them, as far as I can sign that they hurry. Shouted "Bluebeard and now cried so much that the house was shaking. The poor woman went down, threw himself at his feet, wept and wailed very terrible and wringing her hands. "That leads" to anything, said Blue Beard, "You must die!" Then he grabbed with one hand in her hair, with the others he swung his big knife to cut off her head. The poor woman turned to him, looked at him with dying eyes, and even asked for a moment to collect himself. "No! No! Commend your soul to God in the best way! "He shouted, raising his arm ... At this moment it struck so violently on the door that Bluebeard started. They immediately opened. Two knights with drawn swords entered and rushed straight to Blaubart.Er recognized his wife's brothers and wanted to go up and away, but the brothers followed him on foot, caught him before he was of the house, he pushed the sword right through the body and it stretched out dead. The poor woman who was almost as dead as her husband, had barely enough strength to rise and her brothers had to begrüßen.Blaubart no relatives, and so the whole inheritance was his wife. A portion of their immense fortune she gave her sister Anna and married them with an excellent young man who has long loved. Another part she left her brothers, who were the very well need as soldiers, and the rest took them to a solid man, she forgot to its side in prosperity the difficult hours of their short marriage with Bluebeard.
little brother and little sister	106	450	German	Brother took his sister by the hand and said: "Since the mother is dead, we have no good days stepmother beats us every day, and when we come to her, she pushes us away with her feet the hard crusts of bread.. that remain are our food, and the dogs under the table feeling better, which she often throws it a choice morsel. that God have mercy on him, if the knew our mother! Come, let us go together into the wide world! " They walked the whole day over meadows, fields and stones, and if it rained the sister said: "God and our hearts are weeping together!" In the evening they came to a large forest and were so weary with sorrow and hunger and the long road that they sat down in a hollow tree and einschliefen.Am morning, when they awoke, the sun was already high in the sky and seemed hot in the tree inside. Then the brother said, "Sister, I thirst, if I knew of a little brook, I go and drink!; I mean, I hear one rushing." Brother got up and took the little sister by the hand, and to find the brook. The evil stepmother but was a witch, and had seen how the two children had gone away, had crept after them secretly, as witches creep, and had all the fountains cursed in the forest. When she found a little brook that so glitzerig jumped over the stones, the brother was going to drink from it. But the sister heard how it said as noise, "Who drinks of me will be a tiger who drinks of me a tiger is." - Then the sister cried, "I beg you, little brother, do not drink, or you will become a wild animal and zerreissest me!" The brother did not drink, whether it was the same as big thirsty, but said, "I will wait for the next spring." When they came to the next brook the sister heard how this also say: "Who drinks of me will be a wolf, who drinks of me will be a wolf." "Brother I beg you, do not drink, or you will become a wolf and eat me!" Then the sister cried - The brother did not drink, and said, "I will wait until we come to the next spring, but then I must drink, you may say what you want, my thirst is too great." And when they came to the third brook the sister heard how it said in the noise: "Everyone who drinks of me will be a deer, who drinks of me will be a deer." The sister said, "Oh brother, I beg you, do not drink, or you will become a roebuck, and run away from me." But the brother had knelt once by the brook, stooped and drunk of the water and as the first drops touched his lips he lay there in a Rehkälbchen.Nun cried the little sister over her poor bewitched brother, and the fawn wept and sat so sad beside him. Since last the girl said, "Be quiet, dear little roe, yes I will never leave you." It untied her golden garter, did the fawn's neck, and she plucked rushes and wove them into a soft cord. This she tied to the little animal and led it on and went deeper and deeper into the forest. And were gone when she long long, they came at last to a little house, and the girl looked into it, and because it was empty, she thought: We can stay here and live. Since it was looking for the little roe leaves and moss to make a soft bed, and every morning she went out and gathered roots, berries and nuts, and the fawn it brought tender grass, ate it out of his hand, was content and played in front of it around. In the evening, when the sister was tired and his prayer had said, put his head on the back of the Rehkälbchens that was her pillow, softly on it. And would only have had his human form little brother, it would be a wonderful life gewesen.Das took a while, that they were so alone in the wilderness. But it came to pass that the king of the country held a great hunt in the forest. Since the blowing of horns, barking dogs and the merry shouts of the huntsmen rang through the trees and the deer heard it and would not have been too happy here. "Oh!" saying it to the sister, "let me stand off to the hunt, I can do it no longer anymore!" and begged until she agreed. "But," said she to him, "come to me so again in the evening, before the wild hunters I close my little door, and I know you, so knock and say, 'My little sister, let me in!' And if you do not say that, I shall not open the little door. " Now the fawn sprang out, and he felt so well and was so merry in the open air. The king and his huntsmen saw the beautiful animal and started after him, but she could not catch it and if they thought they had it certainly, as it jumped away over the bushes and disappeared. When it was dark he ran to the cottage, knocked, and said, "My little sister, let me in!" Since it was the little door on done, he jumped in, and rested all night on his soft bed. The next day the hunt went again, and when the fawn heard the hunting horn and the "Ho, Ho!" the hunter, because it had no peace, but said, "Sister, I open the door, I must go out." His sister opened the door for him and said, "But the evening you must be here again and your little speech saying," saw as the king and his hunters the fawn with the golden collar again, they chased him all after, but it was too quickly and nimbly. This lasted all day, but at last it had the hunters surrounded him, and one of them wounded him a little in the foot, so it had to halt and ran slowly. As a hunter slipped by to the cottage and heard him, how he said: "My little sister, let me in!" and saw that the door to him was done on, and was shut again. The hunter kept the all this carefully, went to the king and told him what he had seen and heard. Then the king said: "Tomorrow will hunt once more!" The little sister but was terribly frightened when she saw that her fawn was wounded. She washed the blood off him, laid herbs on and said, "Go to your bed, dear roe, that you may get well again." But the wound was so slight that the fawn in the morning no more of that feeling. And when they heard out again hunting pleasure, she said, "I can not stand, do I have to be, as soon I will get none!" The little sister wept and said: "Now they will kill you, and I am alone here in the forest and forsaken by all the world I will not let you out.." - "Then I shall die here with longing," answered the fawn, "when I hear the hunting horn, so I mean, I have to 'jump out of!" Then the sister could not help him and closed the door with a heavy heart, and the fawn sprang healthy and happy in the forest. When the king saw him, he said to his huntsmen, "Now chase him all day until late at night, but none that it does any harm!" Once the sun had set, the king said to the huntsman, "Now come and show me the cottage in the wood!" And when he was in front of the little door, he knocked and called out, "Little sister, let me in!" As the door opened, and the king came in, and there was a girl who was as beautiful as he had seen one yet. The girl was frightened when she saw that not deer, but a man come in who wore a golden crown on his head. But the King looked kindly at her, shook his hand and said, "Will you go with me to my palace and be my dear wife?" - "Oh yes," replied the girl, "but the fawn must also with that I do not leave." The King said: "It will stay with you as long as you live, and shall lack nothing to him." By came bounding in, as it tied the sister back to the cord of rushes, took it into their own hands and went with him out of the little house fort.Der king took the beautiful maiden on his horse and carried her to his castle, where the wedding with great splendor was celebrated, and it was now the queen, and they lived happily together for a long time; the fawn was cherished and jumped in the lock garden around. The evil stepmother but, on account of which the children were entered into the world that did not mean other than little sister would be of the wild animals in the forest torn and been shot dead brother as a fawn from the hunters. And when they heard that they were so happy and well off so as envy and resentment were brisk in her heart and left her no peace, and she had no other thought than how to bring the two still to disaster , Her own daughter, who was ugly as night had only one eye, complained to her, saying: "To become a queen, never had the chance to me." - "Just be quiet," said the old woman, to satisfy her, "when the time comes, I will soon be at hand." Now when the time had moved and the queen a beautiful little boy had brought to the world and the King was out hunting, the old witch took the shape of the bedchamber woman, and went into the room where the Queen lay, and said to her, ". Come, the bath is ready, that will do you well and give you fresh strength Geschwind, it is always cold!" Her daughter was also at hand, they carried the sick Queen into the bath-room and put them in the tub, then she closed the door and ran away. But in the bath room they had made a great fire that the beautiful young queen soon suffocated musste.Als that was done the old woman took her daughter, put a cap on her and put her to bed at the Queen spot. She gave her too the shape and appearance of the Queen; only the lost eye she could not play her. Make it but did not notice the king, she had to lie down on the side where she had no eye. In the evening when he came home and heard that a little son was born to him, he rejoiced heartily, and wanted to go to the bed of his dear wife and see what she was doing. Then the old woman cried hastily, "certainly, the curtains let's, the Queen may not see the light yet and have peace must!" The king went back and did not know that but a false queen in bed lag.Als it was midnight, when all slept, because saw the nurse, who was sitting and even woke up in the nursery by the cradle alone as the door opened and the right Queen came in. She took the child out of the cradle, laid it on her arm and gave him a drink. Then she shook out its little pillow, put it back in and covered it with the coverlet. but they did not forget the roebuck, but went into the corner where it lay, and stroked his back. Then she went in perfect silence out at the door, and the nurse next morning asked the watchmen whether anyone had come into the castle during the night. But they answered: "No, we have not seen anyone." So she came many nights and never spoke a single word here; the nurse always saw her, but she did not dare someone to sagen.Als now some time had passed some of it, as the queen began to speak in the night and said, "What does my child my roe? now I come twice and then no more. " The nurse did not answer her, but he was gone when she, she went to the king and told him everything. The king said, "Oh God What is it I want to watch the next night at the child!". In the evening he went to the nursery, and at midnight the queen again appeared and said, "My child my fawn Now I come once and then never again?". And she nursed the child as she was wont to do before she disappeared. The king did not dare to speak to her, but he watched again the following night. Again she said, "What does my child my fawn Now time I come, then never more?". the king because could not hold back, jumped to her and said, "You can not be anyone other than my dear wife!" She replied, "Yes, I'm your wife," and again had received in that moment, by the grace of God's life, became fresh, rosy and healthy. Then she told the King the snare that the wicked witch and her daughter had committed against her. Both the king let justice run, and to them it was the sentence spoken. The daughter was taken into the forest, where they tore the wild animals, the witch but was cast into the fire and had to burn miserably. And how she was burned to ashes, the roebuck changed and received his human form again; Sister and brother lived happily together ever after.
corvetto	3394	328	German	The audience were so amazed at the intelligent behavior Belluccias that they felt so much joy in their finite marriage as if it had been her own daughter; However, the desire made to hear Ciulla that they interrupted the Antonella donated applause and pricked up their ears even at the movement of her lips, which she began thus: I have certainly heard even say that Juno to the lie seek after Crete went; if me but someone asked where fraud and adjustment were to be found, so I knew to call no other place where the backbiting always go dressed as a jester who slander as buffoons, the betrayal as Pickelhering and playfulness as buffoon than the courts, and where is cut and sewn at the same time, wounded and healing, breaks and glues; which I will ask you just a small little sample in the following narrative. It was once in the service of the king of Breitenfluß a very brave young man who loved the account of his excellent conduct of his master highly, but for that very reason hated by all courtiers of the heart and was detested as it is considered bats malice daily splendor of Corvetto virtues could not look at who is praiseworthy with the cash coin conduct the favors bought his master. Thus was the zephyr of shown him by the king benevolence for the fury of envy bursting a true sirocco so that it at every hour and in every corner of the palace did nothing else than that they grumbled about poor Corvetto, murmured, whispering , hissed, zuraunten, saying: "What has this done to Hans Papp the king that these so probably wants him for a spell? How is he coming to the happiness that hardly a day goes by where he does not receive a new Gunstbezeigung? Because we always go back only as Seiler, come to our circumstances just always go back and serve but also as faithful as dogs, sweating like the day laborers and chase as the fallow deer, to meet the wishes of the king to the hair. Surely, you must have only a little bit of luck; for he that has just always falls on his feet! But what to do? We can only see and be silent, and we should break it! "- These and similar words flew from the bow of their mouth and adjusted poisoned arrows, whose aim was the destruction Corvetto. - Alas, who is condemned to the hell of the courtyards where flattery bushel sold malter be attributed malice and bad services and deception and betrayal are hundredweight balanced. Who could therefore say how much leg irons of deceit they put him to make him fall? How much soap falsehood to einschmierte the head of the royal ears so he shut rush and break your neck? Who can count the mines of deceit, which were dug in the king's heart, and sought the traps friendly zeal, in which one to get him? Corvetto but that was immune and tricks saw realized the whistles, perceiving the snares and the lists, attacks, pitfalls, intrigues and snares of his enemies became aware, always the eyes not a misstep kept a stiff upper lip and wide open to do because he knew that the happiness of courtiers is made of glass. But the higher he climbed, the deeper and faster fell the others, so that they end up not knowing how they should, him out of the way because their slanders were no faith, came up with the idea of ​​him with praises to plunge into an abyss (an art that has been invented in hell and perfected at the courts), and although they tried to reach their intention in the following manner. Ten miles of Scotland namely, the residence woselbst that king was, lived a wild man, the fiercest and most horrible of all who ever came from the land of wild men who pursued the king, ended up on top of a mountain in a forest had that was so dense that even not even the birds nested in it and not even by leaving the tightly tangled branches a single view of the sun. This wild man now had a beautiful horse that looked like painted and many other excellent qualities and the gift of speech had because it could speak through a special magic as well as a human being. Now that the courtiers knew how horrible the wild man, how terrible the forest, how high the mountain and how great the difficulty of obtaining the horse was, she came one day before the king, gave him an accurate portrayal of the perfections of the animal and added that his property would probably be fit for a king and he should therefore seek every possible way to snatch it the clutches of the wild man, and that Corvetto able would most likely there to kidnap him, because he would be very articulate and understand it to lure the dog from the oven. The king, who had no idea that was hidden among the flowers of these words a snake Corvetto had once before come up and said to him: "If you love me any, see to it that you give me the horse of the wild man, my enemy , verschaffst to one or the other way; for it is certainly not regret it, to have done me this service. "Corvetto now realized, although quite good, from which evil Loche this wind whistled, but made nevertheless to the king to obey, on the way to the mountains, crept quite secretly into the stall of the wild man who saddled the horse, jumped up, and with your feet firmly in the stirrups, he made his way back. As the horse, however, saw spur from the palace, it exclaimed: "Hallo, holla! Corvetto carry me away! "At which cry of the wild man with all the beasts that served him forth rushed to tear him to pieces. Although Corvetto, left looked right come from a werewolf behind by as a monkey, and from there a Silberbär a lion, he still chasing that spurs the horse hard in the ribs pushing down the hill, and by verhängtem on and on with hurried back reins to the city, he arrived happily in the palace of the king. Once he handed him the horse, he embraced this as his son, took his bag and filled Corvetto hands with bare thaler, so that the embers of resentment of the courtiers got new furnace, and if it has been previously blown through Handbälge, they blazed now as fanned high by Schmiedebälge by seeing that the perils through which they intended to destroy Corvetto happiness, only served to pave the path of his prosperity. However, knowing that the oak does not fall on the first blow, they wanted to try again and said to the king: "We congratulate you most heartily for the beautiful horses that will be truly the glory of the royal stables; only we wish that you could get the room wallpaper wild man; because they are something indescribably Magnificent, and your name would be all through their ownership in the mouth. But no one else can multiply your wealth by this treasure as Corvetto, it all has gone particularly to carry out such things. "The king who danced how to whistle him, and bitter of these, but candied fruit was eating only the shell, Corvetto was again in front of him come and asked him to give him the room wallpaper wild man. Without answering a word to Corvetto two, three went into one, the hill of the wild man, crept unseen into his bedroom, hid under the bed and waited there, without stirring, until the night to the stars laugh to make heaven anrußt the face black, after which he, after the wild man had lain down with his wife, as quietly possible increased as the wallpaper from the walls, and he even wanted the duvet with continued mausen, this gently throughout pull started. Here, however, the wild man About awoke and told his wife that she should not drag so much because they blanket him all so that he could easily catch cold. "What cuckoo," said the woman, "you cover me yes, and I'm already quite naked." - "Where hell is the ceiling" Now the wild man, and as he put his hand out of bed, took it Corvetto straight so that he began to cry once in the face: "the goblin, the goblin! Heda, lights, quick! "And the house was in an uproar with all this noise. was corvetto had but now the wallpaper down the drain, they jumped and ran, they quickly summarize, posthaste back to town, where he by the King with such demonstrations of joy overwhelmed, that neither these can think nor the anger of the courtiers which almost burst with vexation. Nevertheless, they took pounce with the rear-guard of mischief over Corvetto the plan, and so again came before the king, who was almost mad with joy at the wallpaper, because they were not only worked on silk and decorated with gold embroidery, but also still had woven a thousand ingenious ideas and thoughts, for example, if I remember correctly, a rooster, who wanted to raise his voice at the sight of the dawn even, with a motto in Tuscan language: "Sol ch 'io te miri" (sun, if only I) see you; Furthermore, a withered sunflower with an equally Tuscan headline: "Al calar del sole" (when the sun goes down), and also so many other things that a completely different memory and much more time would be needed than mine, enumerate everything. By now, I say, the courtiers encountered the king full of joy and gladness, they said to him: "There Corvetto already so great has run out of love for, it would now be a little thing to be when he to you a very special service to prove you gave possession of the palace of the wild man who is of the kind that even an emperor could live in it; because it contains so many wings and chambers that he would be able to take an army, and you can not begin to imagine that there courtyards, halls, arcades, gazebos, odorless latrines and tube fireplaces are created with such great architecture that art is proud of him, nature is ashamed and the wonder is taken to the extreme. "the King, whose imagination was very receptive and quickly became pregnant, turn left Corvetto call and told him a whim what to the palace of the wild man him would have taken, and that he also would like to add this to so many services that he rendered him; because he would write it with the chalk of gratitude on the blackboard of memory. Corvetto now that at every opportunity immediately began fire and a thing did not let hot twice, once took his legs over the hump. In the palace of the wild man Touching, he found that his wife had been delivered of a cute wild little man, he had self-perpetuating go to invite his cousins, while the new mother, got out of bed, bustling with activity all institutions to feast met , Therefore, once Corvetto entered the palace, he said to her: "Bless you God, brave woman, you are a capable landlady; why your plagues you because but very much from? Yesterday was only your child, and already you're working so much on the matter, without any pity for yourself? "-" What shall I do, "replied the woman," if there is no one who can help me! "-" I'm here, "said Corvetto," and you want to stand with all our strength. "-" so me are many times welcome, "said the woman," and since you so kindly offer your services to me, so I help these two sticks split. "-" Very much, "Corvetto said," and if these few pieces are not enough, I split more "and as he grabbed a freshly polished ax, he cut instead, into the wood, the wild woman on the head. so that they straightway fell to the ground, then immediately ran to the entrance of the palace, made a deep, deep hole, and having it covered with branches and earth, he was watching behind the gates until it arrive the wild man with the cousins saw where he began to call within the court: "hold on there, I Use will you have fallen! Long live the King of Breitenfluß "heard as the wild man this challenge, he ran together with the other obsessively going on Corvetto to make him a stew; However, by blindly ran under the porch of the gate, they fell one and all in the pit. Once they were now fallen down and Corvetto had transformed by throwing stones into a porridge, he locked the door of the palace and took the keys to the king, who now after having completely met the zeal, courage and wisdom Corvetto, despite its low Herkommens, so that in this way the barriers of resentment for Corvetto had become rolling to the annoyance of envy and to the chagrin of the courtiers, gave him his daughter in marriage, on which he could leave the ship of his life in the sea of ​​happiness of stacking, while his enemies, quite ashamed and rage almost bursting, had to withdraw with a long nose, because: Although Des evil punishment hesitates at times, but will last you ever befall him ..
the blue light	1106	562	German	There once was a soldier who had served the king faithfully for many years: but when the war was over and the soldiers, because of the many wounds he had received, could not serve the king said to him 'you can home go, I do not need you anymore: money you do not get on, because only receives wages that my services will make it. ' Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living, went away sorrowfully and went all day until the evening he entered a forest. When darkness came, he saw a light, which he went up and came to a house wherein lived a witch. 'Give me one night's lodging and a little food and drink' he said to her, 'I shall starve.' 'Oho!' she answered, "who gives a run-away soldier? but I will have mercy, and take you if you do what I ask. ' 'What do you want ?, asked the soldier. 'That you should dig all round my garden for me tomorrow.' The soldier consented, and next day labored with all his strength, but could not be finished before evening. "I see well" said the witch, "that you do not continue to do today: I want to keep you one more night, for which you must tomorrow chop me and make small a load of wood. ' The soldier spent the whole day and in the evening the witch gave him the suggestion to stay another night. 'Thou shalt me ​​tomorrow little work to do behind my house is an old dry well into which I dropped my light, it burns blue, and never goes out, you shall bring it back to me.' The next day brought him the Old to the well, and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light, and made a sign that she should go up it again. They also pulled him into the air, but when he was near the edge, she handed down her hand and wanted to take the blue light it. 'No,' he said, perceiving her evil intention, "the light I can not give you more, until I am standing on the ground with both feet. ' The witch fell into a rage, let him back down into the well to fall and went fort.Der poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue light went on burning, but what was it that help? He saw clearly that he would not escape death. He sat for a while very sad, because he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which was still half full. 'This shall be my last pleasure, "thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke. served as the steam inside the cave went about, suddenly a little black dwarf stood before him and said, 'Sir, what you command ?,' What did I tell you about ?, replied the soldier, quite astonished. 'I have to do everything' said the little man, 'what you ask.' 'Well,' said the soldier, 'so I help first from the well.' The little man took him by the hand and led him through an underground passage, but did not forget to take the blue light. go there showed him the treasures which had brought together the witch and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said to the little man, "Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before the judge. ' Not long before she came on a wild cat with a terrible cry like the wind riding past, and it once again did not take long before the little man back, 'it's all done, "said he," and the witch is already hanging on the gallows - Lord, what further commands ?, asked the little man. 'At the moment none, "answered the soldier," you can go home, only be at hand, when I call you.' 'Nothing more is needed "said the dwarf,' as you light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear before you. ' Thereupon he vanished from his Augen.Der soldier returned to the city from which he had come. He went to the best inn and had himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord furnish him a room as grand as possible. When it was done, and the soldier had taken it, he called the black dwarf and said, "I have served the king faithfully, but he sent me away and let me go hungry, but I will take revenge now. ' 'What should I do?' asked the little man. 'Late at night, when the King's daughter is in, they bring sleeping here, she shall do servant's work for me.' The male said, "to me that's an easy, for you but a dangerous thing, if it is discovered, it will go ill with you. ' When it had struck twelve, the door sprang open, and the male was in the princess. 'Aha, are you there?' cried the soldier, "to work! Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber. " When she was done, he bade them come to his chair, stretched out her feet meet her and said, "Pull off my boots, 'she threw her then in the face, and she had to pick, make clean and shiny. but she did everything he bade her, without opposition, silently and with half-closed eyes. In the first cock crowed, the mannikin carried her to the royal palace and in her bed zurück.Am next morning, got up as the princess she went to her father and told him she had a strange dream, I was in the streets carried away with lightning speed and put a soldier in the room, which I had to come up like a servant and all common work to do, sweep his room, clean his boots. It was just a dream, and yet I'm as tired as if I really had done everything. ' "The dream may have been true," said the king, 'I will give you some advice, thy pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in your pocket, you're going away again, they will fall out and leave a track in the street . ' When the king spoke, the male was invisible there and heard everything on. At night, when it carried the sleeping princess again through the streets, some peas fell out of his pocket, but they could not make track, for the crafty males had previously scattered in all streets peas. But the king's daughter had to go to Hahn servant's tun.Der king sent the following morning his people out to seek the track, but it was in vain, for in every street poor children were reading peas sat up and said, 'it has today night peas raining. ' 'We must think of something else, "said the king;" keep your shoes on when you lay down to bed, and before you return from there, hide one of them I will find him. ' The black dwarf heard this plot, and when the soldier asked evening, him to bring the princess again, it advised him and said to counteract this stratagem would know no way and if the shoe were found in him, it could be bad him fare. 'Do what I tell you, "replied the soldier, and the king's daughter also had the third night as a maid working; But she hid before she went away, a shoe under the Bett.Am morning let the king across the city his daughter's shoe searching he was found at the soldier and the soldier himself, who at the request of the little ones to the gate had also made was soon caught and sent to prison. He had forgotten his best to escape, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in his pocket. As he loaded with chains was standing at the window of his prison, he saw pass by one of his comrades. He knocked on the window, and when he came up, he said, "Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have in the inn leave, I'll give you a ducat. ' His comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone again, he lighted his pipe and let the black dwarf come. 'Have no fear,' it said to his master, 'Go wheresoever they take you, and let everything pass, only the blue light take with.' The next day there was judgment of the soldiers kept, and although he had done nothing wrong, the judge sentenced him to death. When he was led forth, he asked the king for one last favor. 'What a?' asked the king. 'That I may smoke one more pipe on my way.' 'You can smoke three, "answered the king,' but do not think that I will give you life. ' Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lit it at the blue light, and like a few wreaths had risen from the smoke, the mannikin was there with a small cudgel in his hand, and said, "What does my Lord ?, 'strike me because the false judges and their henchmen to the ground, and spare not the King who has treated me so bad. ' Since the male drove like lightning, darting this way and that, and from whom much as touched by his cudgel fell to earth, and did not dare to more rain. The King was terrified, he lay down on begging, and to retain only the life he gave the soldiers the kingdom and his daughter in marriage.
the peasant	587	1535	German	It was a village, it sat really rich peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little (peasant). He did not even have a cow and even less money to buy one, and he and his wife were so wish to have. One day he said to her: "Listen, I have a good idea, there is our gossip the carpenter, he shall make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, it looks like another, over time it will certainly get big and be a cow . " The woman also liked the idea, and timbered of gossip the carpenter cut and planed manage the calf, it underlined how sichs belonged, and made it so that its head hanging down, the next morning were expelled as devour es.Wie the cows, called the peasant the pastor and spoke in, "Look, I have a little calf, but it is still small and has yet taken." The shepherd said, "All right," took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture and it turned into the grass. The little calf always remained standing like one that eats, and the shepherd said, "This will soon run alone, just look what it eats already!" At night when he wanted to drive the herd home again, he said to the calf, "Can you stand there and eat your fill, so you can go on your four legs, I do not like you home hauling back on the arm." The peasant stood but outside the front door and waited for his little calf. And when the cowherd drove through the village and lacked the calf, he asked for it. The shepherd replied, "That is still out there and eats, it would not stop and come with us." But peasant said, "Eh, what do I have my cattle again have." Then they went to the meadow back, but one had stolen the calf, and it was gone. Said the shepherd: "It will have to run well." But the little peasant said, "I do not like that!" and led the shepherds before the Schultheiss, who condemned him for his carelessness, he had the peasant for the escaped calf a cow geben.Nun had the peasant and his wife, the long desired cow; they were glad of heart, but they had no food, and could give it nothing to eat, so they had to be slaughtered soon. The meat salted them, and the peasant went into the city and wanted to sell fur there to order for a result a new calf. On the way he came to a mill, there sat a raven with broken wings, he took out of pity and wrapped him in the head. but because the weather was so bad, and wind and rain burst, he could not continue, returned to the mill and begged for shelter. The miller's wife was alone in the house and said to the peasant, "Lay thyself on the straw," and gave him a cheese sandwich. The peasant ass and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman thought. "The tired and falls asleep" Meantime came the parson, the miller's wife received him well, and said, "My husband is out, so we will have a feast." The peasant listened, and had heard about feasting, was vexed that it should have to make do with bread and cheese. But it happened the woman brought and carried on four things, wanted to roast, salad, cake and Wein.Wie them to sit down and eat, there was a knock out. The woman said, "Oh God, that's my husband!" She quickly hid the roast inside the tiled stove, the wine under the pillow, the salad on the bed, the cakes under the bed, and the parson in the cupboard in the entrance. Then she opened the man and said: "Thank God, you're here again This is a weather as if the world were coming to!" The miller saw the peasant lying on the litter and asked, "What is that fellow there?" - "Oh," the woman said, "the poor knave came in the storm and rain, and begged for shelter, so I gave him a cheese sandwich and placed him where the straw." The man said: "I do not mind, but I soon creating something to eat." The woman said, "But I have nothing but bread and cheese." - "I am satisfied with everything," the man replied, "I care with cheese bread," looked at the peasant and said, "Come and eat again with." The peasant is left not to be told twice, stood up and ass. After this the miller saw the skin lying on the ground, in which the raven was, and asked, "What do you have there?" The peasant replied, "I have a soothsayer inside." - "Can I also say true?" "Why not?" Said the miller. replied the peasant, "he says but only four things, and the fifth he keeps to himself." The miller was curious, and said. "Let him say once true" Then the peasant pinched the raven's head, that he croaked and made "krr krr". The miller said, "What did he say?" The peasant answered: "First, he said, there is some wine hidden under the pillow." - "That would be a fine thing!" cried the miller, and went there and found the wine. "Now go on," said the miller. The peasant left the ravens croak again, and said, "Secondly, he said, would be roast stove tile." - "That would be a fine thing!" cried the miller, and went there and found the roast. The peasant left the raven prophesy still more, and said, "Thirdly, he said, salad on the bed would be." - "That would be a fine thing!" cried the miller, and went there and found the salad. At last the peasant pinched the raven once again that he croaked, and said: "Fourthly, he said, would cakes under the bed." - "That would be a fine thing!" cried the miller, and went there and found the Kuchen.Nun the two sat down together at the table, the miller but was frightened to death, went to bed and took all the keys with her. The miller would have liked to know the fifth, but spoke little peasant: "First we want to eat the four things, for the fifth is something bad." So they ate, and after that they bargained how much the miller was to give for the fifth prophesy, until they agreed on three hundred dollars. Then the peasant pinched the raven once more to the head that he croaked loudly. The miller asked, "What did he say?" The peasant replied, "He said, outside in the cupboard in the entrance, because the Devil is." The miller said, "The devil must go out," and opened the front door, but the woman had to give up the keys, and peasant closed the closet. Since the Pfaff he could ran out, and the miller said, "I saw the black rascal with my own eyes. It was right" But peasant made off next morning by daybreak with the three hundred thalers from the Staub.Daheim the peasant did allgemach to built a beautiful house, and said the farmers: "The peasant was certainly where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in shovels. " And it was the little peasant called before the Schultheiss, it should say from whence his wealth came. She answered, "I sold my cow's skin in town for three hundred dollars." When the peasants heard this, they also wanted to enjoy the great advantage, ran home, killed all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in the city with the big win. The Schultheiss said, "But my servant must precede." When they came to the city to the merchant, he gave her no more than three dollars for a coat; and when the others came, he gave them not even as much, saying, "What shall I do with all these skins' Now angered the farmers that they were led by peasant tricked, wanted to take revenge on him, and accused? the fraud was led out at the Schultheiss. the innocent little peasant was unanimously sentenced to death, and should be rolled into a perforated barrel into the water. the peasant and brought a priest who was to read him a requiem Mass. the others all had to be removed, and how the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the priest, who had been with the miller's wife spake to him. ". I got you out of the closet free, set me free from the barrel" Well drove straight to the shepherd with a flock of sheep therefore, from the peasant knew that he would long since have liked to become Schultheiss, as it screamed with all his might, "no, I will not do! And when it wanted to have the whole world, no, I will not do "The shepherd hearing that came him, and asked:" What are you doing? What will not you do? "The peasant said," Because they do not want to make me Schultheiss, when I put myself in the ass, but I tus "The shepherd said." If that be all is to become Schultheiss, wanted . I equate myself in the barrel "peasant said," will you put in you, you'll also Schultheiss "the shepherd was willing, got into it, and the peasant shut the lid on it; it took the shepherd's flock for. ... and drove it away but the parson went to the and said the mass had been when they came and rolled the barrel after the water back began to roll as the barrel, the shepherd cried, "I am quite willing to be Schultheiss . "they believed no otherwise than the peasant who was saying this, and answered:" that is what we intend, but first you shall look as down, "and rolled the barrel into the water hinein.Darauf went home the farmers, and how to village came, including the peasant came along, driving a flock of sheep quietly e in and was quite satisfied. Since the peasants were astonished, saying: "The peasant, where are you from you coming out of the water?" - "Of course," replied the peasant, "I sank deep, deep, until I finally got to the bottom: I met the barrel to the ground and crawled out, and there were pretty meadows on which a number of lambs were grazing, thence I brought my flock with. " Said the peasants "are still gone?" - "Oh yes," said the peasant, "more than you need can." Since the farmers any one flock agreed that they wanted to also bring sheep; but the Schultheiss said: "I come first." They went together to the water, there were just the blue sky Flock small clouds, called the one Lämmerchen that reflected from the water, as called on the farmers: "We can already see the sheep down on the ground." The Schulz pressed forward and said, "Now I want to go down first and look around; and if things right, I'll call you." Then he jumped in, "plump" sounded in the water. They did not mean other than he was calling them to "come!" and the whole crowd plunged in in a hurry after him. Since the village was deserted, and peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.
The peasant in heaven	1599	802	German	There is even a poor pious peasant died, and arrived before the gates of heaven. At the same time, a rich, rich lord came there who also wanted to heaven. Then Saint Peter came with the key, rise up, and letting in the Lord; he has the peasant, however, as it seems not seen and therefore makes the door again. The peasant from the outside has heard how the Lord has been taken up in heaven with all joy, and how they were making music, and singing. Finally it became quiet again, and Saint Peter came, the gates of heaven makes and lets one the peasant. The peasant meant that it would also make music and sing when he arrived, but there's all been quiet; you have it certainly added with all the love and the angels are gone to meet him, but no one sang. Then the peasant asked Saint Peter, is why not sing with him just like when the rich man: if it were, seems, in heaven so partial to like on the Erde.Da said St. Peter, "But no, you're us so love like everyone else, and may distribute the heavenly pleasures enjoy like the rich Lord, but look so poor peasant as you are one, come all day in the sky so a rich man but.. here comes every hundred years, only about a "
The Willful Child	1115	779	German	There was once a child stubborn and did not do what his mother wanted. That is why God had no pleasure in it and let it get sick, and no doctor could help him, and in short time she lay on her death. And when it was lowered into her grave and the earth spread over her, so her arm came suddenly again, and stretched in the air, and if they put it in and did fresh earth over it, so it did not help, and the little arms always came back out. Since the mother had to go myself to the grave, and strike with the rod on little arms, and as she had done this, it was drawn in, and the child had rest beneath the ground.
the donkey	1373	430	German	There once lived a king and a queen who were rich and had everything they wanted, but no children. The Queen lamented day and night, and said. "I am like a field on which grows nothing" At last God gave her her wish, but when the child was born, it did not look like a man, but was a little donkey. Like mother beheld, began her lamentations and outcries only right on, she would rather have had no child as a donkey and said they should throw him into the water, so that it might devour the fish. And the king said, "No, God has given him, he shall be my son and heir, after my death sit on the royal throne, and wear the royal crown." So the donkey was raised, grew, and his ears grew him up beautifully high and straight. But it was a merry disposition, jumped about, played and had especially his desire for music, making it a famous minstrel was saying. "Teach your art, that I can almost play the lute as you" " Ah, dear little master, "answered the minstrel," that would come very hard, your fingers are not made, however, to and too large;. I afraid the strings would not last " No excuses, did the donkey, and had to play the lute, was persistent and diligent and learned to do it as good as the master himself. The young lordling went out walking and came to a well, he looked into it and saw in a mirror-clear water saw his donkey's form. Furthermore, it was so sad that it went into the wide world and took only one faithful companion. They moved up and down, at last they came to a kingdom where an old king ruled, was the only one, but beautiful daughter. The donkey said, "Here we will stay," knocked at the gate and shouted: "It's Haussen a guest who makes up, that he may enter." But was not opened, he sat down, took his lute and played it with his two front feet most delightful. Then the door-keeper opened his eyes, ran to the king and said, ". Out there sits a young donkey in front of the gate, which plays the lute as well as an experienced master" "So I let the musician come," said the King , But how a donkey came in, all began to laugh at the Lautenschläger. Now the donkey should be put down to the servants and fed, but it was much displeased, and said: "I am no common stable, I am a noble one." They said: "If this is you, then sit down with the people of war." "No," said he, "I will sit by the King." The king laughed and said good-humouredly: "Yes, so be it, as you wilt, little ass, come here to me." He then asked, "Little ass, how do you like my daughter" The donkey turned his head towards her, looked at her, nodded and said, "From the masses well, she's as beautiful as I have not seen." " well, you shall sit next her too, "said the king." this is exactly what I wish, "said the donkey, and sat down at her side, ate and drank, and knew how fine and to be neat. When the noble beast a good time at the King's court remained, she thought: What good does all this, you need to go back home, let his head hang sadly, and went to the king and asked for his dismissal. The king had but fond of saying, "Little ass, what you you look so sour as a jug of vinegar stay with me, I will give you what you ask Want Gold?.?" "No," said the donkey, and shook his head "do you want jewels and rich dress?" "No." "do you want half my kingdom?" "Oh no," the king said: "... If only I knew what could make merry you; you want my beautiful daughter in marriage? "" Oh, "said the donkey," which I would like to have good, "was at one time quite merry and happy, because that's just what it had wished. Thus was kept a great and splendid wedding. In the evening, the bride and bridegroom were led into their bed, the king wanted to know if the ass would behave well, and told a servant to hide there. As they were both within, the bridegroom bolted to the door, looked around, and he believed that they were all alone, he suddenly threw off his ass's skin, and stood there as a handsome royal youth. " now you see, "he said," who I am, and see that I was not your unworthy. " Then the bride was glad, kissed him, and loved him dearly. But when morning came, he jumped up, put his animal skin again, and no one would have thought, what kind of a behind. Soon the old king "Oh came walking." Oh, "he said," is the little ass merry? You're probably quite sad, "he said to his daughter," that you have not got a proper man for thy husband? "No , dear father, I love him as if he were the handsomest, and it wants to keep in my life. " The king was surprised, but the servant who had concealed himself came and revealed everything to him. The king said. "That can not be true" "Then watch yourself the next night, you will it with my own eyes to see, and you know what, Mr. King, him take the skin away and throw it into the fire, he must be well show his true shape. "" your advice is good, "said the King, and at night when they slept, stole it himself, and how he got to the bed he saw in the moonlight rest a proud young man there, and skin lay stretched on the ground. Then he took them away and let out a great fire lighted and throw the skin and remained by it himself until it was all burnt to ashes. but because he wanted to see how the robbed man would behave himself, he stayed awake the whole night, listening. When the youth had slept, at the first light of morning, he got up and Eselshaut wanted to put on, but it was not to be found. Since he was shocked and full of grief and anxiety: "Now I must see that I escape." As he stepped out, but the king stood there and said, "My son, where such a hurry that you have in mind Stay here, you're such a handsome man, you shall not return to me I give you now half my kingdom?. and after my death you get it all. "" So I wish that what begins so a good end, "said the youth," I will stay with you. " Then the old man gave him half the kingdom, and when he died after a year, he had the whole, and after the death of his father one more thing to it and lived in all magnificence.
The lighter	2003	562	German	A soldier came the road therefore marched: One, two! One two! He had his knapsack on his back and a sword at his side, because he had been in wars and was now returning home. There he met an old witch on the way. She was ugly, her lower lip hung down her to his chest. She said, "Good evening, Soldier What a fine sword you have and what a big knapsack You're a real soldier, Now shalt thou so much money to get what you want to have!" "Thank you, old witch!" said the soldier. "Can you see the big tree?" said the witch, pointing to a tree that stood on the side. "It's quite hollow inside, and you must climb to the top, when you see a hole through which you can slide down you and get down deep into the tree can I'm gonna tie a rope round your body, so I pull you up again! , if you call me! "" What am I going down the tree? " asked the soldier. "Get money!" said the witch. "You have to know when you arrive at the bottom of the tree, so you're in a big Gage, as it is quite light, because it burn a hundred lamps there Then you see three doors you can they unlock, inserted the key.. . fact you going into the first chamber, as you see in the middle of the floor a big box on which a dog is sitting;! he has a pair of eyes as big as teacups, but you shall not take care of you I'll give you my blue checked apron, which you can on the floor spread, then go quickly back and take the dog, put him on my apron, the box closing, and take as much money as you want; it is pure copper If you have but rather silver. want, you need into the next room type, but there sits a dog who has a pair of eyes as big as mill-wheels, but that's why you do not need to take care him sit on my apron and pick up of the money want! you, however, have gold, kan nst you also get, and that as much as you wear like when you go into the third chamber. But the dog who sits on this chest, who has two eyes, each as big as the Round Tower in Copenhagen. This is a huge dog, you can believe! But thou shalt not take care of you! Put it only on my apron, then he will not hurt you, and you may take from the chest what gold you want! "" That's not so stupid, "said the soldier." But what can I give you, you old hag ? For something you want to probably have, I think! "" No, "the witch said," I will not have a single penny! To bring me only an old lighter take that forgot my grandmother when she was the last time down! "" Well, then I put the rope around the body, "said the soldier." Here it is, "said the witch , "and here is my blue checked apron." So the soldier now climbed up the tree, let himself through the hole slide down and stood down as the witch had said, in the great hall, in which many hundred lamps brannten.Nun closed he the first door on. Uh! there sat the dog with eyes as big as teacups, staring at him. "you are me so a nice guy," said the soldier, put him on the witch's apron and took as much copper shillings, would like to go into his pockets, joined then the box, put the dog back on and went into the other room. Hei! there sat the dog with eyes as big as mill-wheels. "you should not look so long me "said the soldier," you could get eye pain! "and then sat e r the dog on the skirt of the witch. But when he saw the many silver money in the chest, he threw all the copper money away what he had and filled his pockets and his knapsack with nothing but silver. Then he went into the third chamber! No, it was awful! The dog is really had two eyes as big as the Round Tower and rolled in his head like wheels! "Good evening!" said the soldier, touching his cap, for he had never seen such a dog; but when he for a while had looked at him, he thought, now it is sufficient actually picked it up on the floor down and closed the box. No, God forbid, what was that for a lot of gold there he could buy all the sugar pigs of the cake women, the tin soldiers, whips and rocking horses in the world! Yes, there was really even have money! - Now threw the soldier all the silver shillings with which he had his pockets and his knapsack filled on, taking gold for it. Yes, all bags, knapsack, the hat and the boots were filled, so that he could hardly walk. Now he had money! "Now pull me out, old witch!" "Do you have the lighter with" the dog he sat back on the box, the door slammed shut and then called up through the tree? asked the witch. "Really!" said the soldier, "that I reinweg forget" and he went and took it. The witch pulled him up, and he was back on the road with his pockets, boots, knapsack and the cap full of money. "What do you want with the lighter?" asked the soldier. "That's nothing!" the witch said, "You have now got money, just give me the lighter!" "bells and whistles" said the soldier, "you want to say the same to me what you want with it, I will draw my sword and cut your head off!" "No!" said the Hexe.Da hit her, the soldier from the head. Now she lay there! But he tied up all his money in her apron, took it like a bundle on his back, the lighter was in his pocket and went straight into the city.The was a magnificent city and in the magnificent tavern he returned and demanded the best rooms bought it and his favorite dishes, for now he was rich because he seemed so much money hatte.Dem servant who cleaned his boots to be actually quite pathetic, old boots for such a rich gentleman, but he had no new ; The next day he bought boots with which he could be proud of, and the most beautiful dresses! Now the soldier had become a gentleman, and you told him about all the wonders that in the city, and and what was his beautiful daughter, Princess of their kings. "Where can you get them to see?" asked the soldier. "You can not get to see!" he was told that "she lives in a large copper castle, surrounded by walls and towers around No one but the King may consist - or received by it, for it is prophesied that she will marry a common soldier, and the king can not admit it. "" I want to see well! " thought the soldier, but he was able to just it permission bekommen.Nun he lived funny going on, went to the theater, drove in the king's garden, and gave to the poor lot of money, and that was well done; he knew from the old days, how bad it was not to have a shilling! Now he was rich, had fine clothes, and many friends, who all said he was a fine fellow and a real gentleman and the soldier could well suffer. But as he spent money every day and never in was something he had last no more than two shillings left, and had to leave the beautiful rooms where he had lived, move away into a little garret right up under the dragon had its own boots brush and mend them with a darning needle, and none of his friends came to him, because there were so many stairs to steigen.Es was a very dark night, and he could not even buy a light; but since he remembered that in the lighter that he had brought from the hollow tree into which the Witch had helped him down, a small candle-end had been. He took the lighter and the stump out, but just when he struck a light and flew the sparks from the stone, the door sprang open, and the dog who had eyes as big as teacups, and he down in the tree had seen, stood before him and said, "What does my Lord," "What's that!" said the soldier, "that would be a pleasant tinderbox, if I can get to what I want. Get me some money, "he said to the dog, and wupp, was the fort and returned, carrying a large bag full of money in his Maule.Nun knew the soldier, what a tinderbox that. Suggested he once, came the dog who sat on the chest of copper money, he struck twice, so was the one who had the silver money, and he struck three times, was the one who had the gold. Now put the soldier back to his elegant rooms and was accompanied in the good clothes, and since it is equal knew all his friends again; they thought so much of ihm.Da he began to think it's strange that you can not get to see the princess, you should be so beautiful. all say;.? but what can it help if they ever in the great copper castle with the many towers have to sit can I not they as get to see Where's my lighter and now he struck a light and wupp, the dog came with eyes as big as teacups. "It is certainly middle of the night, "said the soldier," but I should very much like to see the princess, but a small moment! "The dog was straight out the door and before the soldier could it, he saw it again with the princess. She sat and slept on the dog's back and was so beautiful that anyone could see that it was a real princess; The soldier could not help but kiss, because he was just a real Soldat.Der dog ran with the princess now back, but drank the morning the king and queen of tea, the Princess said she had one tonight so whimsical dream dreamed of a dog and a soldier. She had ridden on the dog, and the soldier had kissed her. "That would be a nice story!" said the Königin.Nun should be a wake up of the old ladies of the court the next night at the bedside of the princess, to see if it was really a dream, or what else had his könnte.Der soldier terrible longing the beautiful princess again, and so because the dog came in the night, took it and ran what he could, but the old maid of honor put on water boots, and ran just as fast after him. When she saw that they disappeared in a large home, she thought, now I know where it is, and painted with a piece of chalk a large cross on the door. Then she went home and lay down again, and the dog also came back with the princess; but when he saw that a large cross was painted on the door, where the soldier lived, he took a piece of chalk and made crosses on all the doors throughout the city, and that was wisely done, for now the lady could not even find the right door when came on all crosses waren.Morgens early the king and queen accompanied the lady and all the officers, to see where the princess had been. "there it is!" said the king, when he saw the first door with a cross. "No, there it is, my dear man!" . Said the queen, when she saw the second door with the Cross "But here is one, and there is another!" They all cried; where they saw crosses on the doors were. Since they had to realize that the search not help them würde.Doch the queen was a very clever woman more could go than just in the carriage. She took her large gold scissors, cut a large piece of silk into pieces and made a neat little bag; she filled with buckwheat flour, the princess tied him on the back and when that was done, she cut a small hole in the bag so that the porridge had scattered on the ground, the princess came nahm.In night now the dog again, the princess took on his back and ran with her to the soldier, who loved her so much and would love to have been a prince to her as his wife to bekommen.Der dog did not observe how the flour all the way scattered along from the castle to the windows of the soldiers, where he ran up the wall with the Princess. In the morning the king and queen found out where their daughter had been, and they took the soldiers and threw him into the Kerker.Da he sat. Oh, how dark and dull it was, and the people said to him. "Tomorrow you will be hanged" That was not very pleasant news, and his lighter he had forgotten at home at the inn. In the morning he could see, rushed like the people from the town to see him hanged by the iron bars of the little window. He heard the drums and saw the soldiers marching. All the people were out; there was also a shoemaker's boy with leather apron and slippers, who ran as a gallop that his departed a slipper and straight against the wall where the soldier peeped sass and between the iron bars. "Hey, Schuster boy! You do not need to have such a hurry. There is nothing like it before I come, but will run to where I lived and bring me my lighter you? Then you shall have four shillings, but you have to make your legs! " The shoemaker boy liked the four shillings, so he ran very fast and fetched the tinderbox, there were the soldiers, and yes, now we will hear! Outside of the city, a large gibbet had been erected. Round which stood the soldiers and many hundred thousand people. The King and Queen sat on a splendid throne, the judges and the whole rate gegenüber.Der soldier already stood on the ladder, but he wanted to put the rope around his neck as if he said that but always a poor sinner, before he suffered his punishment an innocent request was granted. He wished very much a pipe of tobacco smoke, it would be the last pipe he in this world bekäme.Das the king could not refuse, and so the soldier took his lighter and struck a light, one, two, three! and all dogs stood there, who had his eyes as big as teacups, the one with eyes as big as mill-wheels and with eyes as big as the Round Tower. "Help me now, that I may not be hanged!" said the soldier, and the dogs went to the judges and all the council going on, seized one by the legs, were his fellow by the nose and threw them far into the air so that they when dropped completely smashed to pieces. "I do not want!" said the king, but the biggest dog took both him and the queen, and threw them all others by. Then the soldiers were afraid, and all the people shouted, "Good soldier, you shall be our king, and have the beautiful princess!" Then they placed the soldier in the king's carriage, and the three dogs ran in front and cried "Hurray!" and the boys whistled through their fingers, and the soldiers presented arms. The princess came out of the copper castle, and became Queen, and she liked that excellent! The marriage lasted eight days, and the dogs sat with at the table and made big eyes.
The padlock	3386	425A	German	The endured by the poor Lisa tribulations moved the hearts of all to the deepest compassion, and some even were his eyes full of tears; because nothing excites the compassion so much to someone as innocent, see you suffer. But since now the turn of Ciommetella was further fortzuspinnen the thread, she began thus: The Council of envy has always been the father of great misfortune, because under the guise of good, he hides the face of ruin, and who the good fortune by the forelock has can hold convinced that getting a hundred others are willing to put him snares's feet and make him fall, as also learned a little girl that fell down by the evil advice of her sisters from the ladder of happiness, so that only the mercy of heaven is prevented, broke that they do not neck. Once there was a mother with three daughters who sent because of the great poverty that so caught in their home base, that is the dirt of the accident was as high piled up in a sewer, their children, in order to eke out only their lives, begging , When she one morning some thrown away by the cook of a gentleman cabbage leaves found on the street and the mother wanted to cook them at home, said this at any of the daughters that they should to get some water from the well; but since all made wry faces, and none did the right thing so that the poor mother finally said, "What do you want'm done, do myself," and was about to go with the pitcher to the well, although they little legs could get from the spot because of age; Lucia alone, the youngest of the daughters, then said: "Give it to me, dear mother; because if I'm not strong enough, so I want you so remove this trouble, "then took the pitcher and went out of the city to the fountain, which splashed up to for fear frightened of the night flower water in the face. Here now, she met a handsome Moor slave who said to her: "My beautiful child, if you want to come with me in a not distant cave, and I will give you very many nice things" to which Luciella which very friendly and obliging was answered: "Let me only this jug of water bring my mother, who is waiting for me; then I'll be right back. "Having taken so the water home, she came under the pretext of looking for some cabbage stalks, back to the well, and led by the slaves, they still expected, they passed through a with Venus hair ivy embellished grotto of tufa in an underground, beautiful lot and all of gold glittering palace, her woselbst once a magnificent plaque was prepared while now published two very beautiful and young maids that you went out the few rags she wore, she brought it in an embroidered all over with gold and pearls bed to the magnificent decorated and then after the completion of grinding, in which, after the lights were extinguished, is also someone put; and this lasted quite a few days. At last, however, Lucia wished her mother see again and told this to the Moors, who came into a room, there was talking to someone and then came back with a big bag full of gold pieces, which he handed to her for her mother, and she should not forget the way rather return soon, but even at home not tell where they have been over time. As Lucia now at hers arrived, and they saw her so beautifully dressed and richly rewarded, they would envy almost burst, so that when she returned, her mother and sisters she wanted to participate; However, she refused their company and came back through the same cave in the same palace in which they stayed again a few months until they felt the same desire and was discharged with the same words and the same gifts as before. After this had but repeated three or four times, so that their hags of sisters with envy almost consumed, these ugly harpies sniffing around as long until they all that passed by a witch with her sister, learned and, therefore, as this once again came to them, they said to her: "While you do not informed of the nature of your delights us, you must know that everything to us is precisely known, namely that you get all the night a sleeping potion and can not perceive that a very handsome youth with you sleeping. However, you'll enjoy your happiness never perfect, if you do not entschließest you to follow the advice of those who you probably want; you are after all our flesh and blood, and we wish only your pleasure and your benefits. If you go in the evening to sleep, therefore, and the Moor with the sleeping potion comes, tell him that he'll bring a towel to dry your mouth, and pour in the meantime sent the wine from the glass so that you can stay awake at night and when you see then fallen asleep your husband, so open this padlock, which spoil the magic against his will and to the summit raise your happiness. "the poor Luciella which did not know that under this saddle of velvet the withers , was among these flowers a serpent, and in this golden cup poison believed the words of the sisters and acted as if she had returned to the palace and appeared the night, just as they had welcomed those Schandpfähle what they once everything is calm and was still, with the lighter lit a light and next to the flower of beauty, a youth of loud lilies and snow saw. By now looked at this glory, she said: "Upon my word, thou shalt not me more from the hands escape," therefore opened the lock and saw immediately come out some females who wore what on their minds pretty much spun flax; since now a fell a strand of them cried Luciella which a pattern of good nature, but at the same time was also unmindful of the place in which it was located, in a loud voice that to: "Lift up the yarn on, Miss," in which! woke up screaming the boy and was so angry about the fact that Luciella had outwitted him that he immediately called the Moor, you attract the former rags again and let it run out of the palace, so that they increase with the color of a just out of the hospital dismissed the sisters returned, so what but fortjagten.Die with bad words and even schlimmem deeds poor began umherzubetteln in the world until she pregnant with a thousand times the tribulations of a town called Long tower came in the palace of the king begged for a place of refuge, if only on a little straw; so that it was actually recorded by a good-natured maid. But when was the time where they should put their body burden, she gave birth to a beautiful boy, a true gold doll, and the first night he was born, came a beautiful young man in the room and said, "Oh! Most beautiful son my, you best of my pleasures when my mother's wot 'she'd' gloat at you; to envy enveloped thee in gold, wüsch thee in gold, as if thou wert; and crowing roosters no longer Would Never 'from you, I divorce! ", according to which words he disappeared as mercury at the first crowing of the cock. By now the lady who had this regarded recur all night the boy and heard repeating the same words, she said finally the queen, who, once the sun like a doctor had dismissed all the stars from the Hospital of the sky, the cruel who issued orders to kill all the cocks that city and in this way make all hens in an instant to abandoned widows. When then the young man came back the following night, recognized the Queen, who lay in wait and perked up enormously, her own son and hugged him most heartily so that inflicted by a witch to the prince curse, which consisted should he wander away from his father's house, had been embraced until he by his mother and no cock crow, was dissolved in the moment when he was in his mother's arms, and finished his tribulations. So now the mother had a grandson and Lucia a husband as she could possibly want him to get; But the sisters, which of which that befell happiness were so outrageously in the message to visit them, the same became repayment in kind and paid them in the same coin, so that they realized to their cost: Grudge punished himself.
The house servants	1337	1940	German	"Where are you going?" - "After Walpe." - "I Walpe to you by Walpe; 'samm'n,' samm'n let's go then." "Are you also a man What is the name your man"? - "Cham." - "My husband Cham, thy man Cham: I, you Walpe according to Walpe; samm'n 'samm'n,' then we go." "Do you have a child What is the name your child"? - "Grind." - "My child Wild, thy child Wild;. My husband Cham, your man Cham; I, you Walpe according to Walpe; samm'n 'samm'n,' we go '' Do you also have a cradle What is the name your weigh? " - "Hippodeige." - "My cradle Hippodeige, your cradle Hippodeige; my child Wild, thy child Wild, my man Cham, thy man Cham; I to Walpe you to Walpe; samm'n 'samm'n,' then we go." "Have you also have a servant? What is the name your servant? " - "Machmirsrecht." - My servant Machmirsrecht thy servant Machmirsrecht; my cradle Hippodeige, your cradle Hippodeige; my child Wild, thy child Wild; my husband Cham, Cham your husband; I Walpe to you by Walpe; 'Samm'n,' samm'n let's go then. "
the shepherd boy	1452	922	German	There once was a shepherd boy, was known far and wide because of the wise answers which he gave to every question. The king of the country heard of it likewise, did not believe it and let the Buebchen come. And he said to him: "Can you give me three questions, which I will ask you to answer, I will look on thee as my own child, and you are with me in my royal palace to live." The boy said: "What are the three questions?" The king said, "The first is, how many drops of water are there in the ocean?" The shepherd boy answered, "Lord King, all the rivers on Earth let clog so that no more little drop runs from them into the sea, which I have not even counted, then I will you tell you how much drop in the ocean are." The King said: "The other question is, how many stars are in the sky?" The boy said: "Give me a wide berth white paper," and then made it to the spring so many fine points on that they were barely visible and almost too numerous to count and the eyes went, if you looked at it. Then he said: "So many stars in the sky as there are points on the paper, it only counts." But no one was able to do so. The King said: "The third question is: how many seconds of eternity?" As the shepherd boy said, "In Lower Pomerania is the Diamond Mountain is located, has one hour in the air, one hour in the width and one hour into the deep; then comes every hundred years a little bird comes and sharpens its beak on it, and when the whole mountain is worn, then the first second of eternity over, "the King said." you've answered the three questions like a wise man, and shalt henceforth with me in my royal palace to live, and I will look at you like my own child. "
The old man made young	1403	753	German	At the time when our Lord still walked this earth, he returned one night with St. Peter at a smith's and received free quarters. Then it came that a poor beggar, hard pressed by age and infirmity, came to this house and begged alms of the smith. Had compassion on Peter and said, "Lord and Master, so please thee, cure him but that he himself his bread should win the plague. ' Meek said the Lord "Smith, lend me your forge and put some coals for me, I will ailing old man at that time. ' The smith was quite willing and St. Peter blew the bellows, and sparkled when the coal fire, large and high our Lord took the little old man, pushed him in the forge in the midst of the red fire that he glowed like a rosebush, and praised God with a loud voice. After that the Lord went to the quenching tub, put the glowing little man into that the water closed over him, and after ers carefully cooled, he gave him his blessing: see, zuhand the little man jumped out, delicate, straight, healthy, and as twenty years. The blacksmith, who had just watched closely and she invited all to supper. but he had an old half-blind crooked, who went to the youth, and with great earnestness asked if he had burnt the fire. Never was better for him, replied that he had been sitting in the glow as the young man had said in a cool Tau.Was that sounded all night in the ears of the old woman, and when the Lord early in the morning the road was moved on and probably had thanked the blacksmith, said that he could make his old law also young, as it finely neat everything was viewed with and propose in his art. Called her so, whether they like a girl of eighteen in to go bounding. She said, "with all my heart, 'because it was arrived so the youth has. So the smith made great fervor and joined the old into that bog down and that, and uttered terrible cries of murder. 'Sit still, what yelling and bouncing you think I want inflate only heartily.' thus pulling the bellows again until all her Haderlumpen burned. The old woman cried without ceasing, and the smith thought 'Art is not right to,' she took out and threw her into the cooling trough. Then she screamed so loudly that it upstairs in the house, the blacksmith and listened to their line: the they both ran downstairs, and saw the old woman crying and maulend very zusammengeschnurrt in the trough are, the face wrinkled, folded and uncreated. is Thereupon the two, who were both with children so shocked that they are still very night two boys were born who were not made like men but apes, and they ran into the forest; and from them the sex of the Apes comes forth.
Clever Gretel	736	1741	German	It was a cook who was called Gretel, who wore shoes with red heels, and when she walked out with them, they turned back and forth, was very cheerful, thinking 'you're a nice girl.' And when she came home she drank, in cheerfulness a sip of wine, and as wine also makes you want to eat, she tasted the best of what she was cooking until she was satisfied, and said 'should the cook know had food schmeckt.'Es came to pass that the Lord once said to her 'Gretel, this evening a guest coming, I teach two fowls very daintily.' 'Wills already do, sir, "answered Grethel. Now the chickens, scalded them, plucked them, put them on the spit, and brought them, towards evening set them before the fire, that they might roast. The chickens began to brown and become even, but the guest had not yet arrived. Then Grethel called the Lord 'the guest does not come, so I have to do the chickens from the fire, but pity and a shame if they are not eaten directly, when they are best in the juice.' The master said 'I will run myself, and fetch the guest.' When the Lord his back had turned, Gretel laid the spit with the chickens aside and thought there are the fire so long makes' hot and thirsty, who knows when they will come! Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a sip. ' Ran down, put a pitcher, said, "God gesegnes you, Gretel, 'and did a good train. 'The wine appended to each other,' to deli on, 'and do not break good,' and even took a serious train. Then she went and placed the chickens back over the fire, she brushed with butter and drove the spit merrily round. But because the roast as good smell, Grethel thought, "it might be missing something, you have tried it be! ' it with her finger and said, "Well, what are the chicken so good! is sin and a shame that they do not eat the same! ' She ran to the window to see if the master was not coming with his guest, but she saw no one and went back to the fowls and thought 'that burns a wing, better ists, I eat it away.' So she cut it off and ate it up, and he tasted it, and how it was done, she thought, "the other must go down too, or else master will observe that something is missing. ' Like the two wings were eaten, she went and looked for her master, and did not see him. 'Who knows,' he remembered, 'well they do not come and have turned in somewhere.' As said, "Hallo, Grethel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has been cut, do another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it all is, you have peace: why should perish the good gift of God? ' So it went again into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the one chicken up in all confidence. As this was a chicken down and the Lord still did not come, saw Gretel the other and said, 'where one is, the other must also be associated two together: what the is a right, this is another cheap; I think if I were to take another draft it would do me no harm. ' So she took another hearty drink, and let the second chicken rejoin the first laufen.Wie it as the best food was, the master came and cried, 'ecause you, Gretel, the guest comes right after.' 'Yes, sir, I will soon serve up, "answered Grethel. Meantime the master looked whether the table was laid, and the big knife with which he wanted to carve the chickens took, and sharpened it on the floor. The guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the door. Gretl ran and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest, she put her finger to her mouth and said, "Shut up! quiet! makes fast that you continue coming back when you caught my lord, as you are unhappy; he certainly did ask you to dinner, but he has nothing else in mind, is to cut off both ears. Just listen how he is sharpening the knife. ' The guest heard the sharpening, and hurried he could, down the steps again. Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and said 'that you've invited a fine guest!' 'Why, why, Gretel? what do you mean by that?' "Yes," said she, "has given me the chickens which I wanted to just apply, taken from the bowl and ran away with it. ' 'That's fine way!' And the Lord said, and lamented the fine chickens, 'if he at least would have a left me so that I would have been something to eat.' He called after him, he should stay, but the guest pretended not to hear. Since he still ran after him, knife in hand, shouting 'only one! only one!' and said that the guest should leave him just one chicken, and not take both of them: the guest but did not mean other than he should give up one of his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, that he would bring them both home.
The Lambkin and the Little Fish	1345	450	German	There was once a brother and sister, who loved each other dearly. Their own mother had been dead, and they had a stepmother who was not kind to them, and gave them secretly to all suffering. It happened that the two were playing with other children on a lawn in front of the house and the meadow was a pool, which went up on one side of the house. The children ran around, made war and played at counting: 'Eneke, Beneke, lat mi liewen wants di ock min Vügelken giewen. sall Vügelken mi ostrich Soeken, serow wants giewen ick the Köseken, Köseken sall mie Melk giewen, Melk I want giewen the baker, bake baker sall mie 'n Kocken, Kocken want giewen ick the Kätken wants Kätken sall mie Müse catch Müse ick in 'un will hang n Rauck se anschnien.'Dabei they stood in a circle, and one to whom the word snow fell, run away had to, and the others ran after him and caught him. As they were running about so merrily the stepmother watched them from the window and was annoyed. But because she understood arts of witchcraft she bewitched them both, the brother into a fish and little sister into a lamb. Then the fish swam in the pond back and forth, and was sad the little lamb went on the grass back and forth, and was sad and ate and did not one blade of grass. So went a long time when strangers came as visitors to the castle. The false step-mother thought 'now the opportunity is good, "and called the cook and said to him,' Go and fetch the lamb from the meadow and kill it, we have nothing else to guests. ' Then the cook went away and got the lamb, and took it into the kitchen and tied his little feet; which suffered it patiently. As he had drawn out his knife and sharpened on the threshold to stab it, it looked a little fish in the water in front of the Goss stone back and looking up at her and swam to him. but that was the brother, for had seen when the fish as the cook take the lamb away, it was along the pond to the house. Then the lamb cried hinab'ach brother in the deep sea as sad is my heart hurt so much! the cook he whets his knife To my heart durchstechen.'Das fishes antwortete'ach sister on high, like me does my heart hurt so much in this pond! 'the cook heard that the lamb could speak to ! such sad words to the fish down cried, he was startled and thought it would be a lamb, but was haunted by the evil woman in the house. Then said he 'be quiet, I will not kill you, "and took another sheep and made it ready for the guests, and brought the lamb to a good peasant woman, who told everything he had seen and heard it. The farmer's wife was but just been the nurse to the little sister suspected at once who the lamb was, and went with him to a wise woman. As the wise woman said a blessing over the lamb and the little fish, which they regained their human form, and then led them both to a large forest in a small cottage where she lived but satisfied and happy lonely.
The Lumpengesindel	96	210	German	Chicken said to the hen, "Now is the time when our nuts are ripe, so let us go together to the mountain and we even quite enough to eat before the squirrel all away." - "Yes," replied the hen, "come, we will have some pleasure together." Then they went away to the hill, and because it was a bright day they stayed till evening. Now I do not know if they had eaten so thick, or whether they had become overconfident in short, they did not want to walk home, and the chicken had a little carriage of nut shells build. When he was ready, the little hen seated in and said to the cock, "You can just harness yourself." -.. "You're coming with me," said the cock, "I would rather go on foot to the house when I leave pretension me No, that is not our bargain coachman I want to be comfortable and sit on the box, but drag themselves . I do not do "as they were thus disputing, a duck quacked to:" You thieving folks, who bade you go to my Nussberg Wait, that shall suffer "? So went at the cock with open beak. But the cock also was not idle and the duck fell boldly on, at last wounded with his spur so great on them, and that they asked for mercy, and willingly let tension as a punishment to the chariot. Cock now seated himself on the box and was coachman, and thereupon they went off in a gallop, with "Duck, go as fast as you can!" When they were part of the way down, they met two pedestrians, a pin and a needle. They shouted "halt Stop!" and said it would be the same random dark because they could not take a step further, and it was so dirty on the road, if they could not carriage for a while, they would have been at the tailor's house by the gate, and had stayed too long over the beer. Chickens, as they were thin people who do not take up much room, she let them both get in, but they had to promise not to contact him and his chicken on its feet. Late in the evening they came to an inn, and because they did not want to continue the night the duck was not able to walk and fell from one side to the other, so they went in. The host at first made a lot of objections, his house was already full, thought also good, do not want to be distinguished reign, but at last, they brought sweet talk, he should have the egg which the little hen had laid on the road, keep the duck that one put every day, he said at last, they want to stay the night. Now they let Apply fresh again and lived the high life. Early in the morning, when it dawned and yet everyone was asleep, chicken aroused the hen, brought the egg, pecked it up, and they ate it together; but they threw the shell on the hearth. Then they went to the needle which was still asleep, she grabbed the head and put her in the chair cushion of the landlord, the pin in his towel, she finally flew away, nothing to you, over the heath. The duck who liked to sleep in the open air and had stayed in the yard, heard them going away, made herself merry and found a stream, down which she swam; and went quicker than before the car. A few hours later, the host did not get out of bed, washed himself and wanted to dry himself, as the pin went over his face and made a red streak from one ear to the other. Then he went into the kitchen and wanted to light a pipe. But when he came to the hearth, jumped him the eggshells in the eye. "This morning I want everything in my head," he said, and let himself displeased at his grandfather's chair, but he quickly started up again and cried: "Ouch!" Because the needle had worse and not stabbed him in the head. Now he was thoroughly angry, and suspected the guests who had come so late last night. And how he went and looked at them, they were gone. Then he made a vow to take no more ragamuffins into his house consumes much, pay for nothing and drives to thank the bargain jokes.
The girl without hands	297	706	German	A miller had fallen gradually into poverty and had nothing left but his mill and a large apple-tree behind. Once he had gone into the forest to fetch wood, an old man stepped up to him whom he had never seen, and said, "Why do you torture yourself with cutting wood, I will make you rich if you will promise me what behind your mill stands. ' 'What can that be but my apple tree?' thought the miller, said 'yes,' and prescribed it to the stranger. Now he laughed scornfully and said, 'after three years I will come and pick up what's mine,' and walked away. When the miller home came, he took his wife meet her and said 'tell me, miller, from whence comes this sudden wealth into our house? at once every box and chest was filled, no one brought it, and I do not know how it happened. ' He answered, "It comes from a stranger who met me in the forest, and promised me great treasures; I have promised him what stands behind the mill. the big apple tree, we can very well give it ' 'Oh, man,' said the terrified wife, "that has been the devil: the apple tree he did not mean, but our daughter, who was standing behind the mill sweeping the Hof.'Die miller's daughter was a beautiful, pious girl, and lived three years in a fear of God and without sin. And when was the time around, and the day came when they wanted to get the bad guy because washed them clean, and made with chalk a wreath around. The devil appeared quite early, but he could not come near her. Angrily, he said to the miller 'her do all the water away so they can not wash, because otherwise I have no power over them.' The miller was afraid and did not. The next morning the devil came again, but she had wept on her hands, and they were quite clean. Since he could not approach her again and furiously said to the miller, "you cut it off their hands, otherwise I can not touch her. ' The miller was shocked and answered, "How could my own child's hands cut off! ' Since he threatened the Bad and said, "Where you do not, so you are mine, and I'll pick you up myself. ' The father became alarmed, and he promised to obey him. Then he went to the girl and said, 'my child, if I do not fuck off you both hands, thus leading me the devil away, and in my terror I have promised him. Help me in my need, and forgive me what I am doing evil to you. ' She replied, "Dear father, do with me what you will, I am your child. ' Then she laid both hands and let them be cut off. The devil came for the third time, but she had wept so long and so much on the stumps, that they were quite clean. Since he had to give way and had every right to it verloren.Der Müller said to her, 'I have won so big Well you, I want life keep thee most delicately.' But she answered, "Here I can not stay, I will go forth, compassionate people I will already give as much as I need. ' Then she let her maimed arms behind his back binding, and by sunrise she set out on the way and went all day until it was night. Since she came to a royal garden, and shimmering of the moon she saw that trees were covered with beautiful fruits; but they could not get in because there was a water matter. And because she had gone all day and not a bite had enjoyed, and hunger tormented her, she thought, "Ah, I would be in it, so I ate some of the fruit, else must perish. ' As she knelt down, called on God the Lord and prayed. Suddenly an angel came that turned into a dam in the water, so that the trench was dry and could pass them. Now she went into the garden, and the angel went with her. She saw a tree with fruit that were beautiful pears, but they were all counted. Since they came and a but with the mouth from the tree to satisfy their hunger, not more ass. The gardener saw it with, but because it was the angel, he was afraid and thought the maiden was a spirit, peace, and not to call dare or to speak to the spirit. When she had eaten the pear, she was satisfied, and went and hid in the bushes. The King, whom the garden belonged, came down the next morning, as he counted and saw that one of the pears was missing, and asked the gardener what had got there they would not be under the tree, but was gone. Da 'came last night a ghost in, who had no hands and ate one from the mouth.' Replied the gardener The King said, 'How did the spirit came in over the water? and where did it go after it had eaten the pear? ' The gardener answered, someone came in snow-white garment from heaven who made a dam, and the water is inhibited, that the spirit might walk through the moat. And because there have been an angel must, so I was afraid, not asked and not called. When the spirit had eaten the pear, it went back again. ' The King said, "it is as you say, I will it was dark that night with you wachen.'Als, the King came into the garden and brought a priest with him, who was to speak to the spirit. All three sat down under the tree and watched. At midnight the girl out of the bushes crawled, walked over to the tree, and ate again with the mouth one pear off but next to her the angel stood in a white dress. Since the priest went out and said 'you came from God or from the world? Art thou a spirit or a human being? ' She answered, "I am no spirit, but an unhappy mortal deserted by all but God. ' The king said, "If you are forsaken by all the world, I will not leave you. ' He took her with him into his royal castle, and because she was so beautiful and good, he loved it from the heart, let her make silver hands and took them to his Gemahlin.Nach one year had the king over field draw, since he ordered the young queen his mother and said, "if she comes to childbirth, keep and cared for them well and writes it to me the same in a letter. ' Now, she gave birth to a beautiful son. Since it signed the old mother in a hurry and told him the good news. But the messenger rested by a brook, and as he was tired of the long road, he fell asleep. Then the devil came, which the pious Queen always seeking to injure, and exchanged the letter for another, in which was that the Queen had brought a monster into the world. When the king read the letter, he was troubled and much troubled, but he wrote in answer that they were the queen probably keep and maintain until his arrival. The messenger went back with the letter, rested at the same place and went back to sleep. Then the devil came again and put a different letter in his pocket, it was written that they should kill the queen with her child. The old mother was terribly shocked when she received the letter, could not believe it and even wrote to the king again, but she got no answer, because the devil's messenger always substituted a false letter, and in the last letter it was also, they should cried aufheben.Aber old mother to the landmark tongue and eyes of the queen that such innocent blood was to be shed, let the night take a doe, cut her tongue and eyes, and picked it up. Then she said to the Queen 'I can not have you killed as the king commands, but the longer you must not stay here. Go with your child into the world in and never come back' They tied her child on her back, and the poor woman went away with eyes full of tears. She came into a great wild forest, as she sat on her knees and prayed to God, and the angel of the Lord appeared to her and led her to a small house, which was a sign with the words 'here all dwell free.' Over the moon came a snow-white virgin, said, 'Welcome, Lady Queen, "and led her inside. As they unbound the little boy from her back and held him to her breast that he might feed, and laid him in a beautifully-made little bed. As the poor woman, "how do you know that I was a queen? ' The white maiden answered, "I am an angel sent by God, you and cater for your child. ' Since she stayed in the house for seven years and was well cared for, and by God's grace, because of her piety, her severed hands grew wieder.Der King finally came out of the field back home, and his first was that he his wife with the wanted to see the child. Then his aged mother began to cry and said, "You wicked man, why did you write me that I should take those two innocent lives? ' and showed him the two letters that had falsified the evil, and continued, "I have done as thou hast commanded, 'and she showed the tokens, the tongue and eyes. Then the king began to cry so much more bitterly for his poor wife and his little son that it excited the old mother and she said to him, "Do bear, she's still alive. I have had a doe secretly kill and took these tokens from this, but your wife I bound the child on the back, and made to feel, to go out into the world, and made her promise never to come here again because you were so angry with her. ' The king said "I will go as far as the sky is blue, and neither eat nor drink until I have my dear wife and my child recovered, died when they did not die in time or hunger sind.'Darauf drew the King around, many of the seven years, and examined it in all stone cliffs and caves, but he did not find her and thought she was sweltering. He did not ate and drank during all that time, but God did not receive him. At last he came into a great forest, and found therein the little house whose sign was, "Here all dwell free. ' Since the white virgin came out, took him by the hand, led him in and said, "Welcome, Lord King, 'and asked him where he came. He answered, "I'm almost seven years went about, and seek my wife and her child, but I can not find them. ' The angel offered him meat and drink, but he did not take it, and wanted to rest a little. Then he went to bed, and spread a cloth over his Gesicht.Darauf was the angel in the chamber where the Queen sat with her son, whom she usually called Sorrowful, and said to her, 'go out together with your child, your husband is came.' So she went to where he lay, and the handkerchief fell from his face. And she said, "Sorrowful, your father heb's handkerchief, and cover his face again. ' The child picked it up and put it over his face. The king had heard in his sleep and let the cloth fall once more. But the child grew impatient and said, "Dear mother, how can I cover my father's face when I have no father in the world. I have learned to pray, Our Father who art in heaven; since you said that my father was in heaven and was the good God, how can I know a wild man? that is not my father. ' When the king heard this, he straightened up and asked who she was. She said, 'I'm your wife, and your son, Sorrowful.' And he saw her living hands and said, "My wife had silver hands. ' She answered, "natural hands has made me grow again the gracious God; ' and the angel went into the chamber, and brought the silver hands, and showed them to him. Seeing only certain that it was his dear wife and his dear child, and kissed her and was glad, saying, "A heavy stone has fallen from my heart. ' As they ate the angel of God together again, and then they went home to his old mother. As great joy was everywhere, and the king and queen were married again, and they lived happily ever after.
The girl without hands	3389	706	German	After Zeza had finished her story, were all of the unanimous opinion that Cannetella have earned this and worse for having initially nose so carried high, although they are still warm were happy to see them finally freed from so many sufferings, being they noticed it by name, that they initially had all the men despised, looked placed last as far as to implore the help of a blacksmith, so he can deliver out of their great need. At last the prince Cecca, made a sign to service their debt, whereupon the latter, without long hesitation, began thus: In the sufferings of the virtue proved at best, and the light of excellence shines in the darkness most and turn the tribulations the merit generate and this honor is hard behind; not that he acquires praise and who puts his hands in his lap, but he who stirs and dahinterher is proficient, the same as the daughter of the king of Dürr Rock, which is the home of happiness built with bloody sweat and death threats, and of which I myself have resolved to tell you. For when once death had robbed the King of Dürr rock his wife and that therefore widower had become, he sat the cricket in the head, his own sister to marry called Penta, and therefore said to her one day in private: "A wise man, dear sister, can the good that he has not left the house apart from the fact that you do not know whether you will succeed to take duly walking with strangers. So I have now just been thinking the matter and decided to take you for a wife, as you perfectly zusagst me and I exactly know you! Surrender So in my desire for this mosaic, this associations, these files merger, this mixing recipe; . Because we are both doing well-being "as Penta heard us this insane proposal, she was beside himself, and blanched over and over; because she would never have believed that her brother commit such inconsistencies and could make her such an imposition. Having now a considerable time had silently stood there and thought about how they should respond to the unexpected and outrageous request of her brother, snatched at last the patience, and so she began: "If you have lost your mind, brother, I do not lose the shame. I must höchlich surprised that you like words can bring about your lips, jokingly said, remind us of the donkey; but when they are meant seriously, smell of the box, so that even if your tongue is able to express such Schandreden, but my ears they do not want to hear. I was your wife? Are you out of your mind? Since when, man, you're like crickets and invasions like an old house? And where we live? As among the Hottentots? Am I I'm your sister a mean Vettel right? - I advise you to better yourself and not let back those words out of thy mouth, or I'm doing a vicious spectacle and will as long as you do not treat me as a sister, you too not to be regarded as who you are to me, "By this. said she went to her room she locked behind him, and could not be longer than one month before her brother see during this, who satisfy want, dismayed like a boy with cheeky face his impure impulse that his mug broken and confused as a cook, the cat stole the meat remained. End of this time but pre-requested again by the king, that they beisteure to satisfy his unbridled lust, she wanted to know but very much why because actually her brother had just obsessed with them so; Therefore, she left her room, appeared before him and said, "Dear brother, I have looked at me long and often in the mirror and just considered, but nothing can quite my sight discover that deserves your love, because I do not so lusty bite am who could give a such a great desire "to which the king replied:"! Although you are, love Penta, from head to foot beautiful and immaculate; However, it is particularly the hand, the other fills me more than anything with ardor; it is the fork that pulls me out of the pot my chest the heart; the hook which extricates the bucket of the soul from the well of my life; the reins, taming of my mind while Cupid tormenting him! - O hand, you, you presents beautiful hand spoon so beautiful glories, you who kneipt pliers hearts, you who ... "He wanted to proceed further than Penta interrupted him and cried out piles on my inner glow fire shovel "I've heard enough; just wait a little and give yourself no further useless effort; . I'll be right back "She went then to her room, called a slave, who had just not have much brain to her and said, by a large knife along with a handful of gold coins handed him:" Dear Ali, I do hands . get out, I use a secret charms and beautiful "the slave who you wanted to be complacent, you cut down the hands with two strike from pure; then called his name Penta, place it in a porcelain bowl and covered with a silk cloth, bring her brother, and she let him say that he should happily enjoy what he seemed to want more than anything in the world. When the king saw what a trick had played his sister, he flew into such a rage that he acted as if mad; finally he let fetch, insert the sister and throw them into the sea a very verpichten box. This box has now been tossed about by the waves some time and finally thrown at a coast, some fishermen woselbst him into a net to land attracted him opened and in Penta found that beautiful looked like the moon when it passed the lush fasting in Taranto seems to have (because he has become so very full), so that Masiello, the most honored and chief of those people who took it and with his home told his wife called Nuccia her to maintain the girl in the best cherish and. But no sooner had this continued move again, so put Nuccia, which was the biological mother of suspicion and jealousy, the poor girl again into the box and threw them into the sea again. And again, the box of the ocean waves was thrown so long back and forth until he met a ship on which the king was green city, which, this subject on the waves swim seeing collect the sails, expose the boat and the box let fish up. And when they had opened it and the unfortunate girl found believed the king, when he saw this living beauty in a coffin of death to have found a great treasure, though he would also have cried that on such a rich jewel box of love lacked the jewelery of the hands. So he brought them with him to his kingdom and gave it to his wife as maid of honor at the capacity in which Penta all possible services, even sewing thread, the strengths of the collar and combing the Queen was doing with his feet. However, after a few months the Queen was summoned to the bank of the Fates, to pay the debt of nature, she let the king called to him and said to him: "It can not be long until the marital bond between my soul and my body is dissolved; therefore, farewell my dear husband, and write me soon. But if you love me and want me with a calm mind to the other world over travel, so do me a big favor. "-" areas only, my dear child, "said the King," because if I no longer while you can give my attachment of your life characters, so I want you so prove at your death, how much I am devoted to you. "-" Well, "said the queen," I beg you, trusting in your promise with all my heart, that you, as soon as the earth marry my eyes covered, Penta, because although we do not know who she is or where she comes from, it is nevertheless on the characteristics of their fine manners clearly seen that it is a horse of noble race. " - "Oh what," said the king, "you rather live still many hundreds of years, but if you were to really say good night to give me a bad day, I swear hereby that I take my Penta wife and me the less darankeh will reindeer, that it has not, no hands and the full weight always prefer the least takes as one of the unwelcome. "The last words, however, he muttered to himself, so that his wife should not hear. Hardly the Queen the light of life was now gone out, so he married soon Penta, and in the very first night he fathered a son with her. It was now wearing But once that the king had to again make a voyage to the Kingdom of Hohenfels and therefore, from Penta taking leave, went to ships. During this absence it was that Penta was delivered and so that despatched hosted joy throughout the city fireworks and the High Council a special felucca to put a beautiful little boy gave birth to the King of the event informed. This ship, however, had to endure a very violent storm, such that it was soon thrown by the waves in the air and to the stars lifted soon plunged back into the deepest abyss and finally thrown through a special destiny of the sky to the coast, had been taken at the Penta from the compassionate fishermen and thrown back into the sea by his ruthless wife. Unfortunately, now was washing this woman the diapers of her son on the shore, and curious as the women all, she asked the saint of the felucca, where he came from, where he was going and who sent it, what that said, "I'm from Grünstadt and am on the trip to Hohenfels to the king of this country and seek einzuhändigen him a letter, which I have been especially sent. Although I believe that it is his wife, but I would not know to say exactly what it contains. "-" And who is the king this woman "asked Nuccia next?. "So I hear," said the patron, "it's a very beautiful woman, named> Penta without hands," so called because it lacks both hands. It is said that it has been found in a box on the sea, and married by her happy fate of the king. However, I do not know what she has to write to him important, but I should not hesitate a moment to long fast with him. "No sooner had the shameful Nuccia heard this, they invited the saint to a glass of wine, made him to drunk over his ears and then pulled the letter out of his pocket. While she was now read to them, they felt so much envy that she almost burst, and heard not a word, without ejecting a deep sigh; then let her out of the same known student who read her the letter that mimic the same handwriting and writing to the king another, to the effect that his wife had brought a hideous monster to light and to his command expect to know what they should do with her. When it was this letter written and sealed, put it to the saint in his pocket, and as he saw on awakening the weather again favorable, ordered it to brassen sail briskly to cross to get to full blast, and reached so shortly with the king in which he handed to the letter immediately. This now answered after he read it that the Queen to be treated as before with the greatest attention and not the unhappiness is had should let feel in the least; because such things geschähen with approval of the sky, and a legal person must want the stars not prescribe. Then the messenger went off again and came on the third day turn to the coast where Nuccia lived that and him, as the previous time set before hard to swallow, so that he lost it in the most friendly received his whole mind in the cup, and recently dead into a deep sleep, what Nuccia again examined his pockets and found the letter properly. This let them also read once and write instead another of the High Council of Green City, said that one should immediately burn mother and child. As soon as the skipper had slept the noise, he went off, and arrived in Green City, he handed the letter. Hardly this was opened and read, then stood up among the elderly and assign owners Council a loud murmur, and after they had discussed long this thing, they came to the conclusion that the king must have been either come or bewitched by his mind ; because he, but a gem of a woman and a jewel possessed by a child, wanted to make him a tooth powder for death. They were therefore all the opinion to follow a middle course and send away the queen, with her little son, so that never again hear the least of them. Therefore, she was given a handful of dollars on the road and robbed as the royal palace of a treasure, the town a shining ornamental and her husband of two supports his hope. So when the unfortunate Penta, although they saw himself nevertheless rejected in this way from the land neither a unehrbares females nor the relatives of an outlaw, nor a dissolute student was, she took her offspring, she from now on always with milk and tears wetted, on the arm and set off on the road to Klagensee where a powerful sorcerer ruled that the sight of her hands deprived beautiful woman who stole the hearts of them Erblickenden immediately and despite their mutilated arms victorious was when the hundertarmige Briareus, wanted to hear the full story of their tribulations of it, they suffered from the time that her brother abandoned because of the denied him enjoyment of their beauty the fish for food, up to the moment when she had set foot in his country. When listening to this long history of suffering magician shed countless tears and pity that penetrated his heart through the openings of the ears, broke through the air hole of the mouth back into sighs forth; finally he started but to comfort her and said, "Take courage, my daughter; because like rotten whatever the residence may have a soul, it can still be maintained by the supports of hope. So the heart will not let fall; Heaven stretches sometimes human misery to the very brink of ruin from, to make it appear the more wonderful for his additions. Be therefore without fear, for you have found in my father and mother, and I would, if need be, even risk my life for you on the line, "The poor Penta thanked him most intimately, and replied." I, for my part would give me not the least of it do if the heavens rain down on me suffering and could reduce hail tribulations, as long as I am only under the protective roof of your favor; because you may be able even to protect myself against everything and just this poor creature fills me with sorrow. "After like thousandfold friendly speeches by one and as many acknowledgments from the other side of the magicians Penta had a beautiful suite of rooms in his palace at harbored and she would like his own daughter and left the next morning endure a public notice that whoever come to his court and the largest, he would tell been initiated misfortune, a crown and a scepter of gold, of greater value than a kingdom, should receive from him as a gift. When there had been a rumor thereof throughout Europe spread, people flocked to his court together like swarms of bees, which carry around those rich reward. One said that he his life at court and served after being added to life and property, youth and health here, a right Quark would have received as a reward. A second again said that a serious injustice was inflicted on him by a distinguished man, for he could not retaliate, so that he would swallow the bitter pill and must keep his anger in the body. A third complained that he put all his belongings on a cargo and a contrary wind it would have done as poor as a church mouse. A fourth lamented the fact that he spent his whole life trying to handle the spring, and the purse was still always let him light as a feather; but especially it would bring him to despair that it was the efforts of his spring was of such poor success, given that otherwise the substance of inkwells would have been so much happiness in the world. Meanwhile, the king had returned from Green City home, where there were the fine mess found so that he behaved like a let loose lion and his counselors, the coat had pulled over his ears, if they are not his letter had been showing him as a result, the imitation handwriting perceiving the messengers before him, and was told in great detail of it, as it had happened on the trip. In this way, so he found out that the woman Masiellos the whole disaster had caused, therefore, went immediately in person on a galley to those coast, and after he found the woman he coaxed her on smart way the confession of their deceitful infamy. As he so also learned that the cause was jealousy to it, he had them all over with wax and tallow, sprinkle them then surrounded by a large amount of dry wood rings and this then infect. But as soon as he saw that the fire had consumed with glühroter tongue those unfortunate, he went back under sail, and met in the high seas a ship, the king was on board of Dürr Rock, who told a thousand times the mutual ceremonies to the king of Green City, that he was on his way to Klagensee, where he due to the adopted by the ruler of that kingdom prompt try his luck would, as he did not nachstünde of tribulations the suffering people on earth. "As to this point," the king replied green city, "you stay further behind me, the unhappiest is a zero compared to me, and if all other their accidents metz as measured, so I can bushel. Therefore I will go with you, and we both want to how to proceed brothers, so that we, whoever of us wins the prize, divide it down to the smallest grains - like Very, "replied the king of Dürr Rock, and after. '' they given each other their word, they put jointly their way to Klagensee continue woselbst they arrived to the magician went, who as a crowned heads in the best received, they sit down under a canopy and said a thousand times welcome. So when he heard that they had come to the competition of the unfortunate, he wanted to know of pain they preisgäben which burden the sirocco of Sighs, began to tell what the king of Dürr rock of the love he felt for his natural blood, by the resolute act that carried his sister as a respectable females, and by the nefarious heart that showed it, as he would in fact ordered to lock them up in a negotiated pichten box and thrown into the sea, it on the one hand why the remorse of his own crime tortured, on the other hand him the grief tormented about his sister's death. So it tormented because the shame, there is the loss that the sufferings of the most tortured souls of hell, taken off on of the still, would give no such bottom line of shame, how about his. "Woe to me, but what are your pain just sugar waffles, sweets and honey cake compared to the agony that I feel, because those virgin without hands I found, and she looked: had as a King stopped talking, the other began like a candle of whitest wax in a pitch-black coffin, which should shine to my funeral. After I but married and she bore me a beautiful little son, little was missing that not both would have been burned by the malice of a shameful Weibsbildes on a pyre. But in any case - o thorn of my heart, O pain that never will stop! - they have been violated and sold out of my realm, such that I can every joy bar did not understand how under such a heavy burden of suffering of donkeys of my life not yet collapsed, "And when the magician both kings belongs. had he saw them on the nose, that one of the brother, the other the husband was Pentas; therefore he let his son, who had been named Nufriello, summon and said to him: "Here's your daddy, go and kiss his hands," which the boy did immediately so that the father saw when he how behave well the little saint was hung him a beautiful gold chain around his neck. Then the magician said again to him, "Kiss also your uncle's hand, my son," And that Buebchen did once, as he was commanded, so that even the king of Dürr Rock, astonished at the woken lad, it a pretty Edelstein gave the magician and asked if it would be his son, to which he replied that he should ask the mother. Penta, which meanwhile everything had overheard behind a curtain, stepped forth, and like a dog that has lost his master and finds him in a long time, barking at him, licks, wags his tail and a thousand other signs of joy on its own are, including Penta soon ran to his brother, soon as her husband, soon of the marital love, soon attracted by the sibling love, and embraced now this, now those, so that the three a trio aufführten with untold cheers of half words and interrupted sighs. Finally, however, a break was made, and now they began again the son to caress by the father soon, soon the uncle it embraced and kissed and with delight all were beside themselves. After it was now cheered everyone a long time and talked, the magician began: "Heaven knows much my heart trembles with joy, happy to see Ms. Penta again it deserved, probably because of their excellent qualities to be worn on hands like, and for whose sake I have given me so much trouble, her husband and her brother here to bring that I had them, if necessary, passed as slaves in chains me. But since the bull by the horns, man is bound by his word and the promise of an honest man is as good as an official document, I also believe that the king was green city with grief and annoyance really close to bursting, so I want to keep him my word and give him not only the promise by the public notice crown and scepter, but also the whole kingdom; for I have neither child nor cones and wants, if ye are pleased to accept this beautiful couple as sons, that to me is so dear and expensive as my eyeball; and nothing mangle at the perfect joy Pentas, they put the stumps of her arms under her apron; . Because it will again draw forth hands, will be the more beautiful than their earlier "When this was how the magician said, done, one can not describe the jubilation, which then rose; they jumped for joy up to the ceiling, but especially the king of Green City, who held the recovery of his wife for a greater happiness than the gift of him by the magician Kingdom. And when they had long spent a few days full of happiness, the king of Dürr rock returned home, but his brother was through him instruct his younger brother with the government of his kingdom and himself remained with his wife at the magician by the customs lengths sufferings days decided with interminable bliss years and the world proved: the not knowing the sweetness of pleasures who does not known before bitter suffering.
The sea-hare	1816	329	German	There was once a princess who had her castle high under the battlements an apartment with twelve windows, which looked out in every possible, and when they went up and looked around her, she could inspect her whole kingdom. From the first she saw already sharper than other people better in the second still in the third even more clearly, and what was so on and on, until the twelfth, where she saw everything above and below the earth, and hid her nothing could stay. But because she was proud, no one wanted to subdue and keep the rule alone, she let proclaimed that there should be no one to her husband, not as hiding from her might that it would be impossible for her to find him. but who try and discover him, he will cut off his head and put on a pole. There were already ninety seven piles of dead heads in front of the castle, and in a long time no one answered. The princess was delighted, and thought, 'Now I shall be free for all my life.' Then three brothers appeared before her and announced that she wanted to try their luck. The oldest believed to be safe if he crept into a lime-pit, but she saw him from the very first window left to pull out and his head cut him. The second crawled to the basement of the castle, but she perceived from the first window, and it had happened to him, his head hit the nine and ninetieth post. Then came the youngest in front of her and asked her to give him a day to think, be so gracious as to give it to him twice when they discover him, it was not possible nerds him the third time, he would not do anything about his life , Because he was so nice and so welcoming asked, she said 'yes, I want you grant that, but it is not you glücken.'Den following day he pondered long after, as he wanted to hide, but it was in vain. As he took his gun and went out hunting. He saw a raven, took him to the grain; just going to losdrücken, when the bird cried 'shoot not, I will reward!' He sat down, went on and came to a lake where he surprised a large fish from the depths up to the surface of the water had come. When he had created, 'do not shoot, I will reward!' Cried the fish He let him go into hiding, went on and met a fox which was lame. He shot and missed it, the fox cried, 'much better come here and draw the thorn out of my foot.' He did so, but then wanted to kill the fox and skin it bellows. The fox said, "let off, I will reward! ' The youth let him go, and there it was evening, returned heim.Am next day he was to hide himself, but as he racked his brains over it, he did not know where. He went into the forest to the raven and said, "I have let you live, now I'm where I am to hide myself, so I do not see the king's daughter. ' The raven hung his head and thought for a long time. Finally he 'habs me out!' Snarled He took an egg from its nest, it disassembled into two parts and joined the youth inside then he made it whole again and sat on it. When the princess came to the first window she could not discover him, nor in the others, and she began to be uneasy to be, but from the eleventh she saw him. She let the raven shoot, take the egg and break, and the young man had to come out. She said, "once it is given to you if you do not do it better, then you are lost. ' The following day he went to the lake, called the fish to her and said 'I have let you live, now tell me where should I hide myself, so I do not see the king's daughter.' The fish thought, at last cried, "I have it! I will lock you up in my stomach. ' He swallowed him, and went down to the bottom of the lake. The king's daughter looked through her windows, even from the eleventh did not see him and was dismayed at last the twelfth she saw him. She let the fish catch and kill, and the young man appeared. It can think as he was Zumrut everyone. She said, "Twice dirs paid, but your head will be set on the hundredth post kommen.'An the last day he went with a heavy heart into the country and met the fox. 'You know to find all the hiding places,' he said, 'I have let you live, now my advice, where I should hide myself so that I can not find the princess.' 'A hard task, "answered the fox, looking very thoughtful. Finally he 'habs me out!' Cried He went with him to a spring, dipped himself in and came out as a market shopkeepers and animal dealers. The youth also had to dive into the water, and was in a small sea-hare. The merchant moved to the city and showed the pretty little animal. There many persons gathered together to make it to look. Last came the king's daughter, and because they had great pleasure in it, they bought it and gave the merchant a lot of money. Before he gave it, he said to him, "When the King's daughter goes to the window, creep quickly under her braid. ' Now came the time when they should be looking for him. She stepped to the line of the windows from the first to the eleventh and did not see him. When she did not see him even in the twelfth, she was full of fear and anger, and shut it down with such violence that the glass in every window shivered into a thousand pieces and the whole castle erzitterte.Sie went back and felt the sea-hare beneath the braids of her hair then she seized it, threw it to the ground exclaiming, "away from my eyes! ' It ran to the merchant, and both hurried to the spring, where they plunged, and received back their true shape. The youth thanked the fox and said, "the raven and the fish are idiots compared with you, you know the right tune, which must be true! 'The youth went straight to the castle. The king's daughter was waiting for him and herself to her fate. The wedding was celebrated, and he was now the king and lord of the whole empire. He never told her where he had concealed himself for the third time and who had helped him, and so she believed that he had done everything by his own skill, and had respect for him, because she thought to herself, "able to do more than you! '
The riddle	213	851	German	There was once a king's son who took a fancy to travel about the world, and took no one with him but a faithful servant. One day he came into a great forest, and when evening came, he could find no shelter, not knowing where he was to spend the night. Then he saw a girl who was going towards a small house, and when he came closer, he saw that the girl was young and beautiful. He spoke to her and said, "my child, can I and my servant in the house for the night a shelter place?" - "Oh yes," said the girl in a sad voice, "that you certainly can, but I do not advise you to venture it does not go in." - "Why should not I?" asked the prince. The girl sighed and said, "My stepmother practices wicked arts; she is ill-disposed toward strangers." He was well aware that he had come to the house of a witch, but because it dark was and he could not continue, also not afraid, he entered. The old woman sat in an armchair by the fire and saw with their red eyes to the stranger. "Good evening," growled she, and seeming quite friendly, "let down yourselves and rest." She blew on the fire on which she was cooking something in a small pot. The daughter warned the two to be careful not to eat and nothing to drink, for the old woman brewed evil Getränke.Sie slept quietly until early morning. When they were making ready for departure and the prince already sat on horseback, the old woman said, "wait a minute, I will give you rich only a farewell drink." As they caught up with him, the king's son rode away, and the servant who had to buckle his saddle tight, was the only one present came as the Wicked Witch of the potion. "Take that to your master," she said, but at the moment the glass broke and the poison splashed on the horse, and was so violent that the animal immediately fell down dead right hinst. The servant ran after his master and told him what had happened, but did not want to abandon his saddle and ran back to fetch him. But when he came to the dead horse, already sat a raven on it and ate it. "Who knows if we find something better today," said the servant, he killed the raven and took him mit.Nun attracted them in the woods all day on, but could not get out. At nightfall they found an inn and went inside. The servant gave the host the Ravens, he was to prepare for dinner. But they were caught in a den of thieves, and in the darkness came twelve murderers and intending to kill the strangers and rob them. but before she went to work, they sat down to table, and the innkeeper and the witch sat down with them, and they ate together a bowl of soup, the meat chopped war.Kaum Raven but they had a few bites swallowed, they all fell down dead, for the raven had communicated to the poison from the horsemeat. There was now no one in the house left but the innkeeper's daughter, who was honest, and had taken no part in their godless deeds. She opened the stranger all the doors and showed him the accumulated treasures. The prince said she might keep everything, he wanted none of it, and rode with his servant weiter.Nachdem they were pulled around long, they came to a town where a beautiful but proud princess who had proclaimed that whosoever her presented a riddle that she could not guess who was to be her husband but she guessed it, he would have to leave the main knock. she had time to reflect for three days, but she was so clever that she always found the puzzles submitted before the appointed time. Already, were nine of perished in this way, arrived when the king's son and blinded by her great beauty, was willing to put his life wollte.Da he stepped in front of her and gave her his riddle, "What is this," he said, "a hit no and yet slew twelve. " She did not know what that was, she thought and thought, but she did not find out, she opened her riddle books, but it was not in short, her wisdom was at an end. Since they did not know to help, she ordered her maid to creep of the Lord in the bedroom, as they listen to his dreams, and thought maybe he was talking in his sleep and discover the riddle. But the clever servant had gone to bed instead of his master, and approached the maid, he tore her coat, in which she had wrapped herself, and chased them with rods hinaus.In the second night sent the king's daughter, her maid, which should see if she could succeed better in listening, but the servant took her coat off and chased her out with rods. Now the Lord for the third night believed to be safe and lay down in his bed, as the King's daughter came himself, had put on a misty gray coat and sat down beside him. And when she thought he was asleep and dreaming, she spoke to him and hoped he would answer in his sleep, how many tun.Aber he was awake and understood and heard everything very well. Then she asked, "One slew none, what is that?" He replied, "A raven, which ate of a dead and poisoned horse, and died of it." Next she asked, "And yet slew twelve, what is that?" - "Those are twelve murderers who ate the raven and died of it." When she knew the riddle she wanted to steal away, but he held her mantle, that she had to leave him. The next morning, the princess announced that she had guessed the riddle, and let the twelve judges and expounded it before them. But the youth begged for a hearing, and said "it is about in the night to me and questioned me, otherwise she would not have guessed it." The judges said, "Bring us a sign." Since the three mantles brought thither by the servant, and saw the mist-gray as the judge whom used to wear the king's daughter, they said "let the mantle embroidered with gold and silver, then it will be your wedding-mantle."
The valiant dressmaker	195	1640	German	One summer morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the window, was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. When an old woman came down the street and shouted, "Good jams, cheap Good jams, cheap!" That sounded pleasantly in the tailor's ears, so he put his head out the window and cried. "Here, my good woman, here you want a customer los" The woman climbed the stairs with her heavy basket to the tailor and had to unpack all the pots for him. He inspected each one, lifted her into the air, holding his nose at it and finally said, "The jelly seems pretty good, they wieg me out four ounces, dear woman, if it's a quarter of a pound, it does not come to me on it. " The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling. "Well, this jam shall be blessed me God," cried the little tailor, "and give me health and strength," took the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it. "This will not taste bitter," he said, "but first I want to make the doublet finished, I take a bite." He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and his joy, made bigger Stiche.Indes the smell rose from the sweet jelly up to the wall where the flies were sitting in great numbers, so they were attracted it and flew it settled. "Oh, who invited you?" said the little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests. But the flies, who did not understand German, could not be turned away, but came in larger numbers than before. Then the tailor, was finally, as they say, the louse on the liver, it reached from his chimney a piece of cloth, and "waiting, I will give it to you!" struck it mercilessly on it. When he ceased, and counted, there lay before him no fewer than seven dead and with legs stretched out. "Are you a guy?" he said, and had even admired his bravery, "is to know the whole city." And in haste to cut out a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered with large letters on it "Seven at one blow!" "Eh, what city!" he continued, "the whole world the heck out! And his heart wagged with joy like a lamb. The tailor is tied the belt around the body and wanted out into the world, because he thought the workshop was too small for his bravery . Eh, he withdrew, he was looking around the house, whether there would be nothing which he could take, but he found nothing but an old cheese, which he pocketed. Before the door he observed a bird that had been caught in the bushes, who had to the cheese in his pocket. then he took off gallantly on his, and as he was light and nimble, he felt no Müdigkeit.Der road led him up a mountain, and when he had reached the highest peak so sat there a powerful giant looking quite slowly to the tailor went bravely up to him, spoke to him and said. "Good day, comrade, so you sit there overlooking the sprawling world? I am just on my way there and I want to try. ? Do you fancy to go "The giant looked contemptuously at the tailor, and said," You bastard! ! You miserable fellow "-" That would be "answered the tailor, and unbuttoned his coat and showed the giant the girdle," as you can read what I'm looking for a man "The giant read:" Seven at one stroke. "thought that they had been people who had the tailor slain, and feel a little respect for the tiny fellow. But he wanted to test him first, and took a stone in his hand, and squeezed him that the water dropped out." the do after, "said the giant," if you have the strength to me. "" is it nothing? "said the tailor," that's play with us work, "reached into his pocket, took out the cheese and squeezed him that the juice ran out. "Gelt," he said, "that was a little better?" the giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it of the little man. then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high that you could hardly see him with eyes still: "Well, you little fellow that do for me." "Well thrown," said the tailor, "but the stone has yet need to fall back to Earth, I want to take a thee, which shall not come back"; reached into his pocket, took out the bird and threw it into the air. The bird, delighted with his liberty, rose, flew away and did not return. "How do you like the piece, comrade?" asked the tailor. "You can certainly throw," said the giant, "but now we want to see if you are able to carry anything properly." He led the little tailor to a mighty oak tree, like there was on the floor, and said, "If you are strong enough, so I help the tree out of the forest wearing out." "Good," answered the little man, "you just take the trunk on your shoulder, I will take the branches with all their foliage, that's the hardest part. " The giant took the trunk on his shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant who could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree and the tailor into the bargain. It was very cheerful and in good spirits, and whistled the song "There were three tailors riding to the gate out," as if carrying the tree a breeze. The giant, after he had dragged the heavy burden part of the way, could not continue and cried. "Listen, I can have to the tree falling" The tailor sprang nimbly down, grabbed the tree with both arms as if he were carrying it and said to the giant. "you are such a big guy and can not even carry the tree" they went on together, and when they passed a cherry tree, the giant took the crown of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging, bent down at her, she gave the tailor's hand and told him to eat. But the little tailor was much too weak to hold the tree and letting go when the giant, the tree sprang to his feet, and the tailor was rocketed into the air with. When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said: "What's that, you did not force to hold the weak twig?" "On the force is not lacking," answered the little tailor, "you mean, that would be something for , the seven men has a hit with a match? I jumped over the tree because the hunters shoot there in the bushes below. Spring too, if you canst. " The giant made the attempt, but could not get over the tree, but remained in the branches hanging, so that the tailor here the upper hand behielt.Der giant said, "If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me to our cave and spend the night with us. " The tailor was willing, and followed him. When they arrived in the cave because sitting still other giants by the fire, and each had a roasted sheep in his hand and ate it. The tailor looked around and thought, "It's much more spacious here than in my workshop." The giant showed him a bed and told him to lie down in it and sleep. but the tailor was the bed too big, he does not put himself, but crept into a Ecke.Als it was midnight and the giant thought, the tailor was lying in a deep sleep, he got up, took a big iron bar and beat the bed said with a blow by, and he had the grasshopper finishing off the gemacht.Mit the earliest morning were the giants in the forest and the tailor had forgotten because it came at a time quite funny and thus paced daring. The giants were terrified, afraid that it they strike them all dead, and ran in a hurry fort.Das tailor marched on, always following his nose. After it had gone a great way he entered the courtyard of a royal palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep. While it was lying there, people came and inspected him on all sides, and read on his belt. "Seven at one stroke" - "Oh," they said, "what do the great war hero wants here in peacetime This must be a powerful lord." They went and reported it to the king, and said that if war should break out, that would be an important and useful man who at any price you omit dürfte.Dem King liked the advice, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor from, should he, when he awoke, to offer military service. The ambassador remained standing by the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes, and then he carried his answer. "That is why I came here," he replied, "I'm ready to take the king's service." So he was honorably received and assigned him a special apartment. The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished him a far thousand miles. "What will be done?" they said among themselves, "If we quarrel with him, and he strikes us will fall at every blow down seven. Since it can one of us do not exist." So they came to a resolution, and went all together to the king and begged for their dismissal. "We're not done," they said, "to endure next to a man who can kill seven at one stroke." The king was sad that he should lose all his faithful servants because of one man, wished that his eyes had never seen him and would like him to get rid of been. But he did not getrauete is to give him over because he was afraid he would kill him and all his people and meditated on the royal throne setzen.Er long back and forth, he finally found a piece of advice. He sent to the tailor and let him say, because he was such a great war hero, he wanted to make him an offer. In a forest of his country lived two giants, who did great damage with robbery, murder, singeing and burning, no one could approach them without putting himself in danger. If he these two giants and killed, he would give him his only daughter to wife, and half the kingdom as a dowry; Also hundred horsemen should go and assist him. "That would be something for a man as you are," thought the little tailor, "a beautiful princess and half a kingdom is offered to a non-every day." "Oh yes," he replied, "the Giants will I have tame, and did not need the hundred horsemen here: who kill seven encounters a string need not to be afraid of two "the tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.. When he came to the edge of the forest, he said to his followers: "just keep Stay here, I will cope alone with the giants." Then he jumped into the forest and looked about right and left. After a while he perceived both giants they lay under a tree and snored so that the branches waved up and down arc. The little tailor, not lazy, filled both pockets full of stones and climbed the tree. As it was in the middle, he slipped down by a branch, came up there to sit just above the sleepers, and let the a huge one stone after another fall on the breast. The giant felt a long time nothing, but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said, "What are you hitting me," "You're dreaming," said the other, "I'm not you." They lay down to sleep again, since accused the Schneider to second a stone down. "What shoud that?" cried the other, "why do you throw me?" "I do not blame you," answered the first, grumbling. They disputed about it a while, but because they were tired, they gave it up, and his eyes closed once more. The little tailor began his game again, picked out a heavier stone and threw it the first giant with all his might on the breast. "This is too much!" he cried, leaping like a madman and struck his companion against the tree that this trembling. The other paid in the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and belabored each other so long, until finally both at once fell dead to the ground. Then the little tailor jumped down. "It was lucky," said he, "that they the tree on which I have sat, not torn, otherwise I would like a squirrel to spring on to others, but we tailors are nimble!" He drew out his sword and gave each a couple of thrusts in the chest, then went out to the horsemen and said, "The work is done, I have done both a full end, but hard it came about to, they have trees in distress torn and fought back, but that's no good if a man like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow. "" Are you not wounded? " asked the rider. "There are good ways," said the tailor, "no hair they have bent me." The horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; as they found the giants wallowing in their blood, and all around lay the uprooted trees. The little tailor demanded of the King the promised reward, however, repented of his promise, and he thought again how he could create the hero from his neck. "Before you get my daughter and half the kingdom," he said to him, "you must perform one more heroic deed. In the forest, a unicorn which does great damage, you must secure him." "Before one unicorn I fear me even less than two giants; Seven at one blow, that's my business. " He took a rope and an ax with, went out into the forest, and told those who were with him to the outside warten.Er bulged not have to look far, the unicorn soon came and jumped almost to the cutter going on when if he would make him unceremoniously. "Easy, easy," he said, "so quickly does it not," stopped and waited until the animal was quite close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree. The unicorn ran with all his might against the tree and stuck his horn so fast in the trunk that it did not have enough strength to pull it out again, and so it was caught. "Now I have got the bird," said the tailor, came out from behind the tree and put the unicorn the rope round his neck, he took the ax, the horn out of the tree, and when everything was in order, he led the animal, and it brought the king König.Der he still would not give the promised reward, and made a third demand. The tailor should catch him before the wedding only a wild boar that made great havoc in the forest; the hunters were to accompany him. "Gladly," said the tailor, "that's a no-brainer." The hunters he did not take into the woods, and they were all the better pleased, for the wild boar had already received them several times so that they did not want him saw the tailor nachzustellen.Als the pig, it ran with foaming mouth and gleaming teeth to him and wanted to throw him to the ground; but the hero fled and jumped into a chapel, which was nearby, and up to the window in one bound out again. The boar ran after him, but he got inside and slammed the door behind him; then the raging beast was caught, that was much too heavy and awkward to leap out to the window. The tailor called the huntsmen that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes; But the hero went to the king, who now, whether he liked it or not, his keeping promises had and his daughter and half his kingdom handed him. Had he known that not a war hero, but a little tailor standing before him, it would be even more went to the heart of it. The wedding was held with great splendor and little joy, and a tailor a king gemacht.Nach some time the young queen heard in the night, her husband say in a dream, "Boy, make me the doublet and patch me the pantaloons or I you want to beat the Elle over his ears. " Then she discovered was born in what the young lord, complained the next morning her father her suffering and begged him to help her from the man who would be nothing better than a tailor. The king comforted her and said, "Let the next night your bedroom door open, my servants shall stand outside, and when he is asleep, go in, bind him and carry on a ship that takes them into the world." The woman was satisfied, but the king's armor-bearer, who had all listened to, the young man was weighed and informed him of the whole plot. "The thing I want to put a stop to," said the Schneiderlein.Abends put it down as usual with his wife to bed; when she thought he was asleep, she got up, opened the door and lay down again. ! The tailor, who was only pretending to be asleep, began to call in a clear voice: "Boy, make the doublet and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard over the ears I have seven at one blow hit, killed two giants, a unicorn, and a wild boar caught, and am I to fear those who stand outside before the chamber! " And when they heard the tailor, and a great fear seized, they ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them, and no one would venture to attack him more. So was and remained the tailor all his life king.
The Waldhaus	1619	431	German	A poor woodcutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little hut on the edge of a lonely forest. One morning, wanted to go back to his work for him, he said to his wife: ". Let's get me a luncheon eldest daughter out into the forest, I shall never get done and so it does not get lost," he added, "I will take a bag of millet and scatter the seeds on the path." as the sun was directly over the forest in the middle, the girl made a pot of soup on the way. But the field and forest sparrows, larks and finches, blackbirds and Siskins had already picked the millet, and the girl could not find the trail. Since it went on the off chance on constantly until the sun went down and broke the night. The trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and it began to be frightened him. Since it saw in the distance a light flashed in the trees. There, people should probably stay, it thought that kept me overnight, and walked towards the light. Not long before it came to a house whose windows were lit. She knocked, and a rough voice from inside cried, "Come in!" The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked at the office door. "Come in," cried the voice, and opened as it sat there an old, gray-haired man at the table, supporting his face on both hands, and his white beard flowed down over the table almost to the ground. But the stove lay three animals, a hen, a cock and a brindled cow. The girl told to the old man and asked for a night's lodging. The man said, "Pretty little hen, Pretty little cock, And pretty brindled cow, what do you say?" "Duks"! answered the animals, and that probably had to be called "we are satisfied," because the old man said, "Here's abundance, go to the fire, and cook us our supper The girl found in the kitchen abundance of everything and. .. cooked a good meal, but the animals did not think it carried the full bowl on the table, sat down at the gray man, ate and satisfied his hunger was satisfied as it is said, "but now I am tired, where is there a bed in which I lie down and sleep "the animals replied:" Thou hast eaten with him, Thou hast drunk with him, Thou hast had no thought for us, So well see. where you stay the night "The old man said,". Climb up only the stairs, so you'll have a chamber with two beds found, shake them, and cover them with white linen, and I will also come and go to bed. " the girl went up, and had as it shaken the beds and put clean as it lay in the one of them without waiting for the old man. After a while, but came the gray man, the girl lit with the light and shook his and when he saw head. it was fast asleep, he opened a trap door and left it in the basement sinken.Der Holzhauer came late in the evening home, and his wife made allegations that she him all day have to starve. " I have no guilt, "she replied," the girl went out with your dinner, and must have gone astray; tomorrow it'll come back. "Before the day but the woodcutter stood up, go into the forest, requested that the second daughter should take him his dinner that day." I will take a bag with lentils, "he said," the grains are larger . as millet, the girl will see them better and can not miss the way "at noon, the girl took the food out, but the lentils had disappeared, the forest birds had, like, picked the day before and had left none the girl. . was wandering in the forest until night, and then she too reached the house of the old man called in was and asked for food and a bed the man with the white beard again asked the animals "pretty little hen, pretty little cock, and pretty brindled cow, what do you say "the animals again replied:".. Duk !, "and it all happened like the previous day the girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank with the old man and did not care about the animals and when it was after nem camp asked, they answered. "Thou hast eaten with him, Thou hast drunk with him, Thou hast had no thought for us, So also see where you'll stay the night" When she was asleep, the old man came, looked there shaking his head and let it down into the cellar. On the third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife: "Send our youngest child out with my dinner, that's always been good and obedient, and will stay in the right way and not like his sisters, the wild bees, swarm." The mother did not want to and said, "Am I to lose my dearest child?" - "Do not worry," he replied, "the girl did not get lost, it is prudent and sensible; to abundance, I will take some peas and sprinkle that are still larger than lentils, and will show him the way." But hinauskam as the girl with the basket on her arm, so had the wood pigeon peas already in the crop, and it did not know where she was to turn. It was full of sorrow and never ceased to think how hungry her father and would lament the good mother when it failed to. Finally, when it was dark, she saw the light and came to the Waldhaus. She begged quite friendly, they want to accommodate over night, and the man with the white beard once more asked his animals! "? Pretty little hen, Pretty little cock, And pretty brindled cow, what do you say" "Duks" they said. Then the girl went to the stove where the animals were, and caressed chicken and chicken by hinstrich it hand over the smooth feathers, and the brindled cow scratched it between the horns. And when there is a good soup had been prepared at the behest of the Old and the bowl was on the table, it said: "Shall I saturate me, and the good animals to have nothing Outside is the abundance, first I want for them to care." So she went and brought some barley and stewed it for the cock and chicken and the cow fragrant hay, a whole arm brought full. "Let's you taste it, dear animals," it said, "and when you are thirsty, you shall have a refreshing draft." Then she fetched a bucket of water, and the cock and hen jumped on to the edge, dipped their beaks in, and then held her head in the air as the birds drink, and the brindled cow also took a hearty train. When the animals were fed, the girl seated to the Ancient of the table and ate what he had left him. Not long before the cock and hen began to thrust their heads beneath the wings, and the brindled cow blinked. Then the girl said, "Should not we go to bed?" "Pretty little hen, Pretty little cock, And pretty brindled cow, what do you say" The animals replied: "Duks, you have eaten with us, you're with us drunk, you have probably considered us all, we wish you a good night. "Then the girl went upstairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid clean sheets on them, and had finished it, the old man came and lay down in one of the beds and his white beard reached down to his feet. The girl lay down in the other, said her prayers, and fell ein.Es slept quietly until midnight because it was such a noise in the house that the girl awoke. Since it started to wrinkle at the corners and rattle, and the door opened and hit against the wall; The beams groaned as if they were torn from their joints, and it was as if the stairs rushing down, and finally there was a crash, as if the whole roof would coincide. Since it but again was silent and the girl nothing happened harm! So it remained lying quietly and fell asleep again ein.Als it but woke up in the morning in bright sunshine, which saw his eyes? It was in a large hall, and everything around shone with royal splendor on the walls grew up green silk basic Flowers in the air, the bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet, and on a chair stood a couple with beads embroidered Pantoffeln.Das girls thought it was a dream, but three richly clad attendants came and asked what would have to order it. "Just go," the girl replied, "I want to get up the same and the old cook a soup and then also nice chicken, nice chicken feed and the beautiful brindled cow." She thought the old man was up already, and looked around for his bed, but he was not in it, but a stranger. And when he looked and saw that he was young and beautiful, he awoke, sat up and said, "I am a king's son, and was bewitched by a wicked witch to live as an old, gray-haired man in the forest, nobody was allowed to be with me but my three attendants in the form of a cock, a hen and a brindled cow. and not the spell should stop, as until a girl came to us so well from my heart that it is not only against the people is evinced alone, even against but the animals kindly, and that thou hast done, and at midnight we are redeemed by you and the old forest house was changed back again into my royal palace. " And got up when she, the king's son ordered the three attendants, they should fetch go out and father and mother of the girl to the wedding. "But where are my zei sisters?" Inquired the maiden. "The I locked in the basement, and tomorrow they will be out in the forest, and shall live. Serve the Köhler as long AIS maids until they have improved and not leave poor animals to suffer hunger"
The water of life	925	551	German	Once there was a king who was ill, and no one believed that he would come out with their lives. He had three sons, who were saddened went down into the palace garden and wept. There they met an old man who asked her about her grief. They told him that their father was so ill that he would die, because it would not help him. Then the old man 'I know an agent that is the water of life, if he drinks of it he will become well again but it is hard to find.' The eldest said, 'I want it already found,' went to the sick king and asked him that he would allow him to move out, to look for the water of life, for that alone could save him. 'No,' said the King, "the danger of it is too great, I would rather die. ' But he begged so long that the King consented. The prince thought in his heart 'I bring the water, then I am my father dearest and shall inherit the Reich.'Also he set out, and when he for a while had ridden, there stood a dwarf on the road who called him and said, 'Whither away so fast ?,' Silly shrimp, "said the prince, very haughtily," you do not need to know 'and rode on. But the little man had become angry and had done an evil desire. The prince fell soon after into a ravine, and the further he rode the closer the mountains drew together, and at last the road became so narrow that he could not continue to step; it has not been possible to turn his horse or get out of the saddle, and he sat there like caged. The sick king waited long for him, but he did not come. Then the second son said, 'Father, let me go forth and seek the water, "and thought to himself," If my brother is dead, then the kingdom will fall to me.' The king want him at first did not let them go, he finally relented. So the prince drew on the same road that his brother had taken, and also met the dwarf, who stopped him and asked where he was going in such a hurry. "Little shrimp," said the prince, 'you do not need to know' and rode on without giving him another look. But the dwarf bewitched him, and he became like another in a ravine and could not back and forth. but how it works failed to Hochmütigen.Als to the second son, then offered the youngest, go out and fetch the water, and the king had to let him go. When he met the dwarf and the latter asked him where he was going in such haste, he stopped, gave him to answer questions, saying 'I'm looking for the water of life, for my father is sick unto death.' 'Do you know even where to find is ?,' No, 'said the prince. 'Because you be you, as befits sichs, and not haughtily like your false brothers, I will give you information and tell you how you obtain the water of life. It springs from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted castle, but you wilt not be able into it if I did not give you an iron wand and two small loaves of bread. With the rod Strike thrice to the iron gate of the castle, it will spring open: inside lie two lions with gaping jaws, but if you hineinwirfst each a loaf of bread, they are silent, and then hasten to fetch some of the water of life before the clock strikes twelve, else the door will again and you're locked up. ' The prince thanked him, took the wand and the bread, and set out on the road. And when he arrived, everything was as the dwarf had said. The gate sprang up at the third stroke, and when he the lions had softened with the bread, he entered the palace and came in a big beautiful room: it sat some enchanted princes, which he pulled the ring from her finger, then lay a sword and a loaf of bread, which he took away. And he came into a room, which was a beautiful maiden who rejoiced when she saw him, kissed him and said he had redeemed them and should have her entire kingdom, and when he would return in one year, so should their wedding celebration. She also told him where the spring rush to the water of life, but he had to and draw some of it before the clock struck twelve. As he went on and at last entered a room where a beautiful newly-made bed, and because he was tired, he just want to rest a little. So he lay down and fell asleep: awake when he struck a quarter to twelve. He sprang up in a fright, ran to the well and drew some water in a cup which stood near, and hastened that he fortkam. But just as he went to the iron door, the clock struck twelve, and the door fell so violently that he still a piece of his heel wegnahm.Er was glad that he had obtained the water of life, went home and came back the dwarf over. When the latter saw the sword and the loaf, he said 'so you have won great wealth, with the sword you can beat whole armies, and the bread will never come.' The prince would not go without his brothers to his father house and said, "Dear dwarf, you can not tell where my two brothers are? they are out before I moved to the water of life and have not returned. ' 'Between two mountains, they are imprisoned, "said the dwarf,' I have condemned them because they were so haughty." Then the prince begged until the dwarf released them, but he warned him, saying, 'Beware of them, for they have bad Herz.'Als came his brothers, he was pleased and told them how he had fared that he had found the water of life and had taken a cup and rescued a beautiful princess who wanted a year waiting for him, then their wedding was held, and he got a great empire. After that they rode together, and chanced upon a land where war and famine was, and the king thought he would spoil, so great the need was. Then the prince went to him and gave him the bread, which he ate his kingdom and satisfied: and then the prince gave him the sword, so he beat the armies of his enemies, and could now live in peace and quiet. The prince picked up his bread and sword back, and the three brothers rode on. but they came not in two countries where war and famine reigned, and the prince gave the Kings every time his bread and sword, and now had three kingdoms saved. And then they sat down on a ship and sailed across the sea. During the trip, spoke as the two oldest among themselves 'the youngest the water of life has found and we do not, but our father will give him the kingdom which belongs to us, and he will take away our happiness.' Since they were vindictive and agreed with each other that they wanted to destroy him. They waited until they found him fast asleep, then they poured the water of life from the cup and took it for themselves, but they poured salt sea water hinein.Als she arrived home, the youngest to the sick king took his cup so he drink it, and be healthy. But no sooner had he drunk a little of the salt sea water, so he became still worse than before. And as he was lamenting about the two oldest sons came and accused the youngest that he would want to poison him, they brought him the true water of life, and handed it to him. He had scarcely tasted it, when he felt his sickness, and was strong and healthy as in his younger days. Then the two went to the youngest, mocked him, saying, "You certainly found the water of life, but you have had the pain, and we the gain; you'd be smarter and will keep my eyes open, we took it from you whilst you were asleep at sea, and over the years since overtaken one of us the beautiful princess. But beware that you betray nothing of his father but does not believe you, and if you say a single word, you shall on top of that your life to lose, but you are silent, so dirs to paid sein.'Der old king was angry thought about his youngest son and he had plotted to kill him. So he left the yard and gather judgment upon him speak that he should be secretly shot. When the prince after all rode to the chase and suspected no evil, the king had to go with hunters. When they were out there all alone in the forest, the huntsman looked so sad, the prince said to him, "Dear huntsman, what ails you? ' The huntsman said, "I can not tell you, and yet I ought. ' Then the prince said, "Say openly what it is, I will forgive dirs. ' 'Ah,' said the huntsman, "I want you shoot, the king has ordered it to me. ' Since startled the prince and said, "Dear huntsman, let me live, I give you my royal garments, give me your common ones. ' The huntsman said, "I will like to do, I would have can not shoot after you. ' Then they exchanged clothes, and the huntsman returned home, but the prince went further into the forest hinein.Über a time when came to the old royal three carriages with gold and precious stones for his youngest son, but they were of the three kings who had sent hit with the prince's sword enemies and fed on his bread, and who wanted to bezeigen grateful. Then the old king thought, "Can my son have been innocent ?, and said to his people," he was still alive as it to me so sorry that I have him to be killed. ' 'He's still alive', the huntsman, "I could not bring myself to carry out your command, 'and told the king how it had happened said. Since the King their was a load of the heart, and he let in all kingdoms proclaim his son might return and should werden.Die taken into favor princess but left a road in front of her castle making, which was quite golden and shiny, and said, people who straight along it would come to her riding, that would be the right one, and was to be admitted, but who would come next, which was not the right, and they should not be admitted. As was now close the time the eldest thought he would hasten to go to the princess, and pretend to be their savior, because he got her as my wife and the kingdom next to it. So he rode away, and when he came to the palace and saw the beautiful golden road, he thought, that would be a shame if you ride over that, turned aside and rode right alongside. But when he came to the door, the people said to him, he was not the right, he should go away again. Soon after this the second prince set out, and when he came to the golden road and the horse had put the one foot, he thought 'it would be a pity that could cede something, turned aside and rode on the left alongside. But when he came to the door, people said he was not the right, he should go away again. And it came from all around the year, the third out of the woods continued wanted to ride to his beloved, and with her forget his sorrows. So he arose, and was always thinking of her and would have liked to have been with her, and did not see the golden road. So his horse rode the middle of it, and when he came to the door, was it opened, and the princess received him with joy, and said he was their Savior and the Lord of the Kingdom, and the wedding was held with great happiness. And when it was over, she told him that his father invited him, and he would have forgiven. As he rode back and told him everything, like his brothers betrayed him and he had nevertheless kept silence. The old King wished she te punish, but they had put to sea, and were fortgeschifft and did not get all their lives again.
The goat face	3376	710	German	Once Ciulla had finished her amusing story began Paola, was at the now the turn of this dance to tell as follows: All evils committed by man, have any palliation due inciting anger or urgent need or blinding love or neck-breaking fury. has the ingratitude but neither true nor a false pretext that they could plead, and is therefore a so shameful vices that they dry out the source of compassion, extinguishes the fire of love, the benefits blocking the way and in the ungrateful regret and generates displeasure about yourself as you will hear in the following story this: There once was a farmer twelve daughters, each one more smaller than the other, as the brave Ceccuzza, her mother, it all year gave a little mistress, so that the poor man to feed his family honestly went every morning as day laborers on field work and you could not tell if the sweat that he shed, was more than the saliva, which he spat when digging into their own hands; In short, however, he earned by acidic effort and work his piece of bread, so that they did not have to die of hunger. When he again dug near a mountain that also held as a spy of the other hills to head over the clouds to watch what was going on in the air, and a deep and dark cave was on its feet, that the sun fear got hineinzuscheinen, came out of this crawled a green lizard that was as big as a crocodile and the poor peasant so frightened that he had to run away not the power and from the opening of the throat that ugly beast awaited the end of his days. The lizard, however, approached him and began following talk: "Have no fear, my good fellow, because I do not come to inflict you any evil, but for your own sake" Once Masaniello (for that was the workers) those words. heard, he knelt before her and said, "Ma'am, how ye call yet, I'm all in your power; . But verfahrt as befits you, and all were sorry for me, a poor devil that I have to feed twelve bellows "-" That's why I come just to help you; drum me bring tomorrow morning the youngest of your girls here, because I want them auferziehen like my own daughter and love them like my life. "No sooner had the poor father this speech heard, he was so upset as a cheater, the one with his cheating caught; he, and heard calling Although the youngest, he believed that something must be behind and they wanted to use it as a pill for the expulsion of hunger, so that is the lizard one of his children, he thought to himself: "I give her my daughter, so I give her my soul; I refused her, she takes possession of my body; I will grant you, I deprive myself of my heart, I disagree with her, she sucked my blood; I say yes, it snatches me a part of myself; I say no, so she grabs me throughout the fort! So what I decide? What decision I take? What is the way I take? Ah, but how wretched my current day's work, what a misfortune is there rained down to me from heaven 'As he spoke this to himself, the lizard began again: "Make up your mind quickly and do what I told you;! otherwise you get the thing to be expensive, because I want it, and how it should be! "When Masaniello this judgment hearing, from which he could appeal to no one else, he felt very sad home and so yellow in the face, as if he had had the jaundice, so that Ceccuzza which and pale him so pale looked so sad and dejected arrive, he called out: "What's happened to you, dear husband? Have you planned something with someone? If one execution has against you? ? Or is us the donkey died, "-" Nothing like that, "Masaniello said," but a horned lizard has so turned me off like that; because they threatened me that if I do not bring her our youngest child, I would find it difficult to regret. That's why the head like a spindle turns to me and I do not know what I should make up my mind! On the one hand keeps me fatherly love, on the other hand the concern for all of you back. Furthermore, I love both Renzolla as my own life quite excessive; if I were the lizard, this addition does not give my heart, so she takes the whole bushel of my unfortunate body. . Drum advise me, dear Ceccuzza, otherwise it's over with me, "Now that his wife heard these words, they said to him:" Who knows, dear man, if this lizard is not of particular Fortunately for us, who knows whether they will not be the certain end of our misery? Just think that we ourselves are to blame most of our distress, and just then, when we should have the eyes of an eagle to realize the happiness that goes into our hands, as with blindness and have the cramp in his fingers to take place there. Drum only lead always back because it suspects me that the poor thing expecting some good fortune. "These words pleased the Masaniello, and the very next morning, at the time when the sun with the brush of its rays to the shadow of the anstreicht night blackened sky knows he took the girl by the hand and brought it to the grotto. The lizard, which already watched whether the farmer would, once left her hiding place, and as she took the girl in reception, she gave the father a bag of gold coins and said, "Here, marry your other daughters with the help of these gold foxes and was only always of good cheer; because Renzolla has found in my father and mother, and they can congratulate themselves that their such happiness is fallen to "Masaniello thanked the lizard with joy. returned to his wife back home, he told her what had happened and showed her the gold pieces by means of which they really married the other daughters, with them still remained enough to endure the hardships of life with comfort. but the lizard was right after they get Renzolla, a beautiful palace appear, they brought in and pulled them on with so much pomp and splendor that he should have appeared regal even in the eyes of a queen; indeed everything under the sun had not failed Renzolla if they would have wished. They dined like a countess, was dressed as a princess and was surrounded by countless chamber women who always served the most zealous, so that it was around through this wonderful life before one was aware of it like a ton. So it happened now, once stood as the king of the country in that forest on the hunt, he was suddenly attacked by night and in this embarrassment to the palace, in which he saw shining a light despatched a servant to recover from to ask the owner for the night. Once the servant arrived there, the lizard appeared before him in the form of a virgin and said to him after hearing his order that his master would welcome a thousand times and it would not lack the wherewithal to receive it. Accordingly, the king saw that extends went to this answer to the palace, received as a gentleman by him coming toward hundred pages with lighted torches so that they exceptions like the funeral of a wealthy man; Another hundred pages contributed to the food, so that they looked like the hospital attendants who bring the sick their soups; hundreds of others with instruments or domestic storm-duck assailed with music on the audience; but above all handed Renzolla the king with so much grace to drink showed he drank more love than wine. After completion of the Schmauserei and reversed board the king went to sleep, and Renzolla himself moved him so skilfully the boots off his feet and the heart out of his chest that he could feel the poison of love from his toes, their beautiful hand touched, rose up and penetrated his soul so that he, in order to prevent his death, in the possession of the antidote of those beauties was looking to set and by he called them sheltered Fairy, she desired her to wife. Since this was only concerned about the welfare Renzollas, they consented not only very willingly in his request but gave her also a dowry of seven million in gold. The king returned to this jubilant about this happiness with Renzolla back home, while this what the fairy done in her, moved away haughty and unrecognizable for everything with her husband, to be sent to them without the slightest warm word. As the fairy this so great ingratitude saw her, she cursed Renzolla that her face should be turned into a goat's face and hardly those words were spoken, then Renzollas mouth stretched into a muzzle with elle a long beard from the jaws retreated inside, the skin hardened, his face was covered with hair, and the delicate braids turned into pointed horns. Seeing this poor King was as if struck by stroke and did not know what was happening, he saw accept such a heinous form of such a wonderful lovely beauty, and cried every moment from under sighs and tears: ,, Where are the hairs I tied? Where the eyes that pierced me? Where the mouth of the trap my soul, the speckles my spirits and the net was my heart? But how can I be the man of a goat and acquire the title and goat horns carrier? Would it not for the marriage for me to stand woe? No, no, my heart will not break out of the face of a goat, a goat that would be worth my eternal home war with ausgekackten laurels! "As he spoke, he arrived at his palace, locked Renzolla with a maid in the kitchen and gave a ten each bundle of flax for spinning, what work they should have finished in a week. The maid, in obedience to the commands began immediately to pant the flax to divide it into edges to secure it to the spindle, rotating the spindle to work it into strands to bind with a word like a dog, so that they on Saturday evening and was really done with work. Renzolla but which had not previously seen in the mirror and therefore still the same thought to be that she was in the house of the fairy, threw the flax out of the window, saying: "What occurs to the king that he like me expects of things? If he needs shirts, so he may buy them and do not think they saw me on the street; Rather, it should nevertheless bear in mind that I have brought in gold him seven million, I and his wife, but not'm his maid, and he's a big ass seems to be because of this impertinence. "Despite all this, she felt, appeared as the Saturday morning and she saw that the maid her part had finished spun flax, by drumming to see an even very great fear, and therefore made his way to the palace of the fairy, from which it once they heard their plight, most tenderly was embraced and received a bag of flax spun to give it to the king and to show themselves as hardworking laborer and efficient housewife. Renzolla took the sack without even "Fine, thanks," to say and returned to the royal palace, so that the fairy was beside himself about the bad behavior of these ingrates. but after that the king had taken the web in reception, he gave her and the maid every dog ​​and told them that they maintain these animals and should raise. The maid then fed to her with bread crumbs and generally took care of him like a son; Renzolla other hand, exclaimed: "This is cricket but truly outrageous! Am I among the Turks? Should I comb dogs and they do whatever teach? "And saying, she threw the dog through the window, so that it might well happen differently for him to jump through a hoop as this. After a few months, however, sent as the king of the dogs, Renzolla was not bad mood; therefore she hurried again to Fee and found at the door the same as an old man doorkeeper, who asked her who she was and what she wanted; what Renzolla because it itself heard this question so unexpectedly addressed, immediately replied; "Do you know me any, you Geißbart?" - "Will you come to me so," replied the old man?. "That would be as if the thief the captors pursued and a donkey would be the other Sackträger; to you before yes, because for me you come to the right man! I have a goat's beard? Even a goat's beard and once again a! For because of your arrogance you do not deserve just this, but a lot worse! Just wait, you impudent thing, I'll be right infect you a light and show you what you made with your pride and your arrogance it! "And saying this, he took a piece from a little room a mirror and held it in front Renzolla which at the sight of her rough Given almost the spasms get because even Tassos Rinaldo as he looked transformed into the enchanted shields so, was not moved by such great sorrow and pain as Renzolla. when she looked disfigured so terrible that they themselves did not recognize himself; what the old man said to her, "You should not forget that you have become a peasant girl and only through the favor of the Fairy Queen; but you shameless, ungrateful females have little gratitude shown yourself for so much good will and they rather despised, without their even give the slightest sign of love. but how to drive it, how it works, and just wait, it will still turn out quite differently, because you have come into the right kitchen; look how your face is transformed: see but what your ingratitude brought you, because by the curse of the fairy you have not only your former face but also your rank lost! - But if you want to follow me Geißbart, to stand before the fairy throw yourself at her feet, you Eaves of the hair, zerkratze your face, you smash the chest and ask her forgiveness for your bad behavior towards them; she has a very soft heart and will certainly take pity on your sad situation, "Renzolla which saw that the old man spoke so discreet like a book and just hit the nail on the head, did as he called it, after which the Fee her after many hugs and kisses again gave the former appearance and brought them back in an all over with gold embroidered dress and surrounded by numerous servants chassis to the king. Once they now he saw appear as beautiful and gorgeous, he won it again as he loved his life and could have kicked himself that he so much suffering had to endure, although he excused himself by saying that she for their goats face not unjustly by he had been mocked. So now is Renzolla was again very happy by loved her husband, the Fairy honored, gratefully turned to the old man and never forgot what she had learned in themselves, namely: Thankful sense has always profit
Daum Erlings wandering	433	700	German	A tailor had a son, who happened to be small, and no bigger than a thumb, so he was called Thumbling. He had courage in him, and said to his father, 'Father, I must and must into the world.' 'Right, my son,' said the old man took a long darning needle and made on a knob of sealing wax on it, 'because you have is a sword for the journey.' Then the little tailor wanted to have one more meal and hopped into the kitchen to see what the woman had cooked mother finally. But it was just done, and the dish on the stove. Then he said, 'Mother, what is there to eat?' 'See yourself to' 'the mother said. Since Thumbling jumped on the stove and peered into the bowl: but as he reached into his neck too far the steam grabbed him by the food and carried him up the chimney. For a while he rode on the steam in the air until he finally sank back to earth. Now was the tailor out there in the wide world, went about, also went to a master in the work, but the food was not good enough for him. "Mistress if they give us no better food," said Thumbling, 'I go away and write tomorrow morning with chalk on their doorstep. Potato too much, too little meat, adies, Mr. Potato King' 'What do you want most, Grasshopper?' said the champion, grew angry, grabbed a rag and wanted to strike him my little tailor crept nimbly under a thimble, peeped down and out at the mistress tongue out. She raised her thimble, and wanted to grab him, but the little Thumbling hopped into the cloth, and while the mistress was opening and sought him, he set out in the table Ritz. 'Hey, ho, lady mistress,' he cried, and stuck his head in the air, and when she began to strike him he leapt down into the drawer. Finally, however, she caught him and drove him shifted to m House hinaus.Das tailor, and came to a large forest, as he met a band of robbers who had a design to steal the King's treasure. When they saw the little tailor, they thought 'as a little guy that can creep through a key hole and serve as picklock to us.' "Hollo," cried one, "thou giant Goliath, wilt thou go to the treasure chamber? you can easily sneak in and throw out the money. ' Thumbling remembered, finally he said 'yes, and went with them to the treasury. Then he looked at the door up and down if there was any crack in it. Not long before he discovered one who was wide enough to admit him. He also wanted the same throughout, but one of the two sentries who stood outside the door, noticed him and said to the other, 'what is creeping there an ugly spider? I will tottreten. ' 'Let the poor creature,' said the other, 'it has done nothing to you.' Now Thumbling got safely through the crevice into the treasury, opened the window beneath which the robbers were standing, and threw them a thaler after another out. When the little tailor in the best work was, he heard the King coming who wanted to inspect his treasure chamber, and crept hastily. The king noticed that several solid thalers were missing, but could not grasp who have should they stole, for locks and bolts were in good condition, and all seemed well guarded. Then he went away again and said to the two guards ', beware it is after the money.' As Thumbling now his work began anew, they heard the money moving, and a sound clip, clap, clip, folding. They ran swiftly in to seize the thief. But the little tailor, who heard them coming, was still swifter, and leapt into a corner and covered himself with a thaler, so that nothing was seen of it, it is still teased the guards and cried, "Here I am. ' s The wax ran thither, but as they arrived, it was already hopped into another corner under a thaler and shouted 'hey, here I am.' The guards jumped induce haste, Thumbling but was already in a third corner and shouted 'hey, here I am.' And so it had, until they were tired of fools and drove them so long in the treasury around and walked away. Now it threw the dollars out gradually all: the last snapped it with a vengeance 'then jumped himself nimbly upon it, and flew down with him through the window. The robbers paid him great praise, 'you are a valiant hero, "they said,' will you be our captain? ' but Thumbling thanked me and said he wanted to only see the world. They now divided the booty, but the little tailor only asked for a cruiser because it no longer wear konnte.Darauf it buckled his sword again to the body, said the robbers goodbye, and took the path between the legs. It was with some masters work, but he had no liking him last he hired himself as manservant in an inn. The maids but it did not like, because without that they could see him, he saw all they did secretly, and gave in to the rule, which they had taken from the plates, and carried away from the cellar of its own. They said, "Wait, we will pay thee," and arranged with each other to play him a trick. When a maid soon mowed afterwards in the garden, and there jumping around Thumbling and down the plants and saw abkriechen she mowed him up with the grass together quickly, band all in a large towel and secretly threw it to the cows. Now there was a big black among them who swallowed him down without hurting him. but below pleased him ill, because it was quite dark, burned no light. As was the cow being milked he cried, "Strip, strap, stroll, the bucket is almost full? 'But the noise of the milking prevented his being understood. Afterwards, the house came into the stall and said, "Tomorrow should the cow be slaughtered there. ' Then Thumbling was afraid that he called a clear voice, 'let me out first, I am shut up inside.' The Lord heard that quite well, but did not know where the voice was coming from. 'Where are you?' asked he. 'In the black,' he answered, but the Lord did not understand what that was hot, and fort.Am went next morning was slaughtered the cow. Fortunately, met at the cutting up and chopping Thumbling no bat, he got among the sausage meat. when the butcher came in and began his work, he shouted with all his might 'chop too deep, do not chop too deep, I am amongst.' From the noise of the chopping knife that no one heard. Now poor Thumbling his need had 'but trouble sharpens the wits, and he sprang out so adroitly between the blows by that none touched him, and he escaped unscathed. But still he could not: it was no other information, he had to let down stuff with the bits of bacon in a pudding. Since the neighborhood was a bit tight, and besides that he was hung up in the chimney for smoking where it time and time was terribly long. Length in winter he was taken down. because the sausage a guest had to be set. So when the hostess was cutting it in slices, he took care, that he will not stretch out his head too far for him the neck would not cut off with about: last he saw his opportunity, cleared to air and jumped heraus.In the house but where it was so bad happened to him, the tailor did not want to stay Iänger more, but went right back on the hike. But his freedom did not last long. In the open field, there was a fox in the way that snapped him up in thought. 'Ah, Mr. Fox, "cried the little tailor," I who am sticking in your throat, let me again.' 'You are right, "answered the fox' 'in whom I am but as much as anything; you promise me the fowls in thy father's court, and I will let you go. ' 'With all my heart, "answered the Thumbling,' the chickens you shall all have, that I promise you. ' Then the fox let him go again and carried it himself home. When the father saw again his dear son, he willingly gave the fox all the fowls which he had. 'But I'll bring you with a nice chunk of money,' said Thumbling and handed him the cruiser, he has hatte.'Warum acquired on his travels but the fox gets to eat the poor chickens? ' 'Oh, you goose, your father would surely love his child far more than the fowls in the yard.'
Tom Thumb	355	700	German	It was a poor peasant who sat in the evening by the hearth and poked the fire, and the woman sat and spun. And he said, "like ists so sad that we have no children! It is so still with us, and goes so loud in the other houses and fun here." - "Yes," replied the woman and sighed, "if only would a single, and that one ever so small, only Daume great, so happy I should be; It would, indeed dearly." Now it so happened that the woman gave birth to a child, the perfect in all limbs, but was no longer sickly ward and after seven months as a thumb. They said "it's how we wanted it, and it shall be our dear child," and called it by its shape Tom Thumb. They gave him plenty of food, but the child did not grow larger, but remained as it had been in the first hour; Nevertheless it looked sensibly out of its eyes and soon appeared as a wise and nimble creature, for everything was successful, what it anfieng.Der day his father made ready to go into the forest to cut wood; because he spoke out before him "now I want that one would be there to give me the car to bring it." - "O father," cried Tom Thumb, "the car I will soon bring you rely on it, it should be at the appointed time in the woods." Then the man smiled and said, "how could this be, you're much too small to lead to the horse with the reins." - "This does nothing, Father, if only the mother wants to tighten, I sit in the horse's ear and tell him how it should go." - "Well," replied the father, "we will try it again." When the hour came, the mother harnessed and put the Tom Thumb in the horse's ear, "! Jüh and joh hott and har" cried the little one, the horse should go Since it went quite properly as if a master, and the car went the right way into the forest. It happened just as he was turning a corner, and the little "har, har!" exclaimed that two strange men passed by. "Look," said one, "what is it? There goes a car, and a driver is calling to the horse and is not to be seen." - "You can not be fishy," said the other, "we will follow the cart and see where it stops." But the wagon went into the forest, and exactly to the place where the wood had been cut. When Tom Thumb saw his father, he cried to him, "You see, Father, I'm in the car, now get me down." The father took the horse with his left hand and took with the right his little son out of the ear, sat down quite funny on a straw. When the two strange men saw him Tom Thumb, they did not know what to say for astonishment. Then one of the others took aside and said, "listen, the little fellow would make our fortune if we let him see in a big city for money: we want to buy him." They went to the farmer and said, "Sell us the little man, he who cares well for us." - "No," replied the father, "it's my eye, and I do not for all the gold in the world for sale." Tom Thumb, however, when he heard of the trade, crawled to the coat tails of his father up, it turned him on the shoulder and said in his ear, "Father, give me for that, I will come to you again." So the father gave him up to the two men for a large piece of money. "Where are you sitting?" they spoke to him. "Oh just set me on the rim of your hat, and then I can and walk off and look at the location, but did not fall down." They did as he wished, and had taken as Tom Thumb leave of his father, they went away with him. So they went, until it was dusk, and then the little "lift me down once, it is necessary." - "Just stay up there," said the man on whose head he sat, "I do not mind making me the birds leave me sometimes things fall on." - "No," said Tom Thumb, "I also know what to send: take me quickly down." The man took off his hat and put the little fellow on the ground by the wayside, jumped there and he crawled a little back and forth between the floes and then slipped at once into a mousehole which he had chosen. "Good evening, gentlemen, just go home without me," he called out to them and laughed at them. They ran thither and stuck their sticks into the mousehole, but that was crept still farther wasted effort, Tom Thumb; and as soon it was quite dark, so they had with vexation, and with empty purses home wandern.Als Tom Thumb saw that they were gone, he crept out of the subterranean passage. "It is so dangerous to walk here on the field in the darkness," he said, "how easily a neck or a leg!" Fortunately, he met an empty shell. "Thank God," he said, "because I can safely spend the night," and got into it. Not long, as he was going to sleep, he heard two men go over, spoke of the "How can we even begin to the rich pastor to get his silver and gold?" - "I can tell you," cried Tom Thumb. "What was that?" spoke scared of a thief, "I heard someone talking." They stood still listening, and Tom Thumb spoke again, "Take me with you, I will help you." - "Where are you, then?" - "Look about on the ground and notice where the voice comes from," he replied. At last he found the thieves and lifted him into the air. "You little imp, how will you help us?" they said. "Look," he replied, "I crawl into the chamber of the priest between the iron bars and rich you out of what you have will." - "Well," they said, "let's see what you can." When they arrived at the rectory, Tom Thumb crept into the chamber, but cried out with all his might, "will you have all that is here?" The thieves were terrified and said, "Do speak quietly, so no one wakes up." But Tom Thumb made as if he had not understood this, and cried again, "what do you want? Do you want to have everything that is here?" Heard the cook, who was sleeping in the next room, sat up in bed and listened. but the thieves had run back part of the way with terror, finally they took again courage, thought "the little guy wants us to tease," came back and whispered to him in, "now do serious, and reach us something out." They cried Tom Thumb again, as loud as he could, "I will give you everything, just put out your hands in." Heard the listening maid quite distinctly, and jumped out of bed and burst open the door. The thieves ran away, and ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them, but the maid, as she could not see anything, went a light to light. As they thus came up, made himself Daumesdick without was that he saw, out into the barn and the maid after she searched through every corner and found nothing, lay down in her bed again, and thought she had with open eyes and ears but was only geträumt.Daumesdick climbing around in the Heuhälmchen and found a nice place to sleep: he wanted to rest until it was day, and then go back home to his parents. But he had other things in store yes, there are a lot of trouble and worry in the world! The maid went, as usual, dawned as the day already out of bed and tried to feed the cattle. Her first walk was into the barn, where she grabbed an armful of hay, and precisely that very one in which poor Tom Thumb was lying asleep. but he slept so soundly that he was aware of nothing, and did not awake until he was in the mouth of the cow, who had picked him up with the hay. "Oh God," he cried, "I am fallen into a mill!" But he soon discovered where he was. As was said watch it, that he did not come between the teeth and be dismembered, but he had yet to descend into the stomach. "In this little room the windows are forgotten," he said, "and no sun shining into it: a light will not have to!" On the whole, he liked the neighborhood bad, and what was the worst, there were more and more new hay in and the space was being filled. As he finally cried in fear, was so loud he "brings no more fodder brings me to me no more fodder." The maid was milking just the cow, and heard them talking as they, without seeing anyone, and it was the same voice that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off her stool, and spilled the milk. She ran in the greatest haste to her master, and said, "Oh heavens, pastor, the cow has been speaking." - "You're crazy," replied the priest, and he went himself to the barn to see what was the matter. But no sooner had he set his foot, so called Tom Thumb out again, "bring me no more fodder, bring me no more fodder." Then the pastor himself was alarmed, said it would kill an evil spirit and told the cow. So she was killed, but the stomach which put Tom Thumb was cast on the dung. Tom Thumb sought to work through it, and had great difficulty with it, but he finally brought it to the point that he got space, but when he was going to thrust his head out, a new misfortune. A hungry wolf ran up and swallowed the whole stomach at one gulp. Tom Thumb did not lose courage, "perhaps," he thought, "can the wolf listen to reason," and called him out of his belly, "My dear wolf, I do yourself a glorious Frass." - "Where is it to be?" said the wolf. "In such and such a house, because you have to crawl into the gutter and will find cakes and bacon and sausage, as much as you eat like," and described him exactly his father's house. The wolf let himself not say twice, squeezed himself in at night through the sink in and ate in the storeroom to your heart's content. When he was tired, he wanted to continue, but he had become so thick that he could not go out the same way again. Then Tom Thumb had reckoned upon, and began to make a violent noise in the body of the wolf, raged and screamed as loudly as he could. "Will you be quiet," said the wolf, "you'll wake people up." - "Eh, what," replied the boy, "you have eaten your fill, and I will make merry likewise,", and caught screaming anew with all their might. Of these, finally woke his father and his mother, went to the room and looked in through the gaps into it. As they saw that a wolf was inside, they ran away, and the man took the ax, and the wife the scythe. "Stay behind," said the man, when they entered the room, "if I gave him a blow and he is not dead it yet, so you have to hew to him and cut his body." Since Tom Thumb heard his father's voice and called out, "Dear father, I am here, I am in the belly of the wolf." Said the father, full of joy, "thank God, our dear child has found itself again," and told his wife to keep the scythe so that Tom Thumb might not be hurt. He then reached out and struck the wolf such a blow to the head that he fell down dead; then they got knives and scissors and cut his body open and drew the little fellow forth. "Oh," said the father, "what we have endured for you care about!" - "Yes, father, I'm around a lot in the world; thank God that I breathe fresh air again." - "Where have you been all?" - "Oh, Father, I was in a mouse hole in a cow's stomach and a wolfs inside: now I'll stay with you." - "And we sell you all the riches of the world will not again." Since embraced and kissed them their dear Tom Thumb, gave him to eat and drink and let him new clothes make, because his own had been spoiled on his journey.
The old Sultan	460	101	German	A farmer once had was called a faithful dog, the Sultan, who had grown old and lost all his teeth, so he could grab anything more firmly. At one time the farmer was standing with his wife at the front door and said, ". The old Sultan I shoot dead tomorrow, which is good for nothing" The woman, who felt pity for the faithful beast replied: "He has served us so long, and honorable in us, that we might well give him his keep." . - "Eh, what?" Said the man, "You are not very clever; he has no teeth in its mouth, and no thief is afraid of him, he can go off now he has served us, he has good feeding for it got. "the poor dog, who was not far from it stretched out in the sun, everything had been a member, and was sorry that tomorrow should be his last day. He had a good friend, that was the wolf, and he crept evening out into the forest and complained of the fate that awaited him stands. "Listen, my friend," said the wolf, "be of good cheer, I will help you out of your trouble. I have thought of something. Early tomorrow morning is your Lord with his wife to make hay, and they take their little child because no one remains in the home. you maintain the child while working the hedge in the shade to put down. Lie down there too, just as you wanted it to guard. then I want to get out of the wood, and carry the child, you need to swiftly after me, when you wanted me there again abjagen I let it fall, and you bring it back to its parents, who then believe you have saved it, and are much too grateful to you should do any harm;. on the contrary, you will be in high favor, and they will leave it to you to nothing missing. "the plan pleased the dog, and how he had thought, he was executed. The father screamed when he saw the wolf running across the field with his child; but as she brought back the old Sultan because he was glad stroked him and said: "You should not be curved hairs, you shall eat my bread free as long as you live." To his wife he said, "Go home at once and make Old Sultan some bread-sop, he will not have to bite, and bring the pillow out of my bed, I will give him to his camp." From now on, Old Sultan was as well off as he could wish for. Soon afterwards he visited the wolf and was pleased that everything had succeeded so well. "But, my friend," he said, "you will just wink an eye if I weghole a fat sheep your master. Nowadays it is hard to fend one up." - "Do not reckon," replied the dog, "my Lord, I remain faithful, I can not agree" The wolf said it was not spoken in earnest, came creeping in the night and the sheep going to take away. But the farmer, to whom the faithful Sultan had told the wolf's plan, suited him and dressed his hide soundly with the flail. The wolf had to tear out, but shouted to the dog, "Wait, you scoundrel, you shall atone!" The next morning sent the wolf the pig and let the dog out into the forest so that they might settle the affair. Old Sultan could not be helped as a cat with only three legs, and as they went out together the poor cat limped along, and held simultaneously in pain the tail in the air. The wolf and his friend were already in place, but when they saw their enemy coming, they thought that he was bringing a saber with him, for they mistook the outstretched tail of the cat for it. And when the poor beast hopped on three legs, they could only think that it was picking up a stone each time, to throw at them. Since they became both afraid; the wild boar crept into the wood and the wolf jumped up a tree. The dog and the cat, when they came, were surprised that no one see left. The wild boar had been unable to completely hide the foliage, but the ears still stood out. While the cat was looking carefully about, the boar moved his ear; the cat said that it suggested a mouse moving there, jumped upon it and bit heartily into it. As the boar made a great noise and ran away, crying out "up in the tree, sits the culprit." The dog and cat looked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed that he had shown himself so timid, and made friends with the dog at peace.
The poor boy in the grave	1766	1876	German	There was once a poor shepherd boy 'had died the father and mother, and he was placed by the authorities a rich man into the house, which should feed him and educate. But the man and his wife had a bad heart, their riches were greedy and resentful and offended when someone put a morsel of their bread in his mouth. The poor boy might do what he wanted, he got a little to eat, but the more Schläge.Eines day he had to watch a hen and her chickens. but they deserted with their young through a set hedge a hawk swooped down and carried her through the air. The boy screamed with all his might 'thief, thief, rascal.' But what was that? the hawk did not bring its prey back. The man heard the noise, ran up, and heard when he that his hen was gone, he flew into a rage and gave the boy such a beating that he was a few days could not move. Now he had the chickens without the hen guard, but there was the need even greater, for one ran here, the other there. Since he meant to make it smart when it all associations together on a cord, because he could then steal away the hawk none. But far from it. After a few days, when he fell asleep tired of running about and hunger, the bird of prey came, and seized one of the chickens, and as the others were tied to it, he carried them all off together, sat down on a tree and swallowed it , The farmer was just coming home, and when he saw the accident, he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifully that he for several days in bed musste.Als he was back on his feet, the farmer said to him, 'you are to me too stupid, I can thee to watch not need you to go as a messenger. ' He sent him to the judges, which he was to carry a basketful of grapes, and gave him a letter. On the way hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy so violently that he ate two of the grapes. He brought to the judge the basket, but when he had read the letter and counted the grapes, he said 'it lacks two.' The boy confessed quite honestly that he, driven by hunger and thirst, he had devoured the missing. The judge wrote a letter to the farmer and demanded twice as much grapes. These had the boy with a letter carry there. As it was so extremely hungry again and thirsty, he could not help himself, he again ate two grapes. But he took the letter from the basket, put it under a stone and sat on it, could allow the letter does not see and betray him. The judge, however placed him of the missing pieces due to task. "Ah," said the boy, "how did you find out? The letter could not know because I had previously put it under a stone. ' The judge had at the simplicity laugh, and sent the man a letter wherein he cautioned him to keep the poor boy better, and not let him want for meat and drink; He also wants to teach him what is right and wrong sei.'Ich you want to show the difference already, "said the hard man; 'But you want to eat' so you also have to work with, and you're doing something wrong, thou shalt be quite sufficiently taught by blows. ' The next day he introduced him to a heavy work. He was to chop two bundles of straw for feed for the horses; then the man threatened: 'in five hours,' he said, 'I'm back, and if the straw is not cut to chaff, so I beat you until you can not move a limb rain.' The farmer went with his wife, the servant and the girl to the fair and left the boy behind nothing but a small piece of bread. The boy stood at the straw chair and began to work with all his might. Since it was this hot, he put his little coat off and threw it on the straw. In the fear of not cope, he cut all the time, and in his zeal he cut imperceptibly with the straw and his little coat. Too late he became aware of the disaster, which left not make up for. 'Oh,' he cried, 'now it's all over with me. The wicked man did not threaten me for nothing, he comes back and sees what I have done, he will kill me. I would rather my own life nehmen.'Der boy had once heard the farmer's wife said, "under the bed I have a pot with poison. ' But she had only said it to restrain the greedy people, for it was honey in it. The boy crawled under the bed, took out the pot and ate him out completely. 'I do not know,' he said, 'people say death is bitter, but he tastes sweet. No wonder that the farmer's wife has so often longed for death. ' He sat on a stool and was taken to die. But instead of that he should be weaker, he felt strengthened by the nourishing food. 'It must have been poison,' he said, 'but the farmer once said' in his wardrobe was a small bottle of poison for flies, which will probably be the true poison, and bring me death. ' And there was no poison for flies, but Hungarian wine. The boy took out the bottle and drank it. 'This death tastes sweet,' he said, but shortly after when the wine began to him to get into the brain and stupefy him, he thought his end was drawing near. 'I feel that I must die,' he said, 'I will go to the churchyard, and seek a grave.' He staggered out, reached the cemetery and placed in a freshly dug grave. He lost his senses more and more. Nearby stood an inn where a wedding was being celebrated: when he heard the music, he fancied himself already in paradise to be, until he finally lost all his senses. The poor boy did not wake up again, the glow of hot wine and the cold dew of the night took his life, and he remained in the grave, in which he placed himself hatte.Als to the farmer the news of the death of the boy was, frightened and he was afraid of being brought to justice indeed the fear took him so powerful that he fainted fell to the ground. The woman who stood with a pan of hot fat, the herd, ran up to him to help him. But the fire struck in the pan, took the whole house, and after a few hours it lay in ashes. The years that they had to live, they brought, plagued by remorse, in poverty and misery.
The poor miller's boy and the cat	1009	402	German	In a mill an old miller lived. had neither wife nor child, and three apprentices served under him. As they had been with him several years, he said one day to them, "I am old and I want to put behind the stove, go out, and he who brings me the best horse home, to him will I give the mill, and it should cater for me till my death. " but the third of the boys was the Kleinknecht, who held was from the other for silly, they begrudged the mill; and he would not afterwards einmal.Da attracted all three together, and when they came to the village, the two said to stupid Hans, "Now you can stay here, you get all your life no horse." Hans but went with them, and when it was night they came to a cave in which they lay down to sleep. The two smart ones waited until Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, made continuing and left him where and thought it to have done a very clever; yes, it is you, but do not go well, as now came the sun and Hans woke up he in a deep cave!; He looked around on and cried, "Oh God, where am I?" Then he got up and crawled out of the cave, went into the woods and thought: I am quite alone and deserted, how shall I now come to a horse! Whilst he was thus walking full of thought, he met a small tabby cat which said quite kindly, "Hans, where are you going?" - "Oh, can you tell me not but help." . "What your desire is white, I probably," said the cat, "you want to have a beautiful horse Come with me, and have seven years and I will give one to you more beautiful than you seen my faithful servant, your whole life - have "Well, this is a strange cat, thought Hans, but I want to see now whether this is true, what she says. As they took him into their cursed castle and had since nothing but cats who were her servants: They leapt nimbly upstairs and downstairs, and were merry and happy. Evening when they sat down to dinner, had three music made, all emphasized the bass, the other the fiddle, and the third put the trumpet and blew out his cheeks, as much as he could. When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the cat said, "Now, Hans, come and dance with me!" - "No," he replied, "with a kitty I do not dance, I've never done." - "Then take him to bed!" she said to the kittens. As he lit one in his bedroom, one pulled his shoes off, one his stockings, and at last one blew out the light. The next morning they returned and helped him out of bed, one put his stockings on, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes, one washed him, and one dried his face with her tail. "That feels very soft," said Hans. but he had to serve the cat, and all the days of small make wood; this he had an ax of silver, and the wedge and saw were of silver and the mallet of copper. Now that he's made small, stayed there in the house and had good food and drink, but never saw anyone but the tabby cat and her Gesinde.Einmal she said to him: "Go and mow my meadow, and dry the grass!" and gave him a scythe of silver, and a whetstone of gold, but also told him to everything again really deliver. Then Hans went and did what was made to feel he finished the work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, and hay to the house and asked if she wanted to give him his reward. "No," said the Cat, "Thou shalt not matter to me to do There is timber of silver, carpenter's, square, and everything is necessary, all of silver, with these build me only a little house!" Then Hans built the house, and said that he had now done everything, and still he had no horse. Since he was seven years gone around like a half. The cat asked if he wanted to see her horses? "Yes," said Hans. Since she made the little house, and as such opened the door, there stood twelve horses, ah! who had been very proud to have bright and shining, his heart was happy that in the body. Now they gave him to eat and drink, and said, "Go home, your horse, I do not give you with; but in three days I will come and bring thee in." So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill , But she had not given him even a new dress, but he had to keep his dirty old smock frock, which he had brought with him and that he had everywhere become too short in the seven years. When he reached home, the two other apprentices were there again; each had indeed brought his horse, but the one his was blind and the other lame. They asked, "Hans, where did you get your horse?" - "In three days it shall meet." Then they laughed and said, "Indeed, stupid Hans, where are you herkriegen a horse that will be something right!" Hans went into the parlor, but the miller said he should not come to the table, he was so torn and ragged, to be ashamed if someone came in. So they gave him some food out, and as they went to bed at night, he wanted the other two give no bed, and he finally had to crawl into the goose-house and lie down on a little hard straw. The next morning when he awoke, are already the three days had passed, and a coach came with six horses and they shone so bright that it was beautiful, and a servant brought a seventh as that was for the poor miller's boy , Out of the coach but rose a magnificent princess and went into the mill, and this princess was the little tabby-cat whom poor Hans had served seven years. She asked the miller where the miller's boy, who Kleinknecht would be? Then the miller said, "That we can not take in the mill, which is slating and is in the goose-house." As the princess told them to bring him immediately. So they brought him out, and he had to hold his little smock to cover themselves. As the servant buckled fine clothes and had to wash it and tighten, and when that was done, no king beautiful aussehen.Danach was asked the Virgin to see the horses which had brought the other apprentices, one was blind and the other lame. As they left the servant to bring the seventh horse; the miller saw it, he said, so one would 'not yet come to the farm to him. "And that is for the third miller's boy," she said. "Because he must have the mill," said the miller. But the king's daughter said that the horse he was to keep his mill; and took her faithful Hans and set him in the coach, and drove away with him. They first drove to the little house which he had built with the silver tools, there is a big castle, and everything inside it was of silver and gold; and then she married him, and he was rich, so rich that he had for his life enough. Therefore, let no one say that anyone who is silly can never become law.
Bearskin	962	361	German	Once there was a young guy let himself enlisted as a soldier, conducted himself bravely, and was always the foremost when it rained bullets. As long as the war lasted, all went well, but it was closed as peace, he received his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where he wanted. His parents were dead, and he had no home, so he went to his brothers and begged them to give him as long as maintenance, broke out again until the war. The brothers were hard-hearted and said, "What shall we do with you? we do not need you, watch as you durchschlägst you. ' The soldier had nothing to go left but his gun, which he took on his shoulder and wanted in the world. He came to a large heath, on display at nothing but a circle of trees, under these he sat sorrowfully down, and began to think over his fate. 'I have no money,' he thought, 'I have learned nothing but the art of war, and now that they have made peace, they do not need me more; I foresee, I have to starve. ' Suddenly he heard a roar, and when he looked round, a strange man stood before him, who wore a green coat, quite handsome looked, but had a hideous cloven hoof. 'I already know what's wrong with you,' said the man, 'money and possessions you shall have as much as you can make away with violence, but I need to know beforehand whether you are not afraid, so I do not vain spend my money. ' 'A soldier and fear, how does that work?' he replied, "you can put me to the test. ' 'Well' replied the man, "look behind you. ' The soldier turned round and saw a large bear, which came growling towards him. 'Oho, "cried the soldier. 'You I will tickle your nose that you should pass the desire to hum, "aimed, and shot the bear on the nose that he fell down and no longer te reg. "I see well, 'said the stranger,' that thou art not wanting in courage, but there is still another condition which you must comply. ' 'If it to me does not endanger my salvation, "replied the soldier, who probably realized he who before had,' otherwise I let myself to anything. ' 'You'll see for yourself, "answered the green skirt," thou shalt for the next seven years you do not wash you hair and beard do not mesh, do not cut the nails and pray no Our Father. Then I will give you a skirt and jacket, which you must carry at this time. If you die during these seven years, so you're my, you stay but live, so you're free, and rich to boot for all your life. ' The soldier thought of the great need in which he found himself, and as he had so often gone to his death, he would dare even now and agreed. The devil pulled the green coat, gave it to the soldiers and said, 'if you have this coat on your body and reach into the bag, and you will always hand full of money have.' Then he pulled the bear skin over and said, "This shall be your cloak, and your bed, because you need to sleep and allowed to come in no other bed. And this because of costume you shall be called Bearskin. ' Then the soldier disappeared Teufel.Der put the coat on, felt at once in the pocket and found that the thing was really true. Then he put on the bearskin and went forth into the world, was in good spirits and let nothing that did him good and woe to the money. In the first year his appearance was passable, but in the second he began to look like a monster. His hair covered nearly the whole face, his beard was like a piece of coarse felt, his fingers had claws, and his face was covered with dirt so that if one cress had been sown, it would have come. Anyone who saw him, ran away, but as he everywhere gave the poor money to pray for him that he did not die during the seven years, and because he paid for everything good, so he was still always found shelter. In the fourth year, he came to an inn, where the landlord would not receive him and wanted him not even have a place in the stable, because he feared that his horses would be scared. But as Bearskin thrust into his pocket and pulled out a handful of ducats, the host let himself be persuaded and gave him a room in an outhouse; but he had to promise not to be seen, lest the inn Bearskin evening wished bad name käme.Als alone sat and heart that the seven years were over, he heard a loud lamenting in a neighboring room. He had a compassionate heart, opened the door and saw an old man who was crying and violently beat up his hands above his head. Bearskin went nearer, but the man jumped up and tried to escape. Finally, when he heard a human voice, he had to move, and by kind words it brought Bearskin meaning that it revealed the cause of his grief. His property had and by degrees, he and his daughters had to starve, and he was so poor that he could not even pay the landlord and jail should be set. 'If that is your only trouble, "said Bearskin," I have enough money.' He left brought the innkeeper, paid him and put the unfortunate a purse full of gold in the Tasche.Als the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he did not know what he should prove grateful. 'Come with me,' he said to him, "my daughters are all miracles of beauty, you choose one of them for women. When she hears what you've done for me, so she will not refuse. of course, you look a little strange, but it will bring you again in order. ' The Bearskin well, and he went along. When the eldest saw him she was so terribly alarmed at his face that she screamed and ran away. The second stood still while looking at him from head to foot, but then she said 'how can I accept a husband who has no human form more? but since the shaven bear liked even better was to be seen here again and off for a man who had a hussar's dress and white gloves. If he were only ugly, I might get used to that. ' The youngest, however, said, "Dear father, that must be a good man who has helped you out of trouble, You have promised him a bride, your promise must be kept. ' It was a pity that Bearskin's face was covered by dirt and hair, otherwise you could have seen how laughed his heart in his body when he heard those words. He took a ring from his finger, broke it in two and gave her one half, the other he kept to himself. But in their half he wrote his name and in his half, he wrote her name and asked her to keep her piece carefully. He then took leave and said, "I have three more years wandering: but come back I do not, so you are free, for I shall be dead. But please God to my life erhält.'Die poor bride dressed all in black, and when she thought of her future bridegroom, tears came into his eyes. By her sisters you were given nothing but contempt and ridicule. 'Take care, "said the eldest," if thou givest his hand, he will strike his claws into it.' 'Beware,' said the second, "Bears like the sweetness, and if you please him, he eats you up. ' 'You must always do as he likes, "began the elder again," or else he will growl.' And the second continued, "But the wedding will be a merry one, for bears dance well. ' The bride was silent and did not let itself be misled. But Bearskin moved about in the world, from one place to another, doing good wherever he could, and gave generously to the poor, so they were praying for him. Finally, dawned as the last day of the seven years, he went out again on the heath, and sat under the ring of trees. It was not long before the wind whistled, and the devil stood before him and looked at him peevish; then he threw the old rock back and demanded his green back. 'So far we have not yet, "answered Bearskin," thou must first make me clean.' want the devil liked it or not, he had to fetch water, and wash Bearskin, comb his hair, and cut the nails. Then he looked like a brave soldier, and was much nicer than had ever pulled off happy vorher.Als the devil, and it was the Bearskin quite lighthearted. He went to the city, did a magnificent velvet coat, sat down in a carriage drawn by four white horses and drove to his bride's house. No one recognized him, the father took him for a distinguished general, and led him into the room where his daughters were sitting. He had to settle between the two oldest: they gave him wine, put the best morsels in front of him and said that they had seen a handsomer man in the world. The bride but sat in black dress against him, opened his eyes not saying a word. When he finally asked his father if he would give him one of his daughters in marriage, the two jumped oldest up, ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses, for each imagined that she was the chosen one. The stranger, as soon as he was alone with his bride, brought out his half of the ring and threw it in a beaker of wine he handed her across the table. She took him, but had been drinking when she and found the half ring lying on the ground, so it's heart. She took the other half, which she wore on a ribbon around his neck, she held it, and it turned out that both parts perfectly matched to each other. And he said, 'I am your betrothed bridegroom, whom you saw as Bearskin, but through God's grace I have again received my human form, and have once more become clean.' He went up to her, hugged her and gave her a kiss. By the two sisters came back in full dress in, and when they saw that the handsome man had fallen to the youngest, and heard that it was Bearskin, they ran out full of anger and rage. One of them drowned herself in the well, the other hanged himself from a tree. In the evening, some one knocked at the door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it was the devil in his green coat, who said 'you see, now I have two souls one for yours.
The peasant and the devil	1799	1030	German	There once was a clever, crafty peasant, were much talked whose tricks, but the best story is, however, how he once off the devil got and had .The peasant fool had ordered his field one day and prepared for the journey home , has a stepped down as the dawn. Then he saw in the middle of his field a bunch of fiery coals, and as he drew near in astonishment, then sat on top of the coals a little black devil. "You sit well on a treasure," said the peasant. "Yes," answered the devil, "on a treasure which contains more gold and silver than you have seen in your whole life." - "The treasure lies in my field and belongs to me," said the peasant. "It is yours, answered the devil," if you for two years give me half of what your field produces. Money I have enough, but I have a desire for the fruits of the earth "The peasant went into the bargain . "but that no dispute arises in the division, she said," so you should belong, which is above the earth and me what's under the ground. " The Devil was well, but the cunning peasant had sown turnips. And when the harvest time came, the devil appeared and wanted to take away his crop, but he found nothing but the yellow withered leaves, while the peasant, full of delight, was digging up his turnips. "Once you've had the advantage," said the Devil, "but the next time will not apply. Yours is what grows above ground and my what's underneath." - "I am willing," answered the peasant. But when the time came to sow, sowed not return turnips, but wheat. The fruit was ripe, and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks down to the ground. When the devil came, he found nothing but the stubble, and went angrily down into a canyon. "So you have to bounce the foxes," said the peasant, and went and fetched away the treasure.
The boy and the devil	4029	1158	German	There was a fellow who went on a ways and cracking nuts; he found one that was worm-eaten, and at the same moment he met the devil. "Is it true," the boy said, "what you say that the Devil can make himself as small as he wants, and squeeze through a needle's eye" - "Yes," the devil said. "Oh! let even see me and creep into this nut, "the boy said again!; and did the devil. When he had crawled through the hole, the boy struck in a stake. "Well, did I like," he said and put the nut in his pocket. As he was now gone to an end, he was a blacksmith, as he went in and asked the blacksmith, but he wants to beat him the nut in two. "Yes, it should be easily done," said the blacksmith and took his smallest hammer, laid the nut on the anvil and struck; but they did not want two. Then he took a slightly bigger hammer, but it was not yet hard enough; Now he does not even took an even bigger, but that's. Since the blacksmith was morose and took the big hammer, "I'm gonna get nevertheless in half," he said, and slammed, all he could. Since burst the nut that the whole forging roof flew off, and there was a crash, as if the hut was overturned. "I think the devil was in the nut," said the blacksmith. "Yes, he was there," said the lad.
The Dragon	3402	463	German	The story of the seven rinds did so much fat in the amusement soup of the prince that it had communicated with the story of the stupid malice and malicious stupidity Saporitas that Tolla with so much skill, came to overflow. Popa but which Tolla was in no way inferior, drove through the Sea of ​​Stories with the following tales: Who wants to harm others, often unto himself the greatest suffering, and who digs a pit shall fall into it, as it did at a will see Queen, who lay down with her own hands the noose in which they finally got caught with his foot. Once there was a king of Honenufer, which for his cruelty and tyranny, as he had once gone with his wife to a far away from the city of pleasure palace, was raped by a witch's throne. Therefore, when he gave a much-visited wooden statue, the dark oracles, sent to ask for advice, he was told that he could only regain his throne when the sorceress would lose their lives. Seeing, however, that the sorceress, also, that she was surrounded by a numerous guard, also recognized by him the sent against them people at the nose and they put to death without mercy, he came last in despair and decided to all females from the city that fell into his hands, to rob honor and life. Now after many hundreds, driven from their evil fate, destroyed by his reputation and saw their lives shortened last came a virgin named Porziella into his hand, the graceful creature that you could only find any in the world , Her hair handcuffs love captors, her forehead was a blackboard on which the charms and pleasures were listed all in the pantry of love; her eyes two lighthouses, which pointed the loaded with wishes ships, whereas they would have control in order to enter the port of pleasure, and her mouth a lovely rear passage between two rows of rose bushes. So as soon as this maiden had fallen into the hands of the king and the same from him treatment had such experience their predecessors, he wanted to kill her, like them, at the same moment, however, when he raised the dagger, a bird gave him a certain root on the arm fall, he thus in such a tremor came that he dropped the gun from his hand. But this bird was a fairy who a few days earlier asleep in a forest where you could escape from under the tents of the trees the midday heat, if you knew how to defy the fear of the prevailing darkness, in the moment when a satyr their honor wanted to touch, was awakened by Porziella so that accompanied them perpetually from that time on it to her to repay suitable opportunity a service by another. When the king perceived what had happened to him, he thought that the beauty that have placed Given his arm bracket and charmed the dagger so he would not pierce the Virgin, as he did with so many others; Therefore, he wanted the same thing does not repeat twice and do not stain the instrument of death with blood as he did with the of life, but they walled in an attic room of his palace and starve it. Said and done, the unfortunate lover was immured within four walls and you neither left nor to drink something to eat, so they hinsterbe so gradually. But as soon as the bird saw Porziella in such distress, he comforted them with kind words, saying to her that she should only be of good cheer; because he would to sign up for a service that they rendered him to bezeigen grateful to her, if necessary, assist with his own blood, but he did, in spite of all entreaties Porziellas not tell her who he was, only that he her was committed and all would do to her to serve anyway; and as he saw that the poor girl from hunger almost passed, he flew rapidly progressive, but returned immediately with a sharp knife from the table housing the King again and told her that they make little by a hole in a corner of the floor should that just befände above the kitchen, from which he would always bring her something in order to live their lives. So Porziella dug for some time with great effort and finally made such a hole that it pioneered the use of birds one way in which he, by just the cook took a bucket of water from the fountain, flew down to the kitchen, a fat chicken that just stood by the fire, took up and brought Porziella; but since they also had very thirsty and he did not know how to bring her something to drink, so he flew to the pantry, a large quantity of grapes were in, and brought her the most beautiful of them carried up; so he made it for a while every day. Porziella but who had become pregnant by that violence of the king, gave birth last a pretty boy, whom she nursed with everlasting help the bird and as much as they could, used. When he had grown up, advised the fairy Porziella that they make the hole bigger and break away as much shingles of the floor should, to Miuccio (so called even the Son) could crawl through it on which she was to him with some knitting that the bird brought her down and then let the shingles put back in their place, so you do not realize how Miuccio would come down. Having thus done Porziella as the bird they have called, and she had told the son, never to say where he came and what he wanted, she let him down to the kitchen than just the cook had gone out that on his return , such a pretty boy in the kitchen seeing him asked who he was, where he came and what he wanted, what the little one, the command mindful of his mother, said he had lost and seeking a service. During this Hinundherredens the Seneschal came. No sooner had this sees the awakened child in the way he thought right away that he would be very well suited to the noble servants of the king; so he put him on the spot before the king, who immediately took to this gem of beauty and grace big favor him in his service as pages, in his heart, but kept as a son and was informed it in all chivalrous arts so that he over time, the greatest ornament was his court and was loved far more by the king as his stepson. Precisely for this reason the queen began to be Miuccio gram of hearts and hate him by reason of her soul, and so deeper roots hit her envy and her anger, the higher Miuccio by the favors and goodwill rose up, the king of put him on the day so that she decided the rungs of his fortune conductor such lather that he shut rush from it. So when she and the King one evening the instruments had voted and together started a light music, the Queen said to her husband that Miuccio had boasted to build three castles in the air, so that the king partly because he was quite surprised , partly to his wife to make a pleasure, left the next morning, about the time when the moon are the shadows of the night like a schoolmaster his pupils because of the sun festival holidays, call Miuccio and ordered him without any contradiction, the promised three locks to build up in the air, otherwise he would even dance the air dance on the gallows. Since Miuccio heard this, he went to his room and began to complain bitterly, as he saw how fragile glass but had the favor of princes and how fast should fade the goodwill that proved her. While he so cried and complained, suddenly appeared the bird and said to him: "Take heart, Miuccio, and fear nothing as long as you have me with you; because of my ability to deliver you out of your trouble. "Then he ordered him to take cardboard and glue and to turn it into three large locks, was then three powerful griffins come to every one of the locks tied behind his back, and after he them so had to fly in the air, he was summoning the king Miuccio, which at once hastened with his whole court to this spectacle. When the King perceived the ingenuity Miuccios, he won him much better than he already had it before, and showed him all possible caresses, such that he was still more food was and new oil in their anger by fire to the envy of the Queen poured by saw namely, that you did not want to go as desired. She could therefore neither the day watch without thinking on what kind sleep, even at night without dreaming, how they could pull this thorn out of sight, so that after a few days again said to the king: " Lieberman, now the time has finally come when we can return to the previous size, and last year's joys, as Miuccio has offered to the fairy dazzling, and the fact that they have come out with their eyes, you your lost kingdom . repurchase "When the king touched on his sore spot felt he had to summon the same moment Miuccio and said to him:" I am in the highest degree astonished that you, but I love you so much and you raise me on the seat can, which I'm heruntergepurzelt, yet are so indifferent and you can not be be put to snap me out of trouble, in which I find myself, as you see me but by a king throne look down on a forest from one city to a poor palace and the mastery of a numerous population to a few starvelings and bread soup eaters. If you want to avoid therefore my favor, so run right now and get me the eyes of the fairy who has snatched mine me; for while you shut your their stores, you'll magazine my size reopen, and by looking auslöschst their lamps, light the torches of my glory again, the now darkened, and deprived of all light is. "Once Miuccio this speech heard the king, he wanted Although respond that the king would be ill-reported and mistaken in him; because he would not be a raven eyes aushacke nor a privy Feger, the holes ausräume; But the king interrupted him and said: "Not another word, I want it, and so it shall be; leave, you sure that the shop of my head the scale is ready to you so that when you meet your duty, your reward, but if you do not do what I command you zuzuwägen your punishment. "Miuccio who does not head wanted to run against the wall and saw that he was dealing with a true devil, sat down in a corner and again began to complain until the bird again appeared and said to him: "is it possible Miuccio that you always have the same pants so full? Could you start a larger howl if it would even be already over with me? Do not you know that I am more concerned for your life as for my own? so do not lose heart and come with me; for you shall see what I'm looking for a guy. "Then he jumped up and settled into a forest, where he barely begun had to chirp as him once a flock of other birds surrounded, to which he said he the man who built dare, the sorceress to dazzle, would make out a letter of protection against the claws of Sperber and hawks and a freely conduct against guns, arc Bows and limes. Among these birds now also a swallow that had built their nest on a projection of the royal palace and the Sorceress of heart hated because it was often when she performed her diabolical magic arts, driven from it by the incense of her window was they therefore, partly out of desire for revenge and partly to gain the promised reward, offered to perform the desired service. therefore, they flew like lightning to the city and into the palace and saw the Sorceress, lying on a couch, sat drifting snow two maids with a fan cooling. The swallow sat thus just above the eyes of the sorceress down, and by letting drop their feces on them, they robbed them soon eyesight. Now, since the fairy looked at high noon in night wrapped in this way and knew very well that by this closing their eyes shops it was with the goods of ruling over, she let out a cry like a soul in purgatory, the scepter let go and went to hide in a cave, where she met with her head for so long against the walls until they ended their lives. But no sooner had they had moved, the councils already sent envoys to the king that he returned back to his residence, as the dark night of magic would have caused this bright day for him. At the same time now arrived when the king, even Miuccio who spoke thus to the advice of the bird to the king appeared: "The Sorceress is now blind and restore the kingdom yours; if I deserve therefore any reward for this service, so let me in God's name from you without exposing me again like threats. "The king, however, embraced him most heartily, allowed him aufzubehalten his hat in his presence, leaving him on his side sit, so it is impossible to describe how much brown the queen in anger and turned blue, so that one could see from the colorful rainbow that appeared on her face, the misfortune storm poor in their hearts against Miuccio rose. At some distance from the pleasure palace now is a frightful dragon kept on who was the twin brother of the queen, and since her father when she was born the astrologers would have to call so they would here about questioning the stars, so they gave him the answer that his daughter would live just as long as the dragon, but that at the death of the other of them must necessarily dying with one; and only a means could bring to life the queen again, namely when bestriche her temples, the sternum, the nostrils and the pulses with the blood of the same dragon. By now the Queen was aware of the enormous anger and power of the dragon, so she went with it to play him Miuccio somehow in the mouth, convinced that the monster devour it in one bite and Miuccio for the dragon only as a hollow tooth would be; so they turned to the king and said: ,, my faith, Miuccio is a real treasure for your house, and you were in the highest degree ungrateful if you did not love him as much as possible, the more he can be announced, that he wants to kill the dragon, which you have always shown so hostile; for though this is my own brother, I love but a single hair of my husband more than a hundred brothers. "The king, who hated the dragon fatal, but had never been able to get him at bay, immediately let Miuccio call, saying, to him, "I know, dear Miuccio that you succeed everything you take, and therefore you have to because you already done so much for me, I now shew a favor; but then you can do with me what you will. So will go straight back and kill the dragon; because you keep me by a very important service and it shall be a corresponding reward received for it, "Miuccio was with these words on the verge of losing his mind, and after he regained the use of his speech, he spoke thus to the king." Truly, that's very hard that your so great pleasure takes it to throw myself in danger and distress! Is my life worth nothing that you really give it that? This is my faith, no bed of roses, but here is a dragon ripping with its claws, smashed his head, crushing his tail, torn with the teeth, poisoned with eyes and kill with the breath. Will you send me to death, then? Is this the sinecure that your giving me the fact that I bought back to you your kingdom? Which cursed scoundrel gave me brewed again because this soup? What a hell roast you for that, but it was in the implementation of what he once said, steadfastly back into his head and helped you on these jumps? "The king, who was cast as easily as a ball back and forth like a rock, now insisted especially on his head and said: "The hardest thing you have survived and are now staying right in the top stuck! That's why no word lose on and deliver my kingdom were of this monster if I do not want you taking life! "The poor Miuccio, who soon heard a threat soon face caress soon be soon a flattery, a kick in the butt felt and soon, she saw treat it as soon started thinking about how variable is the court atmosphere, and would like the friendship of the king have been rid; but as he knew very well that it is foolish to challenge the major objections, and as dangerous to pluck than the lion by the beard, so he removed himself by cursing his fate that led him to the court and it is therefore always had to rely only Hofwohnung in the house of life. While he wetted his face between his knees, sitting on the stairs in front of the palace gate, his shoes with tears and warmed the space between the legs by sighs, suddenly, the bird appeared with an herb in its mouth and said to him by it tossed into his lap: "Arise, and take courage; for not having your life you'll> bird, fly from <play, but about the roll of the Dragon. Therefore take this herb, so hurry to the cave of the monster and throw it in; then such a sound sleep will come upon him suddenly that you give him meanwhile with a sword on the fastest can make a full end; then embark immediately and be of good cheer; . Because it gets better happen to you at the end than you think "-" Enough, "said Miuccio," I know now what I have to do; Besides, we have enough time and gained time, won everything. "So saying, rose Miuccio, took a sharpened sword, and the herb under the coat and made his way to the Imperial Palace of the Dragon, which is at the foot of a so high grown mountain was that the three mountains that served the giants as leaders, would not have given him up to his belt. Once there, he threw the herb into the cave, and when the dragon was immediately attacked by sleep, even Miuccio began without hesitation to cut him to pieces. At the same time, however, so there Miuccio chopped the monster, the queen's heart felt hacking, and in this severe distress it was their big mistake aware of having caused the deaths suffered so willfully. therefore she let her husband call and told him what the astronomers had once proclaimed, namely that the death of the Dragon would have theirs result and that she was afraid, because their forces gradually Hinsch walls that the dragon just now from Miuccio would be killed; after which the king replied, "If you knew that the life of the dragon, the pillar of yours and was the root of your existence, why veranlaßtest me to send Miuccio? So who's to blame? You've done the evil and like it and weep; you've done the damage and like him also pay! "- ,, I thought I never," said the queen, "that such a lad would have much cunning and strength to overpower an animal that defied the whole armies, but I expected certainly that Miuccio would it bite the dust; I, however, reckoned without the host and the little ship my plans shipwreck has suffered so do me, if you love me, a service and take after my death one dipped in the blood of the dragon sponge and anoint all end members of my body before you can bury me. "-" that's very little in the love I have for cherish you, "replied the King," and when the blood of the dragon is not sufficient, I also want the interference of still mine to thy wish to . do, "by him now wanted to thank the queen, her escaped life at the same time with the language; because at the same moment Miuccio had carved through the final piece of the dragon. No sooner had he therefore appeared before the king to report to report how he had fared, so he ordered this to fetch the blood of the dragon; but because he wanted to see the accomplished by Miuccio work itself, he followed him at the same time. By now Miuccio just stepped out of the palace gate, it occurred to bird contrary, who asked him: "Where are you going" - "Thither, where the king sends me to the blood of the dragon," said Miuccio. - "Unfortunately," said the bird, "this dragon's blood will be for you to make poison and burst you, this blood will bring the evil seed of all your trouble again for germination; because the queen seeks thy life and therefore exposing yourself to ever new dangers, but the king that these ugly witch holds so much under the thumb, throws you like a ball around and throw yourself now in one, now in the other trouble, thou art of his flesh and blood and offshoot of his tribe; but the unhappy man does not know this, although the congenital heart urge would these so-close relationship between you have discovered long ago it; then the services that you paid him, and the unexpected finding of such a beautiful son and heir would certainly force him to the unfortunate Porziella your mother to resume in the grace that is now buried alive in a gable little room already for fourteen years, so that you can see built in an attic a temple of beauty. "but while the fairy therefore said to him, came the king, who had all listened to, closer to hear precisely what it is actually handle, and when he heard that Miuccio would be the son of the pregnant with his remaining Porziella and the latter still in the bottom little room alive befände ordered it immediately that this vomited and Porziella would be brought to him. Then he saw that she was more beautiful than ever (was so good it was maintained by the bird), he hugged her with love and was not enough to push the son to his heart soon soon the mother, by those because of him endured relentless treatment, these but because of the dangers to which he exposed him repeatedly asked for forgiveness, after which he was dressed Porziella in the magnificent robes of the late Queen, and she took on the spot for his wife. The bird but, saved by his counsel alone, as he learned his son from so many dangers and Porziella was alive, the king his kingdom and life offered as proof of his gratitude, but said that he as a reward so many services did not require anything as Miuccio for her husband, and when he said this, he turned into a beautiful virgin who married under great joy of the king and Porziellas with Miuccio, so that while the late Queen with earth was shovel cloudy, the newlyweds desire and pleasure enjoyed by the bushel, after this, to even more parties to organize, made their way to their kingdom, where they were awaited with great longing. but all recognized that they, the Porziella had once been proved, given her all this happiness by the fairy only to the service's sake; because once that remains true: He who sows good deeds reaps thanks.
Simpleton	3395	513A	German	Now Paola began to draw their history from the well of your own feelings: At any time you have a stupid man who seeks such that something can seek the society more praised as a clever, who deals with simple-minded; because as far as benefits and prestige can be gained through those as much wealth and honor can lose by this, and how to recognize the gold on the sample, you will recognize the following story, if what I just said is also true , There once lived in a city a father who indeed had more money than a dime a dozen, (to be there once completely out of luck on earth cares) but also a stupid way and clumsy son that he not black to distinguish from white could. And when the father could no longer tolerate his silly pranks, he gave him one day a nice chunk of money, and sent him to the purchase of goods to the Levant, knowing that the stay in foreign countries and dealing with different people the mind awakens the verdict sharpens and makes out the people. Mascione (so called even the Son) so mounted his horse and took his way to Venice, the meeting place of the wonders of the world to embark on board there any particular ship to Cairo. When he returned this way, a good day trip, he met a young man who stood motionless at the foot of a poplar, and said to him: "What is your name, friend where you are and what you can," What are those answered: " My name is lightning, am from arrow city and can run as fast as the wind "-" I probably wanted a sample of your speed to see, "said Mascione, and that said,". Wait a little, you shall soon see if I you what setting do. "as she so stood a short time, they suddenly saw a deer along the field, the lightning, to give it a bigger lead, only a good deal could be pre-empt what he him so lightly and with such speed chasing that if he had run over a floured floor, he left behind no trace of his steps would, and he the deer before you knew it the, caught up in this way. therefore Mascione asked the youth if he wanted to stay with him; because he would pay him royally, and there was lightning satisfied, they moved jointly on. They were come forward no four miles before they met another young lad, to which Mascione turn, said: "How do you call yourself, mate? From what country you are, and what kind of crafts you learned? "To which of those displaced:" I'm Hasenohr, am out of curiosity town, and when I lie down with his ear to the ground, so I know the spot without me stir everything that goes on in the world, as I the meetings and discussions on which they agree the prices of things to drive up the craftsman, who pranks of the courtiers, the infamies of the coupler, the secret conversations of lovers, the suits the servant, the reports of the spies, the gossip of the old women and the curses of the sailors hear, so that neither the wise faucet Lucian yet the Magic lamp Aladdin's so much overheard as this my ears. "-" If this is really so " replied Mascione, "so tell me what's going on at my house?" to which of those settled soon with the ear to the ground and said, "I hear, like an old man says to his wife:" God be praised that I'm ir finally Mascione have managed at arm's length, these simple-minded drip, this thorn in my eyes; because at least he will be if he looks around in the world, a person can be and not be as a huge donkey, a Erzpinsel, a loafer. ' "-" Enough, enough, "Mascione exclaimed," now believe I like what you say, so just come with me now; because your fortune is made. "-" I am content, "replied the other, and soon they moved on. They had covered but barely ten miles when they someone encountered again, said to the Mascione: "What is your name, brave lad where you are born, and what you're good in the world" - "My name is Triffgut," said of those, "bin Gerad to target shoot as accurately out of the town and can with my crossbow that I meet in the middle of a crab apple." - "of this I would still like to once a sample see," said Mascione what the youth his crossbow seized and after he aimed carefully, a pea from a stone down shot, so that Mascione like the others took him. Having now a day's journey had come again, they met some people who were building in the blazing midday heat of a dam, so that they could rightly sing: "Wine ago, Wine ago or I drop 'round and round' Mascione felt therefore so very sorry for them that he said to them, "How you catch it just, folks, that you aushaltet in this lime kiln, in which one could cook a stone soft" to which one of them answered. "We feel us here as comfortable as in a fresh bath; because we have here a young lad with us, of her blows on us from behind in such a way as if we had the West wind at your back. "-" Do me a favor and let me see, the patron, "said Mascione, therefore the workers the summoned boys and Mascione to him said, "what's your name, friend where you were born, and what a craft you doing" - "my name is Blaise," replied the other, "am from wind city and can with my mouth all make wind; if you have a zephyr wilt, thou shalt also quite fall into raptures, and do you want a Boreas, so I blow to you house. "-" What I see, I think, "replied Mascione what that blow at first very quietly started that was believed to feel the wind blowing in the evening at Posillipo, and then suddenly hinwendend after a few trees, he sent such a powerful storm out of his mouth that he uprooted a number oaks, Mascione why also him as a traveling companion took. After once again a day's journey had come on, he met another young man and said to him: "With all due respect, how thy name for you? Whence art thou if you do not take amiss's? And what a craft do you do, if I may ask, "And he said:" I'm strong back, am from heavy rock and am so powerful that when I take a mountain on his back to me, it seems as light as a spring "-" If so, "said Mascione," so you deserved to be king of the load carrier, and certainly would the price of all carry. However, I would like to see a specimen of your art like. "At once began Stark back to to charge enormously large stones, tree trunks and other loads, such that thousands Fuhrmann cars have not taken away would. But no sooner saw this Mascione, so he took him also into his service, and by then are all heading off together, they came soon after in Blumental. The king of this city now had would have rushed a daughter who could run as fast as the wind and a tilth, krummzubiegen without the ears, endured so that the father had a public notice, who achieved his daughter over her to get a wife. So when Mascione in this town arrived and heard about the decree, he went to the king and offered to walk with the princess in competition. After they had now agreed that Mascione either Shank's pony ride properly or should be made shorter by a head, was this the next morning to the king that he would get diarrhea and therefore could not run in person, but a place of his would send deputies. "Let them come, as will" Ciannetella offset (so that is called the princess), "to me is all the same, and I have enough to, such for all." So when the track with people who wanted to watch the race against had filled that they swarmed like ants, and the windows and roofs were thronged so that no needle could fall to earth, appeared lightning, took his seat at one end of the track and expected the sign of trumpets; least Ciannetella appeared in a skirt, which handed her only to the knee, and cute, petite, incredibly small shoes simple soles and stood next flash. But no sooner had they heard the Trarara and tututu the trumpet, so they began to run, that the heel touched them the shoulders and they were like rabbits that are pursued by greyhounds, horses that broken loose from the stable, dogs being with water poured, and donkeys that have a burr on the tail. However, Lightning, who had the name and the fact Ciannetella left more than a cubit far behind, and not once he had reached the goal, we also heard a mighty tumult and noise, shouting and roaring, whistling, clapping and trampling under the audience, and they cried out: "Long live the stranger, vivat high" and Ciannetella changed color as the rear of a school boy, the one durchgegerbt tidy by confused and quite ashamed, was himself defeated to view it. Since, however, the race should take place twice, they insisted to make up for this insult the second time, and returned home, they Feite a ring by such a spell, that the man who wore it on her finger, completely froze his feet and he did not go again, let alone able to walk, which she sent him for a present to flash, so he wore it as a remembrance of her. Hasenohr had, it is true that secret rendezvous overheard between father and daughter, but remained calm and waited for the end of the whole trade off, so that when the sun with loud trumpets of the birds to the riding on a donkey the dark night ahead of him whipping began and after a given character, the two again began her heels game, Ciannetella seemed to be not so much a second Atalante rather than flash a lame ass or a stiff horse; because he could also stir a foot from the spot. However, since Triffgut perceived the distress of his companion and heard of hares ear, as things stood, he took his crossbow and shot with a bolt as accurate by the finger of lightning that the stone, which contained the magic, jumped out of the rings cuffed legs that broke away and he overtaking in some jumps, Ciannetella, won the prize. As soon as the king this victory a bullfinch, this palm of a lout, this triumph heard a brush, he was not sure whether he would give him his daughter or not, and after he pulled the weisesten men at his court to the Council, spoke this their opinion as meaning that Ciannetella would not bite for such a rag dog and loafer and that, without committing a breach of promise, could transform his promise to give him the daughter, in a gift of money that would be probably welcome such a ragged beggar as all women of the world. The king liked this advice, and so he let Mascione ask how much money he wanted instead of the promised him princess; whereupon he replied with consent of his companions: "I want so much gold and silver, can carry as one of my companions," The king was pleased, and immediately people began to Stark back a myriad of suitcases with ducats, bags with sequins. to load bags with Talern, barrels with copper money and boxes with gold chains and rings; but the more you packed it, the stronger he got, like a tower, so that, as neither the Treasury nor the banks, usurers and changers throughout the city were enough, the king of all make people move about and from them candlesticks, basins, cups had to borrow, bowls, dishes, plates, baskets and even chamber pots of silver. Although this is also still not enough to fully undergo the required; but finally moved Mascione and his companions, though not at full charge; yet saturated and bored their way. But when the councils of the king saw that a few rags dogs continued dragged so much treasure, they said to him that it would be a great folly to be carried away all the power of the empire, and it is therefore advisable rail to forward these guys people to the burden of that Atlas, who carried on his shoulders a sky of gold and silver, a little easier. The king gave this rate hearing and sent Mascione once a group of armed men on foot and horseback to; since, however, Hare's Ear, who had overheard this attack, taught his companions from him and the dust already up to heaven rose through the footsteps of those who came to unload the rich cargo, began Blasius, who saw how bad were things in such a way to blow that he threw not only all pursuing soldiers to the ground, but they still continue operating well with the force of the north wind over a mile so that Mascione along with his companions without further obstacles in the house arrived his father and since the profit with informed them (because they say: good service deserves good wages) not know what those went away quite happy and satisfied, but he himself remained with his father, rich as a Croesus, a gold-laden donkey equal by also to him the proverb was a liar, God gives everyone what he needs.
Iron John	1297	502	German	Once there was a king who had a great forest near his castle; of wild animals around all kinds. At one time he sent out a huntsman who was to shoot a deer, but he did not return. "Maybe it is a misfortune happened to," said the king and sent the following day two more huntsmen who were to search him; but also stayed away. Since he left on the third day all his huntsmen, and said: "Scour the whole forest and not let off until you have found all three!" But none of these came home again, and the pack of hounds which they had taken with them, let no one see again. From that time no one wanted more venture into the woods, and he lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and you saw but sometimes an eagle or hawk flying over it. This lasted for many years; because a strange huntsman announced himself to the king as seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. The king wanted his consent does not give, saying, "It's not safe in there, I'm afraid, are you not better than the other, and you do not come out again." The hunter replied, "Lord, I will venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing." The hunter so went with his dog in the woods. Before long, the dog got a game on the way and was after him; but he was hardly gone a few steps when it stood before a deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched out of the water, grabbed him and pulled him down. When the hunter saw that, he went back and fetched three men who had come with buckets and bail the water out. When they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body was brown like rusty iron and the hair hung over his face down to his knees. They tied him with ropes and led him away to the castle. There was great astonishment over the wild man; the king but he left in an iron cage in his court and forbade on pain of death, to open the door of the cage, and the Queen had the key itself take custody. From now on, everyone was able to safely into the woods gehen.Der king had a son of eight years, once played in the yard, and in the game he remembered his golden ball in the cage. The boy ran thither and said: "Give me my ball out!" - "Not likely," replied the man, "till you opened the door for me." - "No," said the boy, "I do not think this has banned the king," and ran away. The next day he came back and asked for his ball The wild man said. "! Open my door," But the boy did not want. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting, and the boy went once more and said, "If I wanted to, I can not open the door, I have not the key." Since the wild man said, "He is under the pillow of your mother because you can get him." The boy, who wanted to have his ball back, beat all caution to the wind and brought the key. The door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his finger. When it was open, the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried away. The boy had become afraid; he called and called after him, "Oh, wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten." The wild man turned around, picked it up, put it on his neck and went into the forest with quick steps. When the king came home he noticed the empty cage and asked the queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it, looked for the keys, but he was gone. She called the boy, but no one answered. The king sent people out to seek for him in the field, but did not find him. was there he could easily guess what had happened, and there was great sadness at the Royal Hof.Als the wild man back into the dark forest arrived, he took the boy by the shoulders and said to him: "Father and Mother do not you see again, but I want to keep you with me, for you have freed me, and I feel sorry for what I tell you, you shall fine have with you. If you do everything. treasures and gold I have enough and more . than anyone in the world, "he made the boy a bed of moss on which he slept, and the next morning the man took him to a well, and said: "You see, the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit by and take heed that nothing falls into it, otherwise it will be polluted Every night I come and see whether. you have obeyed my order. " The boy sat down at the edge of the well, saw how sometimes a golden fish or a golden snake show itself therein, and had eight that nothing fell in. As he sat, one finger hurt him so violently that he involuntarily put it into the water. He pulled it out quickly, but saw that he was quite gilded, and how much effort it took to wash the gold again, it was all in vain. Evening Iron Hans came back, looked at the boy and said, "What happened to the well?" - "Nothing, nothing," he replied, holding his finger to his back that he should not see him. But the man said, "You have dipped your finger into the water, this time it may pass, but beware that you can not fall back a bit." By daybreak the boy already sat at the well and watching it. The finger hurt him again, and he passed it over his head, because unfortunately a hair fell down into the well. He took it out quickly, but it was already quite gilded. Iron John came and knew what had happened. "You let a hair fall into the well," he said, "I want thee nor see again; but if it happens a third time then the well dishonored, and you can stay with me any longer." On the third day the boy sat at the well and did not move a finger when he did him so much. But the time was long to him and he looked at his face, which stood on the water level. And when he bent it more and trying to look straight in the eye, so he remembered his long hair from the shoulders down to the water. He straightened up quickly in the air, but the whole hair was golden and shone like a sun. You can probably imagine, shocked as the poor boy. He took out his handkerchief and tied it around his head, so it should not see the man. When he came he already knew everything, and said "the handkerchief off!" Since the golden hair streamed forth, and the boy excuse himself as he wanted, it did not help him. "You have not passed the test and can not stay here any longer. Go out into the world, as you will know, doing such poverty. But because you have not a bad heart and I mean well by you, then I will allow you one . If you get into difficulty, come cry to the forest and: "iron John, 'then I will come and help you My power is great, greater than you think, and gold and silver I have in abundance" Because left.. the prince of the forest and walked by beaten and unbeaten paths all the time, till at last he came to a big city. He looked for work but could not find any and had learned nothing with which he could have continued help. Finally he went into the palace and asked if they wanted to keep him. The courtiers did not know what they should need it, but they had to remain well pleased with him and they told him. At length the cook took him into service, saying he could carry wood and water, and sweep up the ashes. Once, when just no one else was at hand, it was called the cook the food to the royal table wear, because he did not want but his golden hair be seen, he kept his little cap. The king was so not happened something, and he said, "If you come to the royal table, you need your hat pull off!" - "Oh Lord," he replied, "I can not, I have a bad sore on his head." Then the king let the cook called, scolded him and asked how he could have such a boy to take into his service; he was to turn him the same. The cook but sympathy was with him and exchanged him for the gardener boy. Now the boy had to plant in the garden and chop basting and dig, and bear the wind and bad weather over him. One summer when he was working alone in the garden, the day was so hot that he took off his cap and the air should cool it. As the sun on the hair seemed glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the bed of the princess, and she jumped up to see what was there. Then she saw the boy and called him, "Boy, I bring a bunch of flowers!" He sat in a hurry on his cap, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. When he was ascending the stairs, he met the gardener and said, "How can you bring a bunch of common flowers of the princess quickly, and get another, and seek the most beautiful and rarest of?" - "Oh no," replied the boy, "the wild scent, and will please her better." When he came into her room, said the Princess, "Take thy cap off, it is not fitting that you keep it on me." He again said "I can not, I have a sore head." but she caught at his cap and pulled it off as rolled his golden hair to the shoulders, it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run away, but she held him by the arm and gave him a handful of ducats. These he departed, but did not heed the gold, but he took it to the gardener and said, "I give it to your children who can play with it." The next day he called the princess once again to, he should bring her a bouquet of wild flowers, and as he entered it, they grapste at his cap, and wanted to take away; but he held it firmly with both hands. They gave him a handful of ducats, but he did not want to keep them and gave them to the gardener for playthings for his children. The third day things went just the same, you could not take away his cap, and he wanted their gold nicht.Nicht long after, was covered with war the country. The king gathered together his people and did not know if he could resist the enemy, who was overpowering and a large army had. As the gardener's boy said, "I'm grown up, and will go to war; only give me a horse!" The others laughed and said, "When we are gone, so you seeking one, we want to leave you one in the barn." When she came out, he went to the barn and got the horse out; it was lame in one foot and limped hobblety jig, hobblety. Nevertheless, he sat up and rode away to the dark forest. When he came to the edge of the same, he shouted three times "Iron John," so loud that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man appeared and said, "What do you want?" - "I want a strong steed, for I will go to war." - "You shall have and even more than you ask." Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it did not take long before a stable boy came out of the woods and led a Ross brought that snorted from the nostrils and was hard to tame. And afterwards followed by a crowd of people of war, all equipped in iron, and their swords flashed in the sun. The young man handed the groom his three-legged horse, mounted the other, and rode in front of the crowd ago. As he approached the battlefield, a large part had already been made by the King of people, and there was no lack much, so had the other soft. The young man was hunting with his iron soldiers, broke like a hurricane over the enemy and struck down everything that was resisting him. They wanted to flee, but the youth sat them on the neck and not let off until there was none left. But instead of returning to the king, he led his flock in a roundabout way back to the forest, and called forth Iron John. "What do you demand?" asked the wild man. "Take your horse and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again!" It was all he wanted, and he was riding on his three-legged horse. When the king returned to his castle, he went against his daughter and wished him joy of his victory. "It's not me who has won the day," he said, "but a strange knight who came to me with his band to help." The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was, but the king did not know and said, "He has pursued the enemy, and I have not seen him." She asked the gardener for the boy; but smiled, and said: "Even he's come home on his three-legged horse, and the others have been mocking and shouted: 'Since our hobblety comes again.' They also asked: "Behind what hedge have you located and meanwhile sleep? ' And he said, 'I've done the best, and without me it would have been bad.' Then he was still more ridiculed "the king said to his daughter." I will proclaim a great feast that shall last for three days and you shall throw a golden apple Perhaps the unknown will come. ". was when the festival announced, the youth went out to the woods and called Iron John. "What do you demand?" asked he. "The fact that I'm starting the golden apple of the king's daughter." - "It is as good as if you had it already," said Iron John, "you shall have a suit of red armor and ride on a spirited chestnut." When the day came, the youth galloped up, took his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one. The king's daughter came forward and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none caught him as he alone; but once he had it he galloped away. On the second day iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him a white horse. Again he began alone the apple, but lingered for a moment, but chased away with it. The king was angry, and said: "This is not allowed, he must appear before me and tell his name." He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple, should go away again, they should pursue him, and if he does not come back willingly, knock on him and sting. On the third day he received from Iron Hans a black armor and a black horse, and he caught the apple. But when he was chasing it, he pursued the king's people, and came close to him so that he wounded the leg with the point of his sword. But he escaped from them; but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell from his head, and she could see that he had golden hair. They rode back and told the king alles.Am next day asked the princess the gardener about his boy. "He works in the garden; the queer creature has been at the festival too, and only yesterday evening returned;. He has likewise shown my children three golden apples which he has won" The king had him right to call and he came and again had his cap on his head. But the king's daughter went up to him and took it off, and there were his golden hair over her shoulders, and it was so beautiful that all astonished. "Are you the knight who came every day to the feast, caught forever in a different color, and the three golden apples?" asked the king. "Yes," he replied, "and here the apples are," she took out of his pocket and handed it to the king. "If you desire further proof, so you can see the wound that I have your people beaten, when they followed me. But I am also the knight who you helped to victory over the enemy." - "If you can perform such deeds as you are not a gardener boy Tell me who your father is.?" - "My father is a mighty king, and gold I have and as I require the wealth." - "I see very well," said the King, "I am indebted to you, I can do something to please you?" - "Yes," he replied, "that can you well, give me your daughter to wife." Since the Virgin laughed and said: "He makes no circumstances But I have his golden hair seen that he is not a gardener's boy," then went back and kissed him. Came to the wedding, his father and his mother and were in great joy, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son. And when they were sitting at the wedding table, suddenly stopped the music, the doors opened, and a stately King came in with a large entourage. He went to the youth, embraced him and said, ".. I am Iron Hans and was by enchantment a wild man, but you've saved me all the treasures which I possess, shall be thy property"
The iron stove	1209	425A	German	Currently, when wishing still helped, was a prince from an old hag cursed that he should sit in the woods in a large iron stove. As he passed many years, and no one could save him. Once a king's daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself, and her father could not find Reich nine days she was gone about so and stood to the iron box. Then a voice came out and asked them, "Where are you from 'and where are you going?' She answered, "I lost my father's kingdom, and can not come back home. ' Then a voice inside the iron stove I want you back home help, in a short time 'if you want to sign to do what I desire. I am a greater prince than you a king's daughter, and wants to marry you. ' Since startled her and thought, "Good God, what shall I do with an iron stove? ' But as she much wanted her father back home, she promised to do but what he asked. And he said, 'you shall return, and bring a knife, and scrape a hole in the iron.' Then he gave her a companion who walked near her and did not speak, but he took them; in two hours home. Now great joy was in the castle, returned as the king's daughter, and the old King fell on her neck and kissed her. But she was very troubled, and said, "Dear father, like it to me has gone! I would not have come home again from the great wild forest, if I had not come to an iron stove, which I was required to sign that I will go back to him, release him and get married. ' Then the old king was so terrified that he almost fainted, for he had but this one daughter. They therefore resolved they would take the miller's daughter who would sc Hoen, in their place; They took her there, gave her a knife and said she was to scrape at the iron stove. She scraped at it for twenty four hours, but could not bring off the least. As day dawned, came cries in the iron stove 'me seems so, it's outside day.' And she answered, 'that seems to me also, I mean, I hear my father's mill rattle.' 'So you are a miller's daughter, then go right out and come let the king's daughter.' And she went and told the old king, who out she did not, he wanted his daughter. Then the old king and the daughter was frightened cry. But they had still a swineherd's daughter, who was even prettier than the miller's daughter, who wanted to give a little money so that they would go for the princess to iron stove. So she was brought and had to scrape for twenty four hours; but they did nothing about it. As day dawned, came cries in the oven 'seems to me it is out day.' And she answered, 'that seems to me also, I mean, I hear my father's horn blowing.' 'So you are a swineherd's daughter, Go away at once or let the king's daughter, and tell her there ye shall befall what I had promised her, and if she does not come, should the whole empire crumble everything and collapse and no stone Remember the other. ' When the princess heard this, she began to cry, but it was no different, they had to keep their promise. So she took leave of her father, put a knife and went out into the forest to the iron stove. How she got there, she began to to scrape, and the iron gave way, and how two hours had passed, she had already scraped a small hole. Then she peeped in and saw such a beautiful boy, ah, the glimmerte in gold and precious stones that he liked her very soul. Now that she went on scraping, and made the hole so large that he could out. And he said, 'you are mine and I am yours, you are my bride and have delivered me.' He wanted to carry with you into his kingdom, but she entreated him to go once again to her father and the prince allowed her, but she should not speak to her father more than three words, and then they should come back. So she went home, but she spoke more than three words, and instantly the iron stove disappeared, and was moved far away over glass mountains and sharp swords; but the king's son was saved, and not included therein. After that, she took leave of her father and did not take with some money, but much, went back into the big woods and looked for the iron stove, but it was not to be found. Nine days she sought, then her hunger grew so great that she did not know to help, because she had nothing to live longer. And when it was evening, she sat on a small tree and thought it should bring the night because she was afraid of the wild animals. When midnight drew near she saw in the distance a small light, and thought, "Ah, there would be I saved well, 'rose from the tree and went towards the light, but on the way she prayed. Then she came to a little old house, and grass had grown a lot about it, and a small heap of wood before. She thought, "Oh, where have I come peeped in through the window, but she saw nothing inside big and little toads (toads), but a table well covered with wine and roast, and plates and glasses were of silver !,. Since she took courage, and knocked. Immediately called the Dicke'Jungfer green and small, Hopping hither, limping leg, Hop hither and fro, see let quickly 'out who wär.'Da came walking a little toad, and took her on. As she entered, all were called to welcome them, and she had to sit down. They asked 'where do you come from? where do you want to go?' Then she told everything as it had been up to her, and because she had transgressed the commandment not to speak more than three words, the stove, and the King's son would be, now they wanted to look for so long and hike over hill and dale until she it would find. As the old saying Dicke'Jungfer green and small, Hopping hither, limping leg, Hop hither and fro, I bring the big box her.'Da went the little back and brought out carried the box. After this they gave her food and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which felt like silk and velvet, and she lay down, and lay in God's name. When the day came, she arose, and gave her the old toad three needles from the large box, which should take them; they would do their necessary because it would have to cross a high glass mountain, and three sharp swords, and a large water when she did all this, she would get her lover. Now, they hereby were three parts (pieces) that it should rather beware, namely three large needles, a plow-wheel, and three nuts. These she traveled onwards, and when she came to the glass mountain which was so slippery she stuck the three needles first behind her feet and then forward again, and so got over it, and as they passed was, she put them to a place , she marked in eight. After that, she came to the three piercing swords, and then she put on her plow-wheel and rolled over. Finally she came to a wide river and how she had crossed it, in a big beautiful castle. She went in and stopped at a service that she was a poor girl and wanted like to be hired; But she knew that the prince was drinne she had released from the iron stove in the great forest. Then she was taken to the kitchen maid at low wages. Now the king's son had another on the side, he wanted to marry, for he thought she was already dead. In the evening, as she had washed up and was done, she felt in the pocket and found the three nuts which had given her the old toad. Bite one and wanted to eat the kernel, behold, there was a stately royal garment in it. Wies now t he bride heard, she came and asked for the dress, and wanted to buy, saying it would not dress for a servant. And she said no, she would not sell it, but if you no matter (a thing) would permit so sies should have, namely to sleep one night in the chamber of her groom. The bride gave her permission because the dress was so beautiful and she still never had one like. Wies was evening she said to her bridegroom, "That silly girl will sleep in your room. ' 'If thou art willing'm ego also, "said he. but she gave him a glass of wine in which she had taken a sleeping potion. So they both went into the chamber to sleep 'and he slept so soundly that she could not awaken him. She cried the whole night and cried I have redeemed you from the wild forest and an iron stove, I have sought thee, and walked over a glass mountain, three sharp swords and a great lake before I found you, and wilt not hear that. ' The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night and in the morning their Lord. And how she had washed up the next evening, she bit the second nut on, there was a far more beautiful dress in it; as the saw the bride, she wanted to buy it. But money was not the girl and asked out that it might sleep in the bridegroom again. but the bride gave him a sleeping draft, and he slept so soundly that he could hear nothing. But the scullery maid wept the whole night and cried I have redeemed you out of a wood and an iron stove, I was looking for you and three sharp swords and a great lake before I found you've gone over a glass mountain, and you will not hear me yet. ' The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night and in the morning their Lord. And when she had washed up on the third evening, bit her third nut on, there was a still more beautiful dress which was stiff with pure gold. When the bride saw that she wanted to have it, but the maiden only gave it up, for the third time when it should sleep in the bridegroom. The prince was careful and let pass the nightcap. As she started to cry and shout "Dearest love, I have redeemed you from the terrible wild forest in an iron stove, 'said the king's son jumped up and said' you're right, you're mine, and I am your . ' Then he sat down in the night with her in a car, and the false bride they took the clothes away, she could not get up. When they came to the big water, they sailed across it, and before the three piercing swords, as they sat down on the plow-wheel, and before the glass mountain, as they put the three needles in it. So they came at last to the old small house, but they were into it, threw a big castle, and the toads were all disenchanted and louder royal children and were full of joy. And it was held marriage, and they stayed in the castle, which was much larger than her father's castle. But because the old man lamented that he should be left alone, so they went away and brought him to her, and they had two kingdoms and lived in good Ehestand.Da came a mouse, This story is done.
The donkey and the Tree Grille	8948	292	German	A donkey had heard that the Tree Grille, a songbird, a pleasant voice did. Once he also heard her singing and asked her now: "What have you eaten that your voice sounds so sweet" Then they said to him, "The air is my food." The donkey, who now wanted his voice was similar, locked its jaws against the air and so until he teaches hunger starb.Dies that it is not lawful for man to strive for something that was not in his nature lies.
Lazy Harry	1571	1430	German	Harry was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do but drive his goat daily to pasture, he nevertheless groaned when he went home after his day's work. 'It is indeed a heavy burden,' he said, 'and so a goat to drive an arduous year from year one until late in the autumn in the field. And if you but lie down and sleep could! but no, because the eyes have to be open, so as not to damage the young trees, through the hedge into a garden, or even running away. How can one have to rest and be glad of his life! ' He sat down, collected his thoughts, wondering how he could make his shoulders this burden free. Long contemplating everything was in vain, suddenly fiels him the scales from your eyes. 'I know what I'm doing,' he exclaimed, "I will marry fat Trina, who also has a goat, and can take mine out with, so I do not need me longer to quälen.'Heinz therefore rose, set his weary legs in motion, walked across the street, because on the road was not where the parents of fat Trina lived, and asked for their industrious and virtuous daughter in marriage. The parents did not pondered for a long time, 'the same and a feather flock together,' she thought, and consented. So fat Trina became wife and led out both the goats. Heinz had good days and needed to recover from no other work than from his own laziness. Only now and then he went with out and said 'it happens merely to make me afterwards the rest the better it tastes: otherwise one loses all sense dafür.'Aber Fat Trina was no less lazy. 'Dear Harry, "she said one day," why should we make life unnecessarily upset and atrophy our best youth? Is it not better for us to give the two goats every morning one interfere with their bleating best sleep, our neighbor, and gives us a beehive for them? the hive we in a sunny place behind the house and further do not trouble ourselves about it. The bees do not care of, or driven into the field to be: they fly out and find our way home by itself, and collect honey without giving the very least trouble '. 'You have such a sensible woman speaking, "replied Harry,' your proposal, we want to perform without hesitation: also tastes better and nourishes the honey better than the goat's milk and can be even longer aufbewahren.'Der neighbor gave for the two goats like a beehive , The bees flew tirelessly from early morning until late at night and, and filled the hive with the best honey, so that Heinz in autumn a whole pitcher of removing konnte.Sie placed the jug on a board up on the wall in her bedroom was attached, and because they feared he might be stolen or that the mice might find it, so took Trine a strong hazel brought and put it beside her bed so she without getting unnecessarily reach him, with his hand and the uninvited guests beds chase könnte.Der lazy Harry did not leave the bed before noon: "he who rises early," said he, "wastes his substance. ' One morning when he so was in broad daylight even in the springs, resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, "Women love the sweetness, 'and you tasting the honey, it is better before it from you alone is ausgegessen that we sure bargain for a goose with a young gosling. ' 'But not likely, "replied Trina," until we have a child that she guards. Should I worry myself with the little geese, and my strength unnecessarily about? ' 'Do you mean,' said Harry, "the boy will tend the geese? Nowadays children do not obey more, they do according to their own will, because they consider themselves smarter than the parents, just like that lad who seek the cow and chased three blackbirds'. "Oh," replied Trina, "should fare badly if he does not do what I say. A stick I will take and tanning the skin with countless blows him. Look, Harry, 'she cried in their zeal and took the stick with which they wanted to drive the mice away,' you see, I will fall on him. ' She took off, but unfortunately hit the honey jar on the bed. The pitcher struck against the wall and fell down in fragments, and the beautiful honey flowed onto the floor. 'There lies the goose with the young gosling, "said Heinz,' and does not need to be treasured. But it is lucky that mine is not the pitcher fell on my head, we have every reason to be satisfied with our lot. ' And then he noticed in a shard of something honey, so he reached it, and said, quite delighted 'the remnant, wife, we will still leave us taste and then after gehabten horrors rest a little, what matters if something we later than usual get up, the day is still long enough. ' "Yes," answered Trina, "it still comes at the right time. You know, the snail was once invited to the wedding, went on his way, but arrived at the christening. Before the house it fell over the fence and said, 'Speed ​​does no good ,.'
The flea	3374	513A	German	The Prince and the Ethiopian burst out laughing over the silliness Vardiellos and admired the wisdom of his mother, who foresaw his silly pranks and make amends understand. However, after the chatter to an end and Popa had been asked to tell their story, they began: An ill-considered decision always carries his punishment inevitable by itself; because vorgetan and nachbedacht, some already great suffering brought; as learned the King of Hochberg, the unparalleled by an indiscretion committed a erzdummen match by throwing his daughter and her glory in the greatest danger. For when once the king was bitten by Hochberg of a flea and he had then caught him with a very special skill, he noticed that the flea was so pretty and handsome that he was a scruple would have had to do it on the scaffold of to bring the nail from life to death. So he put it in a bottle, and while he fed him daily with the blood of his own arm, the flea grew so prosperous approach that he had to refer other quarters and at the end of seven months, bigger and fatter was as a sheep. and when the king saw this, he let him remove the skin, then the same tan properly and then publicly proclaim that whoever knew there was of what was the fur of an animal, get the king's daughter to wife. Once this notice had been issued, people flocked heaps induced and came from all corners of the world to solve this question of price and try their luck; one said, the skin would be a monkey, the other by a lynx, a third of a crocodile and the of the and that from that animal; but all were on the wrong track, and no one hit the nail on the head. Recently, however, spoke up this investigation a wild man who seemed mißgeschaffenste beings around the world, so that even the mere sight would also have the bravest in trembling, tremor, anxiety and fear can move. No sooner had he now arrived and had the skin beguckt properly and smelled, he met the same right to a hair, exclaiming: "This is the skin of the Grand Master of all fleas" Although now einsah the king, what a kid prank him! made, he still did not want to break his word and let his daughter Porziella summon. This had a face like milk and blood, was slender as a fir, and who she saw, she devoured with his eyes, she was so beautiful! To her now the king said: "You know, my daughter what I have known of you, and know what a word man I am; in short, I can not escape my promise; King or beggar, the word is given, and thought it must be if it breaks me the heart; But who would have thought that this jackpot would fall to a wild man? However, because without the will of Heaven not even a leaf stirred on the tree, so we have to believe that the marriage has been concluded there first up and then down here. So have patience, be a good boy and not defy you to your father; my heart tells me beforehand that you're going to have good days; because often great treasures have been found under a pile of raw fieldstones. "heard as Porziella this unfortunate decision, her extinguished eyes, face hereditary, lips slack, trembling legs, and she was close to it, the hawk of the soul of to let quail nachsteigen of pain. However, at last she burst into tears and said, her voice rising, "What have I done wrong because evil that you can pay me so hard? What do I have so much done nothing against you, that you betraying me, the power of this monster's? Porziella unfortunate! Now you have to run like a weasel of toad in the throat, now like a poor little lamb the prey of a werewolf are! If this is the affection that you hold to your blood? This has what you always called the eyeball her soul the love that you show for a daughter? So you reißest you from the heart, which is a part of yourself? So you break that which constitutes the joy of your eyes? O Father, cruel father, you're sprung certainly not human gender, but the monsters of the deep have begotten thee and wild cats nursed you! But why I call creatures of the sea and the earth, since every animal loves its young? Only you alone your child is contrary, only you hate alone and verabscheuest your daughter! How much better it would have been for me when my mum would have strangled the cradle me would be to become a funeral bed, chest of the nurse for hemlock, the diapers to knit and the rattle that you hung around my neck to the millstone, as I should be so unfortunate as to experience this unfortunate day and caressed by Harpyienklauen, embraced by the paws of a bear to be kissed by the tusks of a pig. "Porziella wanted to proceed further in their actions, when the king interrupted her with anger and exclaimed: "Do not be so bitter, because the sugar is expensive, only gently, because the pitcher goes to water until it breaks; just one, because even comes yeast; hush and muckse not, because if you make it too colorful, you get something on the mouth; what I do is done well, the chick wants to be smarter than the hen? Make an end, and keep your mouth and look at you before that I will not increase the bile; because if I catch you first under my hands, there remains no sound shreds up to you, and you have here on the spot bite the dust! You stupid Liese you, do you want to wear the trousers and prescribe your father laws? Since when is fashion that a thing that still wet behind the ears is, defies my will? Now briskly shaken hands with him, and right now at this moment, do you on the path to his house; because I do not want any minute longer have such a cheeky, sassy crab before my eyes! "And when the unfortunate Porziella saw that they further had no choice, she took with the face of a poor sinner, through the eyes of one possessed, with the mouth eaten one, the devil filth, with the heart of which is located between the block and Beil, the wild man by the hand and was dragged by him without any other accompaniment in a forest where the trees covered the corridor, so they do not of the sun would be discovered, whimpering streams fact that they forced to go in the dark, to beat on the stones, the wild animals without paying an entrance fee, conversed and safely roamed the thickets and where never sat reached a person when he not the way had lost. In this place now, which was black as a chimney and ungefegter appalling as the face of hell, the home of the wild man was, within with the bones of people he devoured, papered everywhere. Now an honest Christian soul, like the poor Porziella think the mood was the shaking and trembling, the anguish, the fear, the terror, the horror and the horror which felt the poor girl; indeed, not even a drop of blood left in her veins. But this was still nothing, not even the thousandth part compared to what was to come, because for breakfast there was peas and beans for dinner with snails. Therefore, the wild man went hunting and returned fully loaded with quarters of slaughtered people back, to which he said: "You can no longer complain that I did not feed you properly; Here you have a corresponding supply of food, take and feast, and have loved me; because more of the sky to the earth shall fall before I it to you but the poor Porziella leave of food and drink are missing! "began to throw up like a pregnant woman, and her face turned to the other side away. When the wild man noticed this, he exclaimed: "This is true, blame the swine pearls! But this has nothing to say, just be patient until tomorrow morning; for I was invited to a hunting wild pigs and you'll bring a couple, then we want to organize a capable wedding feast with our cousins ​​to our nuptials with great pleasure to celebrate "; so saying, he went into the forest. By now Porziella bathed in tears stopped at the window, accidentally came an old woman in the house over which, plagued by a fierce hunger, asked Porziella to eat something that they said, "Oh, dear woman, God doth know that I am in the power of the worst devil, I have no other brings into the house as humans district and pieces of the slain, so that I myself do not understand how I can endure this horrible sight only, and the miserable life spend that ever a Christian soul spent, and yet I am a princess every day ate bacon with dumplings and spent every day of my life in abundance "; and as she spoke, she began to cry like a child, you take the afternoon snack, so that it lamented the old woman and she said, "Be of good cheer, my dear, you do not destroy your beauty by crying; because your salvation is certain, and I am ready to contribute to this force. Now listen well to what I tell you, I have seven sons, as the oaks, like the Giants, Mase, Nardo, cola, Micco, Petrullo, Ascaddeo and Ceccone which can eat more than bread, and especially Mase, the whenever he lies down with his ear to the earth, everything that happens thirty miles of it, listening to the most accurate and explored; Nardo makes every time he spits, a large soap sea; Cola makes every time he throws a piece of iron, a field of ground shearing blades; Micco, if he throws a Spänchen, makes a dense forest; Petrullo always does when he injects a jet of water on the earth, a mighty river; Whenever Ascaddeo throws a stone, as it is suddenly a very strong tower there, and Ceccone shoots with a crossbow so accurate that it far exceeds a mile the eye of a chicken. Using this so my sons, who are very friendly and obliging and pity you have to be, I will do my best to free yourself from the clutches of wild man; because this delicious morsel is not for the neck of such a monster. "" What do you do want, do quickly, "said Porziella," for the monster of my husband is now, so that we would not have time at home, forward to the to make legs and run away. "-" that's tonight no longer possible, "replied the old woman," because I live not very far from here. But leave you that I and my sons will be here each morning to deliver you out of your trouble. "Having said this, she went away, and Porziella spent the night with a joyful heart. As soon started a "Vivat" bring up the little birds of the sun, as well as the old appeared with her seven sons, and Porziella in their midst, they made their way to the town. They were still not half a mile away, as Mase, is radically with the ear to the ground, exclaimed: "Heda, holla, watched the fox comes. The wild man because he did not found his wife on his way home confinement, chasing us now posthaste after. "Hardly heard this Nardo, he spat on the ground and made a soap sea. saw And when the wild man of the same came and this soap factory, he hurried back home, took a sack of bran and scattered to the same all the time so long before your feet, until he had overcome with great difficulty that obstacle. Mase but lay down again with the ear to the ground and cried: "Provided, friends, now he comes"; whereupon Cola threw a piece of iron on the earth, and immediately there was a field with shear knives to light. The wild man but that the passport looked wrong track in this way, was once home was covered from head to foot with iron, so that he returned, got away even with this stay. Mase but lay down again with his ear to the ground and shouted, "Hurtig, nimbly to arms! The wild man will be here soon; because it runs as quickly as if he had wings "; what Micco immediately left through his tension suddenly spring up a very terrible, impenetrable forest. Hardly, however, the wild man arrived at this difficult pass, so he grabbed a hunting knife, which he had hanging on his side, and began to right and left cut down oaks and poplars and to stretch here firs there pines on the earth, that he had put away four or five strike the whole forest. Mase but the stiff held the ears, raised his voice again and said, "We have to make that we get away; because the wild man chasing approach, as soon as a bird, and already I see him behind us, "to which Petrullo as soon as he saw this, from a source that rise sent its jets of water from stone bowl, took a sip of water into the mouth , splashed it on the ground and brought in place a broad power to light. When the wild man these new dash saw and perceived that he not soon made a hole than that it zustopften again, he withdrew naked and swam with the clothes on his head to the other side over there. Mase, who listened everywhere, heard the footsteps of the wild man and said, "With our stuff it starts to stand bad; because already I hear the pounding of his feet so close that heaven will help us. But we want to watch and this storm defy; if not, it's over with us. "-" Be without fear, "said Ascaddeo," I'll show the rags dog, with whom he has to do it, "and as he said this, he threw a stone at in which they sought the earth whereon suddenly stood a tower without hesitation refuge by the same door barricaded behind. But as soon as the wild man arrived and saw that they had brought to safety, he ran home, grabbed a winery ladder and hurried back with this on the shoulders of the tower. Mase, who always perked up, heard from afar the arrival of the wild man and said: "Now we are having our hopes entirely to an end; on Ceccone the last refuge of our life is based; because the wild man comes back, and indeed full of rage. My heart beats before fear, and I already foresee how bad things will happen to us. "-" You worry probably already in fear in the pants, "said Ceccone," you let me just take care and be careful what . a guy I'm "As he said this, the wild man lay already the ladder and began to climb; but Ceccone aimed sharp and hit him with a bolt such that those down tumbled like a pear on the ground. Then went Ceccone out and cut the wild man with his own knife, which he wore on the side of the neck, as if he would have been Quark cheese. then they brought the head with great joy to the king, who had already repented a hundred times that he gave his daughter a wild man, and now felt very happy, they retrieve. It did not take long so handsome groom was found for them, while the king did not forget to heap the old woman along with her seven sons who had saved his daughter from such unfortunate position with riches. At the same time he recognized his offense against Porziella, which he toppled out of pure stubbornness in such a risk by foolishly forgot the saying: You do not have the devil painting on the wall.
Frederick and Catherine	567	1387	German	It was a man who was called Frederick and a woman who was called Catherine, who had married each other and lived together as young married folks. One day Frederick, "I now want to Acker, Catherine, when I come back, something fried on the table should be only for hunger, and a fresh draft for thirst." - "Go, Frederick," answered Kate. "Go on, you want to make it quite." As drew near dinnertime, she got a sausage out of the chimney, put it in a frying pan, put some butter to it and set it on fire. The sausage began to fry and to hiss, Catherine stood beside it and held the Pfannenstiel and so had his thoughts. As he remembered: will finish up the sausage, meanwhile, you could go into the cellar to drink tap. So it turned to Pfannenstiel firm, took a can, and went down into the cellar to draw beer. The beer ran into the can and Catherine watched him. As he remembered: Holla, the dog is not fastened above who might get the sausage out of the pan, if you came with me. And in a trice it was up the cellar stairs. But the Spitz had the sausage in its mouth already, and dragged them on the ground along with it. But Catherine, not lazy, pursued it and chased it a long way into the field; But the dog was swifter than Catherine, the sausage did not let go easily, but skipped over the field. "There it goes!" said Kate, and turned back, and because it had run tired, it went pretty slowly and cooled down. During the time the beer on tap was still running, for Kate had not turned the tap, and fully than the pot and no other place was there, so it went to the basement and did not stop rather than to the whole barrel was empty , Catherine saw on the steps misfortune. "Spooky," she cried, "what you start now, that does not notice the Frieder!" It changed his mind for a while, finally he remembered stands from the last fair nor a bag with beautiful wheat on the ground that it wanted to bring down and sprinkle in the beer. "Yes," said he, "who at the right time saving, has it afterwards in need," rose to the floor and carried the sack below, and threw it straight on the can of beer that she knocked over, and Frederick's draft swam also in the cellar. "It's all right," said Kate, "where one is, the other has to be," and strewed the meal over the whole cellar. When it was finished, it was pleased with her work, and said, "What's so neat and clean looks here!" At noon time Frederick came home. "Now, woman, what have you ready for me?" - "Ah, Freddy," she answered, "I was frying a sausage, but whilst I was drawing the beer to drink, it has taken away the dog from the pan, and while I was running after the dog, the beer has run out, and as I wanted to drying up the beer with the flour, I've also knocked over the pot; but be easy, the cellar is quite dry again. " Said Frederick, "had Kate, Kate, you do not have to do Lets be carried off the sausage and run the beer from the barrel and spill on top of that our flour!" - "Yes, Frederick, I did not know had, I have to say it." The man thought: Is that so with your wife, so you need to provide you better. Now he had collected a tidy sum Taler which he changed into gold, and said to Catherine: "You see, these are yellow counters I want to do in a pot and buried in the stable under the cow's manger, but you that I indeed davonbleibst , otherwise you will go ill with it. " She said: "No, Frederick, I certainly do not want to do!" Well, when Frederick was gone, there came shopkeeper who irdne bowls and pots were cheap, asked the village and the young woman if she had anything to act. "Oh, dear people," said Kate, "I have no money and can not buy anything, but if you have yellow counters I will buy of you." - "Yellow counters, why not let them even see?". - "Then go into the stable and dig under the cow's manger, and you will find the yellow counters, I'm not allowed to go there." The rogues went thither, dug and found pure gold. They caught hold of it, ran away and left the pots and bowls behind in the house. Catherine said she would have her new things also need; because now in the kitchen anyway, no defect was because they hit each pot to the ground and put them all as ornaments on the paling round about the house. When Frederick came and saw the new decorations, he said, "Catherine, what have you done?" "Hab's bought, Frederick, for the counters which were under the cow's manger, myself am not there myself, the pedlars had to dig them out." - - "Ah, wife," said Frederick, "what have you done Those were not counters, but pure gold and all our wealth; that you should not have to do!" - "Yes, Frederick," she replied, ". The have I not have known had I's have said before," Catherine stood for a while and thought better of it, and she said: "Listen, Frederick, the gold we will again get, want run after the thieves. " - "Come," said Frederick, "let's try, but take bread and cheese that we have something to eat on the way." - "Yes, Frederick, I will take." They went away, and as Frederick was the better on foot, Catherine went to the rear. My advantage is thought that if we repent, I have indeed a step ahead. Now it came to a hill where there were deep ruts on both sides of the road. "There one can see," said Kate, "she ripped the poor earth, flayed and have pressed! That will not back his life healing." And from her heart's compassion she took her butter and smeared the ruts right and left, lest they should be by the wheels way. And as is bending down in her charity so rolled him a cheese from the pocket down the hill. Said Catherine: "I have already made up their way, I will not go back down, it may, another go-out and repeat it." So she took another Käs and rolled him down. but the cheese did not come back, because it let a third run down, thinking: Maybe they are waiting for company and not like to go alone. When they all stayed away three, she said, "I do not know what it is to imagine, but can it be so, the third has not found the way and gone astray, I will just send the fourth that he summons!". The fourth made it but not better than the third. Since Catherine was angry and threw even the fifth and sixth down, and they were the last. For a while remained standing lurking that they came when she still did not come, she said, "Oh, you're sending good after death, you stay out fine long Do you think I want to wait any longer for you? I go my way, you can send me chase; you have younger legs than me. " Catherine went on and found Frederick, who had stopped and waiting for her because he wanted something to eat. "Now even give it to me, what you have brought. ? ". She gave him the dry bread" Where is butter and cheese. "The man asked," Ah, Freddy, "said Catherine," with the butter I have the ruts lubricated, and the cheeses will come soon; one ran away from me, so I sent the forwarded another, they should call him "Said Frederick," You should not have done that, Catherine, lubricate the butter on the road and the cheese down the hill! "-" Yes.. Frederick, would I have to say it "because they ate the dry bread together, and Frederick said,"? Catherine, did you also keep our house as you left "-" No, Frederick, had to me to say before. " - "Then go home again and bewahr only the house before we go any further; bring something else to eat, I will wait here for you, "Catherine went back and thought. Frederick wants something else to eat, butter and cheese well he does not like, so I want a cloth full of dried pears and a pitcher of vinegar to drink . take away Then she bolted to the upper door, but the door below, picked it out, she took on the shoulder and thought, when she had placed the door in security, the house would probably be preserved Catherine took her time on the way and thought. Nevertheless . longer to Frederick will rest when it reached him, it said. "because, Frederick, you have the front door, as you can keep the house itself" - "Oh, God," he said, "what have I to a smart woman! the door lifts below that everything may run in, and bolts the upper one. Now it's too late to go back home again, but you have brought the door here, you shall they also bear. "-" The door I want to wear, Frederick, but the dried pears and the vinegar-jug will be too heavy for me, I hang them on the door, which she likes to wear. "they went into the woods and sought the rogues, but did not find them. because it was finally dark, they climbed into a tree and resolved to spend the night. but no sooner they sat above, so the guys came along, which carry away what does not want to go, and find things before they are lost. they settled just under the tree down, sat on the Frederick and Catherine, a fire made and wanted to share their prey . the Frieder rose from the other side down and collected stones, thus rose up again and wanted totwerfen the thieves the stones but not met, and called the rogues. "It's almost morning, the wind shakes down the Tannäpfel." Catherine hatt e the door still on his shoulder, and as she squeezed so hard it thought the dried pears were to blame, saying. "Frederick, I have the dried pears throw down" - replied "No, not Kate, now," he, "they might betray us." - "Ah, Freddy, I have to, they push me too much." - "Well so do it, the hangman's name!" then the dried pears rolled down between the branches down, saying the guys below: ". craps the birds" for a while, then because the door was still pressed, said Kate: "Ah, Freddy, I need the vinegar pour out." - "no, Catherine, you must not, it might betray us." - "Ah, Freddy, I must, it weighs me down far too much." - "Well, then do it, the hangman's name!" so she emptied out the vinegar that it besprinkled the robbers. among themselves they said, "The dew trickles down already." Finally Catherine thought it should probably be the door which weighs me like this? and said, "Frederick, I must throw the door down." - "No, Catherine, not now, she could tell us." - "Ah, Freddy, I have to, it weighs me down far too much." - "No, Catherine, holding them so tight!" - "Ah, Freddy, I drop them." - "Ah," replied Frieder annoying, "so let them fall into the devil's name!" As she fell down with a violent clatter, and called the guys down, "The devil is come down from the tree," uprooted and left everything behind. Early in the morning, as the two came down they found all their gold again, and took it heim.Als they were back at home, Frederick said, "Catherine, but now you have to be diligent and work." - "Yes, Frederick, I will soon do want to go into the field and cut corn." When Catherine was in the field, saying it to himself: "I eat before I cut, or shall I sleep before I cut Hei, I ehr want to eat?" Since ass Catherine, and was sleepy over his food and began to cut and cut half-dreaming all his clothes to pieces: apron, skirt and shirt. When Catherine awoke again after a long sleep, it was half naked, and said to himself: "? Is it I or am I not Oh, I am not" Meanwhile ward's night, and Catherine ran into the village, knocked at her husband's window and called out, "Frederick!" - "What is it?" - "like to know Möcht whether Catherine is in." - "Yes, yes," replied Frederick, "it will probably be in and asleep." She said: "Well, I am certainly at home already," and ran fort.Draussen Catherine found some vagabonds who were going to steal. Then she went to them and said, "I want to steal help you." The rascals thought that it knew the situation of the place and were's satisfied. Catherine went to houses and shouted: "People have, you know what we want to steal." Thought the rascals: This is good and wish they were Catherine go again. They said to him, "Vorm village, the pastor beet on the field, Go and Rupf us turnips!" Catherine went to the countryside and began to pluck, but was so lazy and did not lift itself into the air. Then a man came by, saw her and stood still and thought it was the devil who was thus rooting amongst the turnips. Ran away spoke into the village to the pastor and "pastor, in your beet country is the Devil and plucks!" - "Oh God," replied the pastor, "I have a lame foot, I can not go out and drive it." The man said: "I will you Hockeln," and he carried him out. And when they came to the land, the Catherine arose and stood up in the air. "Ah, the devil!" cried the pastor, and both hurried away, and the pastor could run straight when the man who had carried him great anguish with his lame foot, with his healthy legs.
The Frog and the Rat	6737	278	German	Many - says Merlin - digs a grave, The finally dug for himself. This word - perhaps you do today, as well out of date, from - Seemed to me at any time even deeper meaning to have. Only down to business now! - 'a rat, stout and well fed for which only superstition remains Advent and Lent, sat to Find refreshment spirits, Munter and good thing in a fen edge. Speaks a frog them in his speech and manners. "Join me once, even dainty feast you findst" - Woman rat says most graciously Just across the parking and saves him every weitre Please. But the abundance adds he added pointing out How delightful to have such a bath, how pleasant traveling, How strange the moor have; Yet praise she would children and even grandchildren also The area beauty like the people Sitt and domestic And the government and the Council of Magistrate water state. Only one thing is what the thing can seem difficult: A little she swims well, but it needs help. The frog knows good advice with a blade of grass from the reeds binds rat foot to foot it is tight. But no sooner arrived on the moor, equal Did the brave host set out to the guest and drags him violently down to the ground; to prepare against international law and hospitality of all time A fat Jägermahl from him he think that would be quite something for his mouth! He already cracks in the spirit of her with his sharp teeth. She calls the gods, he mocks her tears; She resists, he pulls. Meanwhile, the battle so arose, spots a Weih, the high circles in air, arms, The fights down deep in Sumpfsich that God have mercy. He shoots down, and in its air area Raises he Ratt and frog at the same time. was so successful the string, That if this double prey warm the bird was happy; Did he not at once fresh For Schmause meat and fish. Networks, no matter how finely spun, catching the often that she spun; Unfaithful, yet so fine Suggests devised very often the suitable man.
The frog king or Iron Henry	9	440	German	In ancient times, when wishing still helped one, there lived a king whose daughters were all beautiful; but the youngest was so beautiful that the sun itself, which has seen so much, marveled every time they make her face appeared. Near the castle of the king was a great dark forest, and in the forest under an old lime tree was a well; and when the day was very hot, so the king's child went out into the forest and sat down at the edge of the cool well - and when she was bored, so she took a golden ball, threw it into the air and caught it, and that was her favorite Spielwerk.Nun wore it once, that the golden ball of the princess did not fall into her hands, which she had kept in the air, dropped to the ground well and rolled into the water. The king's daughter followed it with her eyes, but the ball disappeared, and the well was deep so deep that they saw no reason. As she began to cry, and cried louder and could not be comforted. And how she complained so someone said to her: "What are you doing, princess? You weep so that even a stone would show pity." She looked around, where the voice came, and saw a frog, the thick his, stretched ugly head from the water. "Oh, it's you, old water-splasher," she said, "I am crying because my golden ball, which has fallen into the well." - "Be quiet and do not weep," answered the frog, "I can probably provide advice, but what will you give me if I bring your plaything up again?" - "Whatever you will have, dear frog," she said; "My clothes, my pearls and jewels, even the golden crown that I wear." The frog answered, "Your clothes, your pearls and jewels, and your golden crown, I do not like: but if you want me to love, and let me be your companion and playmate, sit at your little table next to you, eat from your little golden plate drink from your cup, and sleep in thy little if you promise me that, I will go down and bring you your golden ball again. " - "Oh yes," she said, "I promise all you want if you bring you me my ball again." But she thought: What nonsense he talks! Sitting in the water with the other and quacks and can no man journeyman sein.Der frog when he had received this promise, put his head under water and sank down, and in a short while came swimming up again with the ball in his mouth and threw it the grass. The king's daughter was delighted to see her pretty plaything again, picked it up and ran away with it. "Wait wait," said the frog, "take me with you, I can not run like you!" But what was it that he croak, you be as loud quack, quack, as he could! She did not hear it, but ran home and soon forgot the poor frog, who back down to his well musste.Am next day, when they had sat down to dinner with the king and all the courtiers, and ate from her golden plate, came as splish splash, splish splash, up the marble staircase crawled a little, and was when it reached the top, there was a knock on the door and called out, "princess, youngest, let me in!" She ran to see who was outside, but when she opened the door, there sat the frog in front of it. Then she slammed the door hastily and sat back down at the table, and it was her fear completely. The king saw plainly that her heart was beating violently, and said, "My child, what are you afraid of? Is there a giant outside the door ready to carry you?" - "Oh no," she answered, "It is no giant but a disgusting frog." - "What does the frog want from you?" - "Ah, dear father, I and played yesterday was sitting in the woods near the fountain, my golden ball fell into the water And because I cried so, it has the frog brought it back, and because he asked for it well, so I promised. him he should be my companion, but I never thought that he herauskönnte from his water Now he is outside and wants to me in ".. And then it knocked a second time and said, "Princess, youngest, Make me on, You know not what gesternDu to me gesagtBei the cool water fountain Princess, youngest, open to me?" Then the king said, "What you have promised, you must also hold; go now and let him in." She went and opened the door, and the frog hopped in and followed her, on the foot after, to her chair. As he sat and cried, "Lift me up beside you." She delayed, until at last the king ordered. When the frog was on the chair until he was on the table, and as he sat there, he said, "Now push your golden plate closer, so we eat together." She did, but you could see well that they do not like doing it. The frog's let himself taste good, but it was almost every Bisslein in the throat. Finally he said, "I was stuffed and am tired and now my contract in your room and do your silken bed cope because we want to go to sleep." The princess began to cry and was afraid of the cold frog which she did not dare to touch and which was now to sleep in her pretty clean bed. But the king was angry and said, "Who helped you when you were in trouble, and you shall hereafter not despise." So she took him with two fingers, carried him upstairs and put him in a corner. but when she was in bed he crept to her and said, "I'm tired, I want to sleep as well as you: heb me up, or I'll tell your father." Since she was only bitter, and took him up and threw him with all her might against the wall, "Now you're going to have peace, you disgusting frog." But when he fell down, he was not a frog, but a prince with beautiful kind eyes. And it came to her father's will her dear companion and husband. Then he told her he had been bewitched by a wicked witch, and no one could have delivered him from the well but herself, and tomorrow they would go together to his kingdom. Then they fell asleep, and the next morning when the sun awoke them, a carriage came driving up with eight white horses covered which had white ostrich feathers on their heads, and were harnessed with golden chains, and behind the servant stood the young king, the was the faithful Heinrich. Faithful Henry had grieved so when his master was turned into a frog been turned that he had three iron bands around his heart, lest it should burst with grief and sadness. The carriage was to conduct the young king into his kingdom; Both Faithful Henry helped in, and placed himself behind again, and was full of joy at the Erlösung.Und when she was a part of the way had gone, heard the prince that a cracking behind him as if something had broken. Then he turned and shouted, "Henry, the carriage is breaking!" "No, sir, not the carriage It is a band from my heart, That one was in great pain, as your imprisoned in the well, as your one Fretsche (frog) wast (waiting). "again and again it crashed on the way, and the prince thought, would break the car, and yet it was only the band jumped off the from the heart of faithful Henry because his master was relieved and happy.
The Fox and the Mrs. Gossip	707	4	German	The she-wolf brought a young one, and let the fox invited to be godfather. 'He is a near relative of ours,' she said, 'has a good understanding, and much talent, he can instruct my little son, and help him in the world.' The fox, too, appeared quite honest, and said, "Worthy Mrs. Gossip, I thank you for the honor you are doing me, but I will also hold so that your your joy shall have it. ' The hard he let sichs taste and made merry, and after that he said, "Dear Mrs. Gossip, it is our duty to care for the child, you have to have good food, so that there is also strength. I know a sheep-fold from which we might fetch a good deal. ' The wolf was pleased with the ditty, and she went with the fox to the farm. He pointed out the fold from afar, saying, 'there you will be able to crawl unseen, I want to look around on the other side, meanwhile, if I pick up a chicken.' but he did not go, but left at the entrance of the forest, stretched his legs and rested. The she-wolf crept into the stable, there was a dog, and made such a noise that the peasants run came caught in the act that Mrs. Gossip and cast a sharp liquor from unfired ashes over their fur. Finally she escaped but and dragged himself out There lay the fox, did quite miserably and said, "Ah, dear Mistress Gossip, how is it to me fared bad! the farmers have attacked me and I smashed all the members, if you do not want me to remain on the court and fail, so you have to carry me away. ' The wolf could even continue slowly, but she had great concern about the fox that she took him on her back, and slowly up to her house bore the perfectly safe and sound godfather. He called her "Farewell, dear Mistress Gossip, and let the roast you probably get, 'laughed heartily at her, and ran away.
The fox and the cat	717	105	German	It happened that the cat met in a forest, which Mr. Fox, and because she thought "He is clever and full of experience, and is much in the world, 'so she spoke to him kindly. 'Good day, dear Mr. Fox, how are you? What's up? How are you getting on at this time? ' full of fox, all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from head to feet and knew long not know whether he would give any answer. Finally he said, 'you o wretched beard, you piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what comes to your mind? you under stand to ask you how I am? what did you learn? How many arts do you understand? ' 'I understand but one, "replied the cat, modestly. 'What is this art?' asked the fox. 'When the hounds are following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself. " 'Is that all?' said the fox '' I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain a sackful of cunning. You make me sorry, come with me, I will teach you how to escape the dogs. ' Then came a hunter with four dogs therefore. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. 'Bind the sack, Mr. Fox, open your sack,' cried the cat to him, but the dogs had already seized him and held him. 'Ah, Mr. Fox, "cried the cat,' You stuck with your hundred arts. Had you been able to climb like me ', you would not have lost your life.'
The Fox and the Grapes	9519	59	German	A mouse and a sparrow sitting on a fall night under a vine and chatted with each other. Suddenly the sparrow chirped his girlfriend: "Hide yourself, the fox is coming," and flew rapidly up to the Laub.Der fox crept to the vine approach, his eyes hung longingly of the thick, blue, overripe grapes. He cautiously peered in all directions. Then he leaned his front paws against the trunk, stretched his body vigorously up and wanted to catch with the mouth a few grapes. But they hung annoyed hoch.Etwas he tried his luck again. This time he took a huge leap, but he snapped back only to Leere.Ein third time he tried and jumped with all his might. Full of greed, he scurried to the lush grapes and stretched for so long until he tumbled onto his back. Not a leaf had bewegt.Der Sparrow, who had been watching silently, could no longer dominate and chirped amused: "Mr. Fox, you want to also high!" The mouse peered out of her hiding place and beeped cheekily: "Do not bother grapes you never get. " And like an arrow shot her in her hole zurück.Der Fuchs clenched his teeth, wrinkled her nose and said haughtily: "You are not yet mature enough for me, I do not like sour grapes." With heads held high, he stalked back into the forest.
The Gaudieb and his master	650	325	German	Hans wished to put his son to learn a trade; so he went to church and prayed to our Lord God, what it would be beneficial. Then the clerk got behind the altar and says: "Thieving, thieving." On this Hans goes back to his son, he would have to learn thieving, had told him our Lord God. he goes with his son to seek a man who can thieving. They walk a long time and come to a large forest, where stands a little house with an old woman in it. Hans says: "You know not a man who is acquainted with thieving?" - "You can learn it here well," says the woman, "my son is a master of it." Because he speaks with the son asks if he knows thieving really well. The thief says: ". I want's your son teach all right Come a year is over again if you still know then your son, I will have no dues, and does not know you know him, then you have me two hundred give dollars." the father goes home again, and the son learns well hexene and thieving. When the year is going the father is full of anxiety about how he will do it, to recognize his son. As he is thus going about hinsinnt front of him because he is a little man, who says, "Man, what you For you are so unhappy?" - "Oh," says Jan, "I have placed my son a year ago in a master-thief who told me I should come back in a year, and if I my then son do not know, then I should pay two hundred give Taler, if I but would recognize him, then I would have nothing to give him. Now am but I so afraid that I did not recognize him, and I do not know where to get the money. "then the dwarf tells him to take a small basket of bread and thus placed under the fireplace: "it says on the pole a little basket, as looks out a bird that is your son." since January goes and throws a Krüstchen black bread from the basket; as the bird comes out and looks at it: "Holla, my son, are you here?" says the father. As the son was happy that he saw his father, but the teacher said, "That must have prompted you, the devil; how can you recognize your son you otherwise?" - "Father, let's go," said the Junge.Da the father wants to go with his son home; the move comes as approached a carriage. The son says to his father: "I will change myself into a large greyhound, then you can earn a lot of money with me." Then the gentleman calls from the carriage, "Man, will you sell your dog?" - "Yes," said his father. "How much money will you have for that?" - "Thirty dollars." - "Yeah, man, that's a lot, but because of me, because he's such a fine dog, and I will keep it." The Lord takes it into his carriage, but when they have driven a little farther the dog springs through the glass of the car, and as he was no longer a greyhound and was back with his Vater.Da they now go home together. The next day the market is in the next village; because the boy says to his father: "I am now wants to turn into a beautiful horse, then sell me; but if you have sold me, then you must take off my bridle, or I can not become a man again." Then the father goes with the horse to the fair; here comes the master-thief and buys the horse for a hundred dollars, and the father forgets it and takes off the bridle not decrease. So the man takes the horse home and puts it in the stable. When the maid on the board goes, the horse says, "Take off my bridle, take off my bridle off!" Since the maid stands still and listens, "Yes, you can talk?" Goes and takes off the bridle. As the horse becomes a sparrow, flying over the door, and the wizard becomes a sparrow also, and flies after him. As they come together and bite, but the master of playful and gets into the water and is a fish. The boy also a fish, and they bite again that the master has to gamble. Since the master changes himself into a chicken, and the boy becomes a fox, and bites the master's head off; since he died and has remained dead to this day.
The spirit in the glass	944	331	German	Once there was a poor woodcutter who worked from morning until late at night. When he finally some money had saved, he said to his boy: "You are my only child, I want to use the money that I earned with acidic sweat on your education; you learn an honest trade so you can call me in Age eat when my limbs have grown stiff and I have to sit at home. " As the boy went to a university and studied diligently, making him his teachers praised, and remained there for some time. was as he had learned a few classes, but not yet perfect in everything, so that was kind of poverty, which had acquired the father, spent, and he had to return home to him. "Oh," said the father sadly, "I can give you nothing and may in time make expensive than the daily bread and not a penny more." - "Dear father," answered the son, "do not worry about it, if it's God's will is, so it will turn out for my own good, and I will do all right." When the father go into the forest to earn something on bundles of wood (the hew and erecting), the son said: "I will go with you and you help." - "Yes, my son," said the father, "you will find it too difficult, you're not used to hard work, and think not of that; I have only one ax and no money left to have to buy one. " - "Just go to the neighbor," answered the son. "He will lend you his ax until I myself a've earned" So the father borrowed the neighbor an ax, and the next morning, at daybreak, went them together into the forest. The son helped his father and was quite cheerful and fresh here. As the sun was directly above them, the father said: "We want to engage and hold lunch Then all will go twice as well." The son picked up his bread in his hand and said, "Just you rest, father, I'm not tired, I want in the forest a little and go and look for birds' nests." - "Oh, you fool," said the father, "what do you want to run about, afterwards you're tired and can no longer lift the arm, stay here and sit down beside me!" But the son went into the woods, ate his bread , was very cheerful, and looked into the green branches to see if he discovered about a nest. So he went back and forth until he finally came to a large, oak that certainly already hundreds of years old and was not five people would spans. He stopped and looked at her and thought: There must be some bird its nest have built into it. Since it was at one time, when he heard a voice. He listened and heard how he said with such a pretty dull tone, "Let me out, let me out" He looked around but could not see anything, but it seemed to him as if the voice could emerge out of the ground. Then he shouted, "Where are you?" The voice replied, "I am stuck down here among the oak roots Let me out, let me out." The student began to scrape under the tree, searching among the roots, until at last he found a glass bottle in a little opening. He lifted her into the air and held it up to the light, he saw a thing, designed like a frog jumping up and down. "Let me out, let me out!" cried's again, and the student, thinking no evil, pulled the cork from the bottle from. Immediately rose a ghost out and began to grow and grew so quickly that he as big as half the tree, was standing in a few moments a horrible guy in front of the students. "Weiss you," he cried in an terrifying voice, "what your reward is that you let out me?" - "No," replied the student fearlessly, "how should I know?" - "So I'll tell you," cried the spirit, "the neck I must break you for that." - "You should have told me earlier to say," answered the student, "I would have left you shut up, but my head is to be established before thee well, as more people have been consulted." - "More people here, more people there," shouted the spirit, "your deserved reward that you shall have Do you think I would have been trapped by grace since such a long time, no, it was at my reproof: I am the. . Who releases large mighty Mercurius me, I must break your neck. " - "Calm down," answered the student, "Not so fast that only I have to know that you really were in that little bottle, and that you are the right spirit, you can also back inside, so I want it to believe and you may do with me what you want. " The spirit said arrogantly, "This is a small Art," pulled together and made as thin and small as he had been at first, so he that then crept back into through the same opening and through the neck of the bottle. No sooner but he was inside when the student pushed the cork back on and threw the bottle under the oak roots to their original location, and the spirit was wanted betrogen.Nun the student to return to his father, but the spirit cried out pitifully " Oh, but let me out, let me out yet! " - "No," answered the student, "not a second time: Who has sought me once after life, do not let me go if I have captured him again." - "If you will set me free," cried the spirit, "I will give you so much that you have all your life enough." - "No," answered the student, "you would cheat me like the first time." - "You are giving away your happiness," said the spirit, "I will not hurt you, but plenty of reward you!" The student said, I will venture it, perhaps he keeps his word, and he shall do to me nothing. Then he took out the cork and the spirit rose out like the last time, stretched apart and was as big as a giant. "Now you shall have your reward," he said, handing the student a little rag, much like a bandage, and said, "If you are with one end of a wound sprinkle, so it heals, and if you with the other end of steel and iron sprinkle, so it is converted into silver. " - "That I have to even try," said the student, went to a tree, scratched the bark with his ax, then rubbed it with the one end of the patch; soon it merged and was healed. "Well, it is all right," he said to the spirit, "now we can separate us." The spirit thanked him for his salvation, and the student thanked the spirit for the present and went back to his father. "Where have you been running?" said the father; "Why have you forgotten your work? I have said right that you would not get anything done." - "Do not be concerned, father, I will make it up." - "Yes, to make up," said the father angrily, "has no type." - "Just watch, father, the tree since I will soon cut down that it crash." Then he took his bandage, rubbed the ax with it, and struck a mighty blow; but because the iron had turned into silver, then the cutting was up. "Well, father, just look what you've given me a bad ax that has become quite crooked." As frightened the father and said, "Oh, what have you done now I have to pay for the ax and do not know which; this is the benefit I have from your work!". - "Do not get angry," replied the son, "the ax will I have to pay." - "Oh, you blockhead," cried the father, "How will you pay for it you have nothing but what I give you have students' tricks stuck in your head, but chopping wood you have no intelligence?". After a little while said the student, "father, I can not work no more, we want to quit for the day." - "Eh, what?" He replied, "do you think I wanted her hands in her lap lay like you I have to create, you may head for home but you?". - "Father, I am for the first time here in these woods, I do not know my way alone, go with me!" His anger had subsided, so the father let finally talked into going home with him. As he said to the son, "Go and sell the damaged ax and see what you get for it the rest I need to earn in order to pay the neighbor." The son took the ax and took it into town to a goldsmith, who tested it, put it on the scales and said, "It is worth four hundred dollars, as much as I do not have cash." The student said, "Give me what you have, the rest I will lend you." The goldsmith gave him three hundred dollars and owed him one hundred. Then the student went home and said, "Father, I have money, go and ask the neighbor what he wants for the ax." - "I know so," replied the old man, "one taler, six pennies." - "Then give him two talers, twelve pennies, that's twice and is enough, do you see, I have money in abundance," and gave the father a hundred talers, saying, "It shall want you never live according to your convenience." "My God," said the old man, "how did you come to the wealth?" - Then he told him how everything that had happened and how he would have done in reliance on his luck such a catch. but with the money that he moved back down to the high school and learned more, and because he could heal with his plaster all wounds, he became the most famous doctor in the whole world.
The trained hunter	1057	304	German	There was once a young fellow who had learned the locksmith, and told his father he would now go out into the world and seek his fortune. 'Yes,' said the father, 'I'm satisfied,' and gave him some money for the trip. So he went around and looked for work. At a time when it want the locksmith not follow, nor was it any more, but he took a fancy for hunting. There he met on his rambles a huntsman dressed in green, who asked whence he came and where he was going. He was a locksmith Sell, said the lad, but the craft did not like him more, and had a fancy for hunting if he wanted to accept him as an apprentice. 'Oh yes, if you want to go with me.' Then the young fellow went with some years, let him and learned the hunting. After that, he wanted to continue to try and hunters gave him nothing in payment but an air-gun, but had the property if he did so a shot, he hit its mark without fail. Then he went away and came in a very large forest, from which he could in a day did not find the end. When evening came, he sat on a tall tree, so that it came from the wild animals. Towards midnight, it seemed to him, shone a small light in the distance, he saw through the branches out and kept in mind where it was. But he only took his hat and threw it at the light to shut that he wanted to go by when he would come down, as for a sign. Then he got down, went to his hat, put it back on and went straight forwards. The further he went, the greater was the light, and when he got close, he saw that it was a huge fire, and sat three giants there and had an ox on the spit and let him fry. Now one of them said 'I have to taste if the meat will soon be eating yet,' tore a piece off, and there in the M and connect, but the hunter shot it out of his hand. 'Well,' said the giant, 'because I the wind blows the piece out of hand,' and took another. As he was about to anbeissen, it shot him the hunter again away; On this the giant gave the one who was sitting next to him, an ear, and cried angrily, "what you tears me my piece away? ' 'I have not snatched it away, "said the other,' it will dirs a sharpshooter who shot away. ' The giant took another piece, but could not keep it in his hand, the hunter shot it out to him. Since the giant said, "That must be a good shot to shoot the bit out of the mouth, so one would be useful to us, 'and called in loud' come, you Sniper, sit down to us by the fire and fed eat you, we want you do nothing; But you do not come, and we take you by force, then you are lost. ' As the boy came and said he was a skilled huntsman, and that whatever he aimed with his gun, which he meet also safe and certain. They said if he wanted to go with them, he should be well, and told him, before the forest is a great water behind it stood an tower, and the tower was imprisoned a lovely princess who they were anxious to rob. 'Yes,' he said, 'I want to soon have done.' They added, "but it is still something else, there is a tiny little dog, which is about to start barking when someone approaches, and as soon as it barks watching everything at the royal court and therefore we can not enter into it; dare you, shoot and kill the dog? ' 'Yes,' he said, 'this is me a little fun.' He then sat on a boat and rowed across the water, and he was soon in the country, the little dog came running and tried to bark, but the huntsman took his air-gun and shot it dead. When the giants saw that, they rejoiced and thought they had the princess already certain, but the huntsman wished first to see how the matter was arranged, and said they should stay outside until he called them. So he went into the castle, and it was quiet as a mouse in it, and slept anything. As he opened the first room, a sword was hanging on the wall, which was of pure silver, and had a golden star on it and the king's name; near it lay on a table a sealed letter which he broke, and it was written that whosoever had the sword could kill everything living, which opposed him. So he took the sword from the wall, put it on and went on: since he came into the room where the princess was lying sleeping, and she was so beautiful that he stood still and looked at her and holding her breath. He thought to himself, "How can I give an innocent maiden into the power of the wild giants, who have evil in mind. ' He looked around further, as under the bed stood a pair of slippers, on the right was her father's name with a star and on the left her own name with a star. She also had a big neckerchief, silk, with gold freaked, on the right side of her father's name, on the left her name, all in golden letters. Then the huntsman took a pair of scissors and cut the right corner off, and put it in his knapsack, and then he also took the right slipper with the king's name and put it inside. Now the maiden still lay sleeping, and she was quite sewn into her dress, and he cut off a piece of his shirt and put it to rest, but he did all without touching her. Then he went away and let her sleep undisturbed, and when he came to the gate again, the giants were still standing outside, waiting for him and thought he would bring the princess. He called out to them, they should come in, the maiden was already in his power: but the door he could not open them, but there was a hole through which they crawl would. Now the first approached, because the hunter wrapped the giant hair around his hand, pulled his head in and struck him with his sword into a match, and duns (moved) him then completely into it. Then he called the second and cut off his head, and finally the third, and was glad that he had freed the beautiful maiden from her enemies, and cut the tongues out of them and put them in his knapsack. He thought 'I want to go home to my father and him to show what I've done, I will travel about the world; the happiness that God is pleased to grant me, looking forward erreichen.'Der king in the castle but when he woke up, he saw the three giants who lay there dead. Then he went into the bedroom of his daughter, woke her up and asked who that might have been, would have been killed the giants. Then she said, "Dear father, I do not know, I was sleeping. ' But when she arose and would have put on her slippers, which was right away, and when she looked her scarf, it was cut, and lacked the right corner off, and as she looked at her dress a piece was out. The king left together the whole yard, soldiers and everything was there, and asked who freed his daughter and the Giants could have put their lives. Now he had a captain who was one-eyed and ugly man who said he had done it. Then the old king, he would have done, he should marry his daughter. But the maiden said, "Dear father, that I should marry, I would rather go into the world, as far as I wear my legs. ' Then the king said if she did not marry him she should take off her royal garments and wear peasant clothing, and go; and it should go to a potter and a business with earthenware. As she did her royal clothes and went to a potter and borrowed a junk earthen works; they also promised him that if she had sold it in the evening, she would pay for it. Now the king told her to sit in a corner with it and sell it. Then he appointed certain farm wagons that should pass through the middle that everything was going to pieces. As the king's daughter had placed her stall in the street, the car came and broke all she had into tiny fragments. She began to cry and said, "Alas, how shall I ever pay for the pots. ' The king had wanted to force them trying to marry the captain, instead, they went back to the potter, and asked him if he wanted to once again lend to her. He answered no, they should pay only the first. Then she went to her father and cried and lamented and said she wanted to go into the world. And he said, 'I want you out there in the forest, a house can be built, it thou shalt stay all thy life long and cook for everybody, but you can not take money.' When the hut was ready, a sign was hung outside the door, on which was written 'day given, to-morrow sold.' As they sat for a long time, and said it is in the world around as were sitting a virgin who cooked without asking, and the stands at the door of a shield. This also heard the hunter and thought 'that would be something for you, you're poor and have no money.' So he took his air-gun and his knapsack, which still put everything what he had then taken the castle as a landmark, went into the woods and found the hut with the sign 'day given, to-morrow sold.' He had put on the sword, which he had cut off the head of the three giants, so entered the house in and let himself be something to eat. He was delighted with the beautiful girl, but it was also pretty as a picture. She asked from whence he came and was going, and he said 'I travel about the world.' Then she asked him where he had got the sword, for that truly her father's name on it. he asked if it were the king's daughter. 'Yes,' she replied. "With this sword, 'he said,' I've cut three giant head, 'and he took their tongues out of his knapsack, he showed her the slipper, corner of the neck cloth and the piece of shirt. Then she was full of joy and said he was the one who would have redeemed. Then they went together to the old king and brought him h Erbei, and she led him to her room and told him that the huntsman was the man who she had saved from the giant. And as the old king saw all the proofs that he could no longer doubt, and said it would be dear to him that he knew how everything had happened, and he should now have to wife; about the Virgin of heart rejoiced. Then she dressed him as if he were a foreign lord, and the king ordered a feast. When they went to table, the captain came to sit, but the hunter to the right to the left side of the princess: said, the captain, was a foreign lord who had come to visit. When they had eaten and drunk, the old king said to the captain, he wanted to give him something he must guess if one said that he had killed the three giants of life, and he'd asked where the giants' tongues were, and he would have to watch and there were none such could that happen in their minds? As the captain said, "they will not have had. ' 'Not so,' said the king "Every animal has a tongue," and went on to ask what would be the value that it happening to. The captain replied, 'belongs to be torn to pieces.' Then the king said he had pronounced his own sentence, and the captain gefänglich set and then torn into four pieces, but the king's daughter married to the huntsman. He then brought his father and his mother brought, and living in joy at her son, and after the old king's death, he received the kingdom.
Clever Hans	307	1696	German	Hansen's mother asks: "Where, Hans?" Hans replied, "To Grethel." "Goodbye, Hans" "It's make up bye, mother.." "Good-bye, Hans" Hans comes to Gretel. "Good day, Gretel.. . "". good day, Hans What do you bring that is good? "han" bring nothing given "Gretel presents Hans a Nadel.Hans says." good-bye, Gretel, "" good-bye, Hans. "Hans takes the needle, sticks. it into a hay, and follows the cart home. "" With Grethel. "" good evening, mother. "" good evening, Hans. Where have you been? "What did you take her?" brought "nothing has given. "" What did Gretel give you? "" needle given. "" Where did you get the needle, Hans? "" In hayrides stuck. "" you've done, Hans, had to the needle at the sleeve insert . "" do not do anything better. "---------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------- "Where, Hans?" "to Grethel, "make mother." take care, Hans. "" All right. good-bye, mother. "" good-bye, Hans. "Hans" good day, Gretel. "" good day, Hans Wa comes to Gretel.. s bring you good? "han Bring nothing given." "Gretel presents Hans with a knife." Good-bye, Gretel. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home." Good evening , mother. "" good evening, Hans. Where have you been? "With Grethel." "" What did you take her? "Nothing has been given. '" "What did Gretel give you?" Given knife. "" "Where did you get the knife, Hans ? "" to put the sleeve. "" you've done, Hans, the knife had to put in your pocket. "" do not do anything better. "--------------- -------------------------------------------------- --------------- "Where, Hans?" "to Grethel, mother." "take care, Hans." "make All right. Good-bye, mother. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans comes to Gretel." Good day, Gretel. "" Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is good? "" Bring han not given. "Grethel presents Hans with a young goat." Good-bye, Gretel. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans takes the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he gets home it is suffocated. "good evening, mother." "good evening, Hans. Where have you been? "" With Grethel. "" What did you take her? "Nothing has been given. '" "What did Gretel give you?" Given goat. "" "Where did you get the goat, Hans ? "" put it in my pocket. "" you've done, Hans, the goat had to bind to a rope. "" do not do anything better. "--------------- -------------------------------------------------- --------------- "Where, Hans?" "to Grethel, mother." "take care, Hans." "make All right. Good-bye, mother. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans comes to Gretel." Good day, Gretel. "" Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is good? "" Bring han not given. "Grethel presents Hans with a piece of bacon." Good-bye, Gretel. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it behind her. the dogs come and eat the bacon from. When he gets home, he has the rope in his hand, and is nothing more to it. "good evening, mother." "good evening, Hans. Where have you been? "With Grethel." "" What did you take her? "Has brought nothing given." "" What did Gretel give you? "Given piece of bacon. '" "Where did you get the bacon, Hans? "" Ans rope tied, taken home, taken away dogs. "" you've done, Hans, had to the bacon on the head wear. "" do not do anything better. "---------- -------------------------------------------------- -------------------- "Where, Hans?" "to Grethel, mother." "take care, Hans." "make All right. Good-bye, mother. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans comes to Gretel." Good day, Gretel. "" Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is good? "Han Bring nothing given." "Gretel presents Hans with a calf." Good-bye, Gretel. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans takes the calf, puts it on the head, and the calf kicks his face. "good evening, mother." "good evening, Hans. Where have you been? "With Grethel." "" What did you take her? "Nothing has been given. '" "What did Gretel give you?" Given calf. "" "Where did you get the calf, Hans ? "" at dead set on it kicked my face. "" you've done, Hans, the calf had to lead and make it in the stall. "" Never mind, do better. "---------- -------------------------------------------------- -------------------- "Where, Hans?" "to Grethel, mother." "take care, Hans." "make All right. Good-bye, mother. "" Good-bye, Hans. "Hans comes to Gretel." Good day, Gretel. "" Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is good "" Bring nothing han given. "Gretel says to Hans?". I will go with you, "Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her, leads her to the rack and binds her fast . Then Hans goes to his mother. "good evening, mother." "good evening, Hans. Where have you been? "" With Grethel. "" What did you take her "brought nothing."? "" What did Gretel give you? "Nothing given, went along." "" Where did you leave the Gretel? " "passed the rope, tied to the rack; Grass accused. "" You've done, Hans, had to friendly eyes on her throw. "" Never mind, do better. "Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves and sheep's eyes, and threw them in Gretel's face. since Gretel gets angry, pulls away and runs away, and became the bride of Hans.
Puss in Boots	1970	545B	German	There was once a miller who had three sons, his mill, a donkey and a cat; the sons had to grind, get the donkey cereals and carry away meal, the cat, however wegfangen the mice. When the miller died, the three sons shared in the inheritance: the oldest received the mill, the second the donkey, the third the cat; nothing was left for him. Since he was sad and said to himself: "I do not yet fared quite bad, my oldest brother can grind, my second ride on his ass - what can I do with the hangover I let me a pair of fur gloves out of his fur make then it's over "" Listen, "began the cat who all had understood," you do not have to kill me to get bad for a pair of gloves from my fur;. let me just a pair of boots do I go out and I can be proud of among the people, then you will soon be helped. " The miller's son was amazed that the cat spoke, but just because passed the cobbler, he called him in and let him measure towards the boots. When they were finished, she pulled the cat, took a sack, made the bottom of corn, but tied a cord drum with which one could pull him, then threw him on his back and walked on two legs like a human, the door hinaus.Damals ruled a king in the land of the ass so much partridges: but it was an emergency, that there were none to get. The whole forest was full, but they were so shy that no hunter could reach them. Knew the cat, and thought better carry on his cause; when he came into the forest, he made his sack, spread the grain apart, but the line he laid on the grass, and brought it behind a hedge. Then he hid himself, turned around and lay in wait. The partridges soon came running, found the wheat - and one by one jumped into the sack. As a good number was inside, the cat pulled the rope to, ran up and turned the neck to them; Then he threw the bag on his back and went straight to the palace of the king. The guard shouted. "Stop! Where to?" - "For the king!" replied the cat curtly. "Are you mad, a hangover and the king?" - "Just let him go," said another, "but the king has often bored, maybe it makes the cat with his humming and spinning pleasure." As the cat before the king came, he made a deep bow and said, "My lord, the Count" - while he called a long and make a name - "can be the Lord King recommended and sends him Partridge here"; knew the Affair with joy and ordered to do the cat, as much gold from the treasury in his bag as he could only wear: "This will bring your Lord and thank him very much for his gift." The poor miller's son but sat to house the window, resting his head on his hand and thought that he had now given away his last money for the boots of the cat, and probably nothing could bring better for him. Since the cat entered, threw the bag from the back, laced it up and poured out the gold from the Müller: "Since you have some gold from the king who is greeting you and thanked for the partridges with you." The miller was happy with the wealth without that he could not quite understand how it had happened. But the cat as he removed his boots, told him everything; Then he said: "You now have money enough, but doing it is not to remain; tomorrow I pull on my boots again, then you should still get richer; the king for I have said that you're a Count." The next day the cat, as he had said was, well shod, hunting again, and the king made a rich catch. This went on all day, and the cat brought home gold every day and so was popular with the king that he turn in the lock and was entitled. Once the cat was in the kitchen of the castle by the stove and warmed himself, there came the coachman and cursed: "I wish the king with the princess would be the hangman I wanted to go to the pub, drink a once and play cards because you shall! I go for a drive to the lake. " As the cat heard that, he crept home and said to his master, "If you a count and get rich want, come with me out to the lake and bathe in it." The miller did not know what he was to say, but he followed the cat, went with him, withdrew from stark naked and jumped into the water. but the cat took his clothes, carried her away and hid them. He had hardly finished when the king came thither; the cat began at once pathetic to lament: "Oh Gracious King my Lord, who has gone here in the lake for swimming, as a thief came and stole his clothes, which lay on the bank, and now is the Lord Count in the water and can not get out, and if he still spends more time in it, he will catch cold and die. " When the king heard this, he had to stop and one of his men had to hunt and pick clothes from the king. The count then drew the magnificent clothes, and anyway because the king was weighed because of partridges, which he thought he had received from him to him, he had to face him in the carriage set. The princess was not angry about it, because the count was young and beautiful, and she liked him very good.The hangover but was preceded and come to a large meadow, where were over a hundred people and made hay. "Who is the meadow, you guys?" asked the cat. "The great magician." - "Hear, now the king is equal to pass when he wants to know who owns the meadow, so replies to the Count, and when you do not, you shall kill all of them." Then the cat went on and came to a cornfield, so great that no one could overlook; there were more than two hundred people and cut the grain. "Who owns the seed, you people?" - "The Magician." - "Hear, now the king is equal to pass when he wants to know who owns the seed, replies the Count, and when you do not, you shall kill all of them." At last the cat came to a magnificent forest, as were more than three hundred people, felled the great oak trees and made of wood. "Who is the forest, you people?" - "The Magician." - "Hear, now the king is equal to pass when he wants to know who owns the forest, so replies to the Count, and when you do not, you shall kill all of them." The cat went even further, the people saw him after all, and because he looked so strange, and as a man in boots therefore went, they were afraid of him. He soon came to the wizard's castle, stepped boldly into it and before this way. The Wizard looked at him contemptuously, then asked him what he wanted. The cat bowed deeply and said, "I've heard that you could transform into any animal any way you will; as for a dog, fox or wolf, because I want to believe it well, but from an elephant that seems I quite impossible, and so I came to see for myself. " The magician said proudly, "This is for me a little something," and was transformed at the moment into an elephant. "That's a lot," said the cat, "but also in a lion?" - "This is nothing," said the wizard, then stood as a lion in front of the hangover. The cat turned frightened and exclaimed: "That's incredible and unheard, like if I had not let me come into the mind in a dream, but more than anything else, it would be if you find yourself in such a small animal, such as a mouse could turn. you can certainly more than any magician in the world, but you will still be too high. " The magician was very kind of the sweet words and said, "Oh, yes, dear kitten, I can do that," and jumped as a mouse around the room. The cat was after him, the mouse began with a set and ate it auf.Der king but was on a walk down with the Count and the Princess, and came to the big meadow. "Who owns the hay?" asked the king. "The Count," they all shouted as the cat had appointed them. "You as a beautiful piece of land, Count," said the king. After that they came to the big cornfield. "Who owns the seed, you people?" - "The Lord Count." - "Egg Count Large, nice lands!" - Then to the forest, "To whom belongs the wood you people?" - "The Lord Count." The king was amazed even more and said: "You need a rich man, Count, I do not think I have such a magnificent forest." At last they came to the castle, the cat was top of the stairs, and when the car stopped down, he jumped down, the door opened and said, "Lord King, you come here in the castle of my lord the Count, the will make this honor happy for his life. " The king got out and marveled at the magnificent building that was almost bigger and more beautiful than his castle; the count but the princess led up the stairs into the hall, he was all of gold and precious stones flimmerte.Da was the princess with the Count promised, and died when the King King, Puss in Boots but first minister.
The stolen farthings	1472	769	German	once there sat a father with his wife and children at noon at the table, and a good friend who had come to visit, ass with them. And as they sat so, and the clock struck twelve, as the stranger saw the door open and come in a snow-white dressed, very pale child. It did not look back and said nothing, but went straight into the next room. Soon after, it came back and went as silent again out the door. On the second and third day, it came up that way. At last the stranger asked the father to whom the beautiful child, I do that every day at noon in the chamber. 'I have not seen it,' he replied, 'and did not know who it could belong.' The next day when it again, the stranger pointed it to the father, but not the saw, and the mother and the children also all saw nothing. Now, the stranger got up, went to the room door, opened it a little and looked inside. Then he saw the child sitting on the ground and busily digging his fingers into the openings between the boards and dig; but when it saw the stranger, it disappeared. He now told what he had seen and described the child exactly as it recognized the mother and said, 'Oh, this is my dear child who died four weeks ago.' They broke the boards and found two farthings which had once saved the child from the mother to give it to a poor man, it had but thought 'this you can buy a biscuit,' keep the Heller and hidden in the floorboard cracks ; and since it had been in the grave no rest, and every day at noon had come to seek for these farthings. The parents gave the money to a poor man, and after that the child was never seen again.
Godfather Death	424	332	German	It was a poor man twelve children and had to work day and night so that he could give them only bread. And when the thirteenth came into the world, he knew in his distress not helping, came down to the big road and wanted to ask you to be godfather to the first person who came to him. The first to meet him, that was God. The already knew what he had on his mind, and said to him: "Poor man, I pity you, I will hold your child at baptism, will care for it and make it happy on earth." The man said, "Who are you?" - "I am God." - "So sought after 'I do not gossip, you," the man said, "you give to the rich and let the poor starve." Thus spoke the man because he did not know how wisely God divides wealth and poverty. So he turned away from the Lord and moved on. Then the devil came to him and said, "What are you looking Want to take me to Godfather of your child, then I will give him gold, the abundance and all desire the world to do so." The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I am the devil." - "So most sought I thee not to be godfather," said the man, "you cheat and seduce the people." He went on; since the dürrbeinige death for him was delivered steps and said, "Take me to be godfather." The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I'll be making the death of all." Then the man said: "You are the rights that you bring the rich and poor, without distinction, you shall be my Gevattersmann." Death answered, "I will make your child rich and famous, for he who has me for a friend can not miss it." The man said, "Next Sunday is the baptism that put one at the right time you." was the Death appeared as he had promised, and served quite well Gevatter.Als the boy to come years ago, came at a time of inspiration and was called go with him. He led him out into the woods and showed him an herb that grew there, and said.. "Now you shall receive your godfather's present I make you a famous doctor If you are called to a patient, and I will appear to you every time : I stand at the head of the patient, so you can say with confidence, you wanted him back to health do, and then you give him some of this herb he will recover, but I stand at the foot of the patient, he is mine, and you say must all help is vain and no doctor in the world could save him. But beware that you are not using this herb against my will, it might endure bad! "it was not long before the young man was the most famous physician in the whole world. "He needs to see only the sick, so he already knows how it is uncertain whether he will recover or if he must die," so it was said of him, and far and wide people came up, took him to the sick and gave him so much money that he was a rich man soon. Now it came to pass that the king fell ill. The doctor was called and should say if recovery were possible. But as he approached the bed, Death was standing at the feet of the patient, and so no herb had grown for him. "If I could cheat death but once," thought the doctor, "he's certainly blame, but since I am his godson, he will shut one eye, I will risk it." So he took the sick and laid him so that death came to stand at his head. Then he gave him some of the herb, and the king recovered and became healthy again. But death came to the physician, made a dark and gloomy face, shook his finger and said, "You have betrayed me the light, this time I will see thee, because you are my godson, but if you dare that again, so are you's to the collar, and I will take you yourself away with me. "Soon afterward the king's daughter fell into a severe illness. She was his only child, he wept day and night, that he blinded the eyes, and had proclaimed that whosoever rescued her from death should be her husband and inherit the crown. The doctor, when he came to the bedside of the sick, saw Death at her feet. He would have the warning to remind his godfather, but the great beauty of the princess and the good fortune to be her husband, he was so infatuated that he threw all thought to the winds. He did not see that death was giving him angry looks, raised his hand in the air and threatened with his withered fist he raised the sick and laid her head to where the feet had lain. Then he gave her the herb, and soon his own life inspired by neuem.Der death when he found himself cheated a second time to his own, strode to the doctor and said, "It's over with you, and the series is now on you, "grabbed him so hard with his ice-cold hand that he could not resist, and led him into an underground cave. Then he saw burned like thousands and thousands of lights in endless rows, some large, others semi-big, others small. Every moment some were extinguished, and others again burnt up, so that the flame in constant change seemed to be. "See," said Death, "these are the life-lights of man. The large ones belong to children, the half-size to married people in their prime, the little ones to old people. But even children and young people often have only a tiny candle." - "Show me my life-light," said the physician, thinking that it would still be quite large. Death pointed to a little stump that was just threatening to go out, and said, "See, there it is." - "Oh, dear godfather," said the horrified physician, "light me a new one, I do's sake, that I may be king and husband of the beautiful princess." - "I can not," answered Death, "only one must go out, before a new one is lighted." - "Then set the old one onto a new one that will go on burning when that is over," asked the doctor. Death behaved as if he wanted to fulfill his wish, took hold of a, great light, but because he wanted to take revenge, he a mistake in plugging intentionally, and the little piece fell down and went out. The physician immediately fell to the ground and was now fall into the hand of death itself.
The glass coffin	1561	410	German	Tell no one that a poor tailor can not do great things and not win high honors, it is also nothing need when he comes to the right smithy, and what the main thing is that it succeeds him. A civil, adroit tailor's apprentice once went out traveling, and came into a great forest, and because it did not know the way, he lost himself. Night fell, and he had no choice but to seek in this painful solitude. On the soft mosses he had indeed found a good bed, but the fear of the beasts let him have no rest, and he had to finally decide to spend the night in a tree. He sought out a high oak, climbed up into the summit and thanked God that he had his goose with him, because he hätte.Nachdem otherwise the wind that blew over the top of the trees carried away, spending some hours in the darkness, not had no fear and trembling, spent, he saw at a little distance the appearance of a light; and because he thought that a human habitation would be where he would be better off than on the branches of a tree, he got carefully down and went towards the light. It led him to a small house, which was woven of reeds and rushes. He knocked boldly on the door opened, and by the light of the fall out light he saw a little hoary old man who wore a coat composed of colored stuff sewn. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' asked the man in a grumbling voice. 'I am a poor tailor,' he replied, 'the night raided here in the wilderness, and I earnestly beg you to take me into your hut until tomorrow.' 'Go your way,' replied the old man in a surly voice, 'tramps I will have nothing to do; Seeking you a shelter elsewhere coming. ' After that, he was about to slip into his house, but the tailor caught him by the coattails and pleaded so piteously, that the old man, who was so angry not, as he wished, at last softened, and took him to his tent, have where he gave him food and then at an angle, a very good bed anwies.Der weary tailor needed no rocking, but slept soundly until the morning, would not have thought of getting up, if he were not a loud noise been startled. A violent shouting and roaring penetrated the house through the thin walls. The tailor, full of unwonted courage, jumped up, put his clothes on in haste and hurried out. Then he saw next to the house a large black bull and a beautiful stag, which were engaged in a violent struggle. They went to such great anger at each other that with their trampling shook the ground, and the air resounded with their cries. It has long been uncertain which of the two to win would carry: finally the deer met his opponent the antlers in the body, whereupon the bull fell with a terrific roar to Earth and killed outright by a few strokes of the deer ward.Der Schneider, which the struggle had watched with amazement, stood still motionless, when the stag in full career bounded rushed towards him and him before he could escape, with its great horns. He could not think a long time because it was a swift race over hill and dale, mountain and valley, meadow and forest. He held on with both hands at the ends of the horns, and let his fate. but it felt no different, as he was flying it. At length the stag stopped in front of a rock wall and let fall the cutter gently. To get the tailor, more dead than alive, required some time to his senses. When he had recovered somewhat, joined the deer, who had stopped beside him, his horns with such force against a door in the rock that she jumped. Flames of fire shot out, to which a large steam followed, which hid the stag his eyes. The tailor did not know what to do and where he should turn to in order to get out of this desert and back to human. Whilst he was standing undecided, a voice sounded out of the rock, which cried to him, "Enter without fear, you will be done no wrong. ' While he hesitated, but driven by a mysterious force, he obeyed the voice and went through the iron door into a large spacious hall, passed the ceiling, walls and floor made of shining polished square stones, on each of which with unknown characters were carved. He looked at everything full admiration, and was about to return to go as he once more heard the voice which told him 'stand on the stone, which is in the middle of the hall, and your great courage Glück.'Sein waiting was so widely grown, that he obeyed the order. The stone began to give way under his feet, and sank slowly down into the depths. When he was once more firm, and the tailor looked round, he found himself in a hall which was the previous scope of the same. Here, however, there was more to look at and admire. In the walls Hollow places were cut in which vessels of transparent glass were, which were filled with colored spirit or with a bluish vapor. On the floor of the hall, facing each other, two large glass box that once excited his curiosity. By approached the one he saw in it a beautiful building like a castle, of farm buildings, stables and barns, surrounded a lot of other good things. Everything was small, but exceedingly carefully and delicately made, and seemed by a dexterous hand with the highest accuracy carved out to sein.Er would his eyes not have turned away from the consideration of this rarity, if not the voice again could be heard. She urged him to turn round and look at the opposing glass case. How his admiration increased when he saw therein a maiden of the greatest beauty. It was as if asleep, and was wrapped in her long blonde hair as in a precious mantle. The eyes were closed, but the brightness of her complexion and a ribbon that moved back and forth of breath, left no doubt about their lives. The tailor looked at the beauty with beating heart, when she suddenly opened her eyes, and started at the sight in joyful terror. "Just Heaven, 'she cried,' my approaching liberation! Quick, quick, I help out of my prison when you push the bolt of this glass coffin, then I shall be '. The tailor obeyed without delay, she immediately raised up the glass lid into the air, got out and ran into the corner of the room, where she covered herself with a large cloak. Then she sat down on a stone down, was called to approach the young man, and after she had imprinted a friendly kiss on his mouth, she said, "my long-desired deliverer, kind heaven has led me to you, my sufferings set a goal. On the same day when they end, shall thy happiness begin. You are certain of heaven husband, and shall, loved by me and showered with all earthly goods, bring your life in unbroken joy. Sit down and listen to the story of my Schicksals.Ich am the daughter of a rich count. My parents died when I was still in tender youth, and recommended me in their last will my older brother, where I was brought up. We loved each other so tenderly, and were so alike that we considered in our way of thinking and our inclinations both the decision to get married never, but to stay together until the end of our lives. In our house there was no lack of company neighbors and friends visited us often, and we showed the greatest hospitality in full measure. This is what happened one evening that a stranger came riding to our castle, and not being able to achieve under the pretext that the next place, begged for shelter for the night. We granted his request with ready courtesy, and he entertained us during dinner with his conversation intermingled with stories of the most graceful. My brother had such a great pleasure in him that he asked him to stay a few days with us, to which he agreed, after some hesitation. We were late at night from the table, the stranger was shown to room, and I hurried, tired as I was to lower my limbs in the soft feathers. As soon as I was a bit asleep, so I woke the sounds of faint and delightful music. Since I could not understand where they came from, so I wanted my sleeping in the next room maid call, but to my astonishment, I found that I feel as congested a nightmare on my chest, dazed language by an unknown force and I was incapable to give the slightest sound from me. As I saw the stranger enter my room through two doors firmly locked in the glow of the night lamp. He approached me and said that he magically forces that were at his command, the lovely music to sound to wake me up, and that he now forced his way through all fastenings with the intention of offering me heart and hand. My repugnance was so great against his magic that I did not deign to reply. He stopped for a while without moving, apparently with the intention to expect a favorable decision, but when I to mention continued, he said angrily, will find that he take revenge and means to punish my pride, after which he left the room again. I spent the night in the greatest disquietude, and only fell asleep towards morning. When I awoke, I hurried to my brother to inform him of what had happened, but I did not find him in his room, and the servant told me that he rode by break of day with the stranger to the chase sei.Mir suspected nothing good. I dressed quickly, left my palfrey to be saddled and rode, accompanied only by a servant, in full gallop to the forest. The servant fell with his horse and was able to get because the horse had broken his foot, not follow. I sat without stop me, my way on, and in a few minutes I saw the stranger with a beautiful stag which he led on a leash, coming at me. I asked him where he had left my brother and how he had come by this stag, I saw tears flowing from his eyes big. Instead of answering me, he began to laugh loudly. I fell into a great rage, pulled out a pistol and discharged it at the monster, but the ball bounced off his chest and drove back into the head of my horse. I fell to the ground, and the stranger muttered some words that I came to my awareness raubten.Als to my senses, I found myself in this underground cave in a glass coffin. The magician appeared once again, said that he my brother into a stag turned, my castle with all accessories decreased in the other glass chest, and my turned into smoke, people would have been banned in glass bottles. I wanted to now his wish add me, so it would be easy to put everything back in its former state, he needs only to open the vessels, so will all return to the natural shape. I answered him as little as the first time. He disappeared and left me in my prison are in which me a deep sleep came. Among the images that passed before my mind, the most comforting that a young man came and freed me, and when I now open your eyes, I saw thee, and see my dream was fulfilled. Help me accomplish what further happened in those visions. The first is that we the glass chest in which my castle is located on that broad stone heben.'Der stone when he was complaining, stood out with the lady and the young man into the air and climbed through the hole in the ceiling the upper hall, where they could reach the outside then easily. Here the maiden opened the lid, and it was wonderful to see how Castle, houses and farms stretched themselves out and grew in the greatest speed to natural size. They went out back to the underground cave and let the smoke-filled glasses of the stones carried up. No sooner had the young lady opened the bottles, the blue smoke rushed out and turned into living people, in which the young lady her servants and people realized. Her joy was still more increased, approached her brother, who had killed the magician in the bull in human form out of the forest, and even the same day the maiden, their promise according to the lucky tailor hand at the altar.
The Golden Bird	548	550	German	There was a king in former times, who had a beautiful orchard behind his castle, it was a tree of golden apples wore. As the apples ripened they were counted, but the next morning one was missing. That the king was angry, and he is ordered that all nights under the tree guard should be kept. The king had three sons, and he sent the eldest to night in the garden. But as it was midnight, he could sleep no longer, and the next morning another apple was missing. The following night the second son had to watch, but it fared no better. When it had struck twelve, he fell asleep, and in the morning an apple was gone. Now came the turn of the third son to watch; who was also ready, but the king did not trust him too and said he would still less than his brothers; but at last he allowed it anyway. So the young man lay down under the tree, woke up and had not master sleep. When it struck twelve, something rustled through the air, and he saw in the moonlight fly as a bird, whose feathers glittered like gold. The bird settled on the tree and had just an apple pecked, when the youth shot down an arrow at him. The bird escaped, but the arrow had struck his plumage, and one of his golden feathers fell down. The youth picked it up, brought it the next morning the king and told him what he had seen at night. The king called his council together, and everyone declared that a feather like this was worth more than the whole kingdom. "If the spring so precious," said the King, "so it helps me a nothing, but I want and need all the birds have." The eldest son went on his way, relied on his wisdom and thought the golden find bird already. When he had gone some distance he looked at the edge of a forest a fox sitting, put his gun and pointed it at him. The fox cried: "Shooting is not me, I will give you for any advice you are tonight come on the way to the golden bird and going to a village where two inns opposite each other One is brightly lit, and it goes.. is funny here, but since traffic is not that, but go into the other when it sees you too bad. " How can I probably a silly beast give one any rational advice? thought the king's son and let, but he missed the fox, who stretched out his tail and ran quickly into the forest. Then he continued on his way, and the evening came to the village where the two inns were. Where was sung one and jumped, the other had a dull and wretched. I should be a fool, he thought, if I went into that dismal place and the beautiful are left. So he went into the merry, lived there in the lap of luxury, and forgot the bird and his father and all good Lehren.Als passed a time and the eldest son was always still not come home and, then made the second to the out to seek the golden bird. As the elders the fox met him and gave him the good advice he paid no attention. He came to the two taverns, his brother was standing at the window of one of which came sounds of merriment, and he called. He could not resist, went inside and lived only his Lüsten.Wiederum passed a time when the king's youngest son wanted to take off, and her salvation try, but his father would not allow it. "It is in vain," he said, "he will find the golden bird still less than his brothers, and if it happens to some misfortune, so he knows not how to help, it lacks the best." But finally, as no peace was there, he let him go. sat in front of the forest again the fox, begged for his life, and gave good advice. The young man was kind and said, "Be easy, little fox, I will do you no harm!" - "You shall not repent it," answered the fox, "and that you may get faster, come sit on my tail." And no sooner had he sat up, the fox began to run, and we went over hill and dale that hair whistled in the wind. When they came to the village, the young man got down, followed the good counsel and returned, without looking back, in the small tavern, where he stayed quiet. The next morning, as he came into the field, sitting there already the fox and said: "I you want to tell anyone what you have to do You go straight ahead, at last you will come to a castle, before a whole. Schar soldier is, but kümmre Do not matter, because they will all be asleep and snoring: go through the middle and straight into the castle, and go through all the rooms last you will come to a chamber where a golden bird in a wooden cage hanging. . Next door stands an empty gold cage for pomp, but beware that you do not take out the bird out of his ugly cage and do in the magnificent, otherwise it would go ill with you. " After these words the fox again stretched out his tail, and the prince sat up. As we went over hill and dale that hair whistled in the wind. When he arrived at the castle he found everything as the fox had said. The king's son came into the chamber where the golden bird was in a wooden cage, while a golden one was standing; but the three golden apples lay about the room. Because he thought it would be ridiculous if he wanted to leave the beautiful bird in the common and ugly cage, opened the door, grabbed him and put him into the gold. At the moment the bird uttered a piercing scream. The soldiers awoke, rushed in and took him to jail. The next morning he was brought before a court and, as he confessed everything, condemned to death. But the king said he would spare his life on one condition, if it namely to bring him the golden horse whose paces were swifter than the wind, and then he was on top of that to reward the golden bird erhalten.Der prince made his way, but sighed and was sad, because where would he find the golden horse? Then he suddenly saw his old friend the fox sitting by the roadside. "You see," said the fox, so "it has come because you did not hear me, but be of good cheer, I will accept me of you and tell you how you get the golden horse. You have to leave straight path so you will come to a castle, where the horse is in the stable the grooms will be lying in front of the barn, but they are asleep and snoring, and you can geruhig lead out the golden horse but one thing you must take heed.. put him common saddle of wood and leather, and not the golden one, which will hang close, otherwise it will go ill with you. " Then the fox stretched out his tail, the king's son sat up, and it went over hill and dale that hair whistled in the wind. Everything came exactly as the fox had said, he came to the barn, where the golden horse was standing. But when he was about to hang him the plain saddle, he thought: Such a beautiful animal would be if I did not put on him the good saddle which belongs to him. But scarcely had the golden saddle touch the horse, so it began to neigh on. The grooms awoke, seized the youth and put him in prison. The next morning he was sentenced by the courts to death, but he promised the king to give life and to the golden horse, if he thither the beautiful princess of the golden castle könnte.Mit heavy heart made the youth on the way, but to Fortunately, he soon found the trusty fox. "I should leave you only your misfortune," said the fox, "but I am sorry for you and you will once again help out of your trouble Your path will lead you straight to the golden castle. Evening. You will arrive, and at night when everything is quiet, the beautiful princess goes to the bathhouse to bathe there and when they go in, so jumping up to her and give her a kiss, then she will follow you, and can they continue with thee. but do not suffer that she takes leave of her parents before, or it will go ill with you. " Then the fox stretched out his tail, the king's son sat up, and so it went over hill and dale that hair whistled in the wind. When he came to the golden castle, it was as the fox had said. He waited until midnight, when everything lay in deep sleep and the beautiful maiden went to the bathhouse, he went up and gave her a kiss. She said she wanted to go with him, but she asked him earnestly and with tears, he would allow her to take leave of her parents goodbye. At first he denied her prayer, but as she wept more and fell at his feet, he finally gave in. No sooner had the maiden came to the bedside of her father, he would have watched, and all the others who were in the castle, and the young man was arrested and sent to prison gesetzt.Am next morning the king said to him, "Your life is forfeit, and you can find merely grace, if you abträgst the mountain that lies before my windows and over what I can not see out, and you need to bring in eight days about. you Failing that, you shall my daughter as a reward have. " The prince began and dug and shoveled away without ceasing, but when he saw after seven days, how little he had done and that all his work was as nothing, he fell into great sorrow and gave up all hope. On the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared and said, "You do not deserve that I accept your me, but go only now and go to sleep, I will do the work for you." The next morning when he awoke and looked out of the window, the mountain had disappeared. The youth ran joyfully to the king and told him that the condition would be met, and the king wanted to or not, he had to keep word and his daughter geben.Nun the two went away together, and it was not long, then came the faithful fox to them. "The best thing you though," he said, "but at the princess of the golden castle and the golden horse belongs." - "How can I get that?" the boy asked. "I'll tell you," answered the fox, "first go to the king who sent you to the golden castle, the beautiful maiden. As outrageous joy will be, they will gladly give you the golden horse and show thee. Sit down immediately and all rich goodbye hand down, most recently the beautiful maiden, and if you've taken, they go with a swing up and pursue it, and no one is able to overtake you, for the horse runs faster than the wind. "Everything was all happily done, and the king's son carried off the beautiful princess on the golden horse. The fox did not stay back and said to the boy: "Now I want to help you to get the golden bird If you are near the castle where the bird is, so let's settle the Virgin, and I want her in my care. . take Then ride the golden horse into the castle courtyard;. at the sight is great pleasure to be, and they will bring out to you the golden bird as you have the cage in your hand, you must start off back to us and get you the lady away . " was when the attack was successful and the prince wanted to ride home with his treasures, the fox said: "Now you shall reward me for my help." - "What do you want for it?" the boy asked. "If we get there in the forest, shoot me, and cut my head and paws." - "That would be a nice gratitude!" said the prince, "that I can grant you impossible." Said the fox, "If you do not want to do it, so I have to leave you, but before I go, I want to give you some good advice pieces before two beware: buy no gallows-meat, and sit at no brook-side." He ran into the Wald.Der boy thought: "This is a strange creature, most singular ideas has any one buy gallows Meat And the desire to sit at a fountain edge, never occurred to me.!." He rode with the beautiful maiden on, and he made his way back through the village in which his two brothers had remained. There was great outcry and noise, and asked when he, what would be going on, it was said that there should be two people to be hanged. As he drew closer, he saw that they were his brothers, done all sorts of evil tricks, and all that she had lost. He asked if they could be freed. "If you want to pay for it," answered the people, "but what you want to the bad people hang your money and redeem them." But he did not hesitate, paid for them, and were released as them, they went on their journey jointly fort.Sie ​​entered the forest, where they had met the fox first, and it was cool and lovely in it, and the sun hot burned, so the two brothers said, "Let us here at the well a little rest, eat and drink!" He agreed, and during the conversation he forgot himself, sat down at the edge of the well and suspecting no evil. But the two brothers threw him backwards into the well, took the maiden, the horse and the bird, and went home to their father. "Since we do not bring merely the golden bird," they said, "we have captured also the golden horse and the Virgin of the golden castle." There was great joy, but the horse does not devoured, the bird did not whistle, and the Virgin, who was sitting and weinte.Der youngest brother but was not killed. The fountain was dry, fortunately, and he fell on soft moss without being damaged, but could not back out. In this emergency he did not leave the faithful fox came to him, jumped down and scolded him that he had forgotten his advice. "I can but not leave," he said, "I will help you back again into daylight." He told him he should grasp his tail and hold on to it, and then pulled him into the air. "Yet you're not out of all danger," said the fox, "Your brothers were not sure of your death, and have surrounded the wood with sentinels, who are to kill you if you let see you." As a poor man sitting at the way in which the young man exchanged his clothes, and came in this way to the King's court. No one recognized him, but the bird began to whistle, the horse began to feed, and the beautiful princess ceased weeping. The king asked in surprise: "What does that mean?" Since the maiden said: "I do not know, but I was so sad and now I'm so happy I do when my true bridegroom had come.." She told him everything that had happened, although the two brothers had threatened her with death if she would reveal something. The king was called all the people brought before him who were in his castle, as well as the youth came as a poor man in his rags clothes, but the maiden recognized him at once and fell on his neck. The wicked brothers were seized and put to death, but he was married to the beautiful maiden and heir of King bestimmt.Aber what happened to the poor fox? Long after the king's son was going through the forest. Since the fox met him and said, "Now you have everything you could want, but with my bad luck it will never end, and it lies in your power to deliver me," and again he pleaded, he want him shoot and cut off his head and feet. So he did it, and no sooner it was done, the fox changed into a man, and there was no one who was finally freed from the spell that was upon him other than the brother of the beautiful princess. And now nothing was missing more to their happiness as long as they lived.
The rooster and the hen	4030	2075	German	The hen: You promise me Shoe Year in, year out, and I get 'no shoe never nicht.Der Hahn: Can you wait so you'll get well Schuh.Die Henne: I lay eggs and thu' What I can and but go I barefoot allezeit.Der Hahn: So take your balls and travel to the city and buy yourself shoes do not go barefoot and longer!
The rooster, the cuckoo and the capercaillie	4027	120	German	The rooster, the cuckoo and the grouse had once bought a cow together. As it now did not concern to share them, and they could not be compared to the disbursement, they agreed as meaning that he who awoke in the morning first, the cow should have. The cock awoke first, "Mine is the cow is mine cow" cried the cock!. While the rooster crowed yet, the cuckoo awoke "half cow half cow" called the cuckoo!. While the cuckoo still called, the capercaillie awoke: "Does my brethren, how right and privilege and cheap Tschio! chi! "cried the capercaillie. Can you tell me now say who should now have the cow?
The cock beams	1422	1290	German	There was once a wizard who stood in the middle of a large crowd of people performing his wonders. Since he also left a rooster striding, which lifted a heavy beam and carried it as if it were light as a feather. But now was a girl who had just found a four-leaf clover, and had thus become so wise that no deception could stand before him, and saw that the beam was nothing but a straw. Since there called 'you people, do not you see, that is a mere straw and no bar, which carries the cock there.' Immediately the enchantment vanished, and the people saw what it was, and drove the magician away in disgrace. But he, being full of inward anger, said, "I will soon have my revenge. ' After some time the girl was married, was cleaned and went into a large train across the field to the site where the church stood. Suddenly they came to a severely swollen creek, and was no bridge and no bridge to go about it. As the bride was quick, her clothes picked up and wanted to wade through. As they are now just standing in the water so calls a man, and that was the wizard who mockingly close beside her 'egg! where did you get your eyes, you think that's a water ?, As their eyes were opened, and they saw that she was standing with her clothes lifted the middle of a blue flowering flax field. As the people saw it likewise, and chased her away with ridicule and laughter.
The Hahnenstein	3398	560	German	Honesty is the best; who digs a pit shall fall into it himself; there is nothing so finely woven, it comes at last to the light of the sun; to testify against villains, even the walls ears, and theft and prostitution have never remain hidden; I'll prove you this, if you aufpasset accurate. Once upon a time in the city black hole a certain Mineo Aniello, who was so ill-fated that all his lying and moving belongings consisted of a crippled Hahn, whom he had been fed with crumbs. However, since he once saw from hunger very tormented and hunger but even chasing the wolf out of the woods, so he decided to sell it. So he carried it to the market and met there two ugly wizards who abhandelten it to him after much haggling for half guilders and he said he should carry him to her house and there take the money in reception. So the Warlock went ahead and he afterwards so that he could hear them talking to each other in kauderwelscher language and said, "Who would have probably predicted us Ghiennarone that we would do this wonderful treasure? Our happiness is certainly made by the stone that has the tap, as you know in his mind and we want to be quickly put into a ring, because we have everything we possibly can any wish. "-" Shoo , Jakovijccio "said Ghiennarone," we have become as rich before we knew it the, and I may be the time do not expect that I tear off the tap head and will throw in the towel bag the hell to me at last a full skirt to attract, for virtue without money counts for nothing in the world, and only clothes make the man. "When Aniello, who had looked long in the world and no longer Fritz had heard the Gaunersprache he made in a narrow alleys around and took to his heels , returned home, he turned the cock's neck and found in his head really the stone. He left it to these up in brass, and to provide his strength to the test, he said. "I'd like to be a lad of eighteen" No sooner had he uttered these words, the blood running down his rapidly through the veins, the nerves were him stronger, the legs stronger, the meat fresh, eyes fiery, silver hair turned into gold, the mouth that was like a dilapidated home, peopled with teeth, and the beard that was a hunting reserves resembled for grain fields; transformed in a word, in a very nice young man, he said again: "I'd like a magnificent palace have," and immediately stood a palace because of incredible beauty, in which there chambers to admire, columns to marvel and Painting, to get out of themselves, were; all bristling with silver, gold you stepped with feet, the gems were wasted heaps, everywhere was full of servants, and the number of horses and chariots went into the infinite; In short, the palace became the father of such splendor that even the king opened his eyes wide and gave him with pleasure his daughter Natalizia wife. Meanwhile, the wizards had perceived the great wealth Minec'Aniellos and therefore designed a plan to expel him from the castle of happiness, in which he sat. namely they verfertigten a doll made by means of a clockwork music and dancing, and so appeared one day dressed as merchants, before the daughter Aniellos, called Pentella, under the pretext of wanting to sell her the doll. As Pentella saw the cute thing, she immediately asked about the price, to which, however, that answered that the doll also is not the largest sum gold cheap, but that it stands the Pentella for a small favor to services when they namely ring that her father wore on his finger, wanted to show that they take an impression of him, and could be making a similar; then, as I said, they would Pentella make the doll without payment of any kind to the present. Since Pentella heard this offer, she took it quite unmindful of the proverb: "What is cheap is expensive" readily of them and said to them, they should come back the next morning; because it would borrow the ring from her father. No sooner had therefore gone sorcerers, and the father came home, she went to him so much about his beard, and loaded him with so many compliments that she got him to give her the ring by vorwandte namely, it would be very dejected and wanted to cheer up a little. The next day, around the time when the road master of the sun makes the waste darkness of the roads and squares of heaven sweep, the magicians came really and did not have as soon the ring in her hands as she in a Hui disappeared, would be so that no trace was left of them, and the poor Pentella dismay almost died. But the magician ordered as soon as they arrived in a forest, where the branches of the trees aufführten a Blütenreigen and other swayed funny, the rings, that he might destroy all the wishes of the tapered old man. This happened to be with the king and thus found himself suddenly turn gray, his hair pale, his forehead wrinkled, his eyebrows bristling, his eyes red, furrowed face, her mouth toothless, the beard to the forest with his back humped, his legs trembling ragged and especially the shiny clothes and torn. When the king this dirty beggar saw her sitting in a confidential conversation beside him, he made him so soon chase under beatings and diatribes from the palace, followed by Aniello, so suddenly fallen out of his heaven, crying visited his daughter and by asking them for the Ring asked to pay for his misfortune remedy to him heard of the alleged traders played string so that it was about to throw himself out of a window. A thousand times he cursed the folly Pentellas that to an unfortunate doll's sake, and decided it into a so ugly bogey, because of a made from rags thing he himself had turned into a rag therefore, so long like a bad penny in the world umherzutreiben until these traders come to the track. So saying, he pulled a jacket over the back, put wooden shoes on his feet, took a knapsack over his shoulders and a stick in his hand, and as he left behind the daughter, who stood beside himself with fear and terror, began he madly go off to them, and strode so long, came up after he inhabited by mice Kingdom deep hole, where he was taken for a spy of the cats and brought immediately before the king Nage Rich. From this, when asked who he was, where he came from and what he was looking for in that country, told Minec'Aniello, having previously given him a rind as a tribute, in great detail all his misfortunes, and closed by saying that it's arduous trek would continue until he heard some of those damned rascals who had abgeluchst him such a precious jewel and robbed the bloom of youth, the source of wealth and the support of the reputation in an instant. At these words Nage Rich felt even pity gnawed, and he wished to comfort the poor man some extent, he called the oldest mice to a council meeting, she asked for their opinion in terms of accidents Aniellos and commanded them that they should make every effort should; for something to inquire about this alleged traders. Now it so happened that among others Knabberich and Springerle, two very experienced in the world runs mice that had stopped at six years in an inn on the high road, were present and said, "Be of good courage, friend, because it will be better off with you than you think. You must know that when we one day in a room of the inn> found ourselves to Horn, "in the einzukehren the most distinguished people in the world and tend to make fun, two people who came from thieves city, came in, and after they ate and awarded the wine efficient, began to speak of a trick she played a certain old man of black hole city by wegstibitzt had him a stone of particular characteristics; one of them, who called himself Ghiennarone, said he never wanted to take off her finger him so he would not even equal to the daughter of the old man for it. "As soon as Aniello heard this, he said to the two mice that if they dared to accompany him to the home of those crooks and to give him the ring, he would give them a load of cheese and cured meats, so that they could eat the same in company with the king. Since then the two mice were told that they should not do nothing their services, so they promised him all possible and set out with the permission Sr. Mausetät accompanied Aniellos on the march. After they had traveled all the way to Krumm fingers City, the mice were named the Minec'Aniello under some trees on the banks of a river left behind, like a leech einsaugte the bloody sweat of field workers in order to spew it into the sea, while they themselves are in the However, house of the magician went, they woselbst perceived that Ghiennarone always wore the ring on her finger and took off it at any time. Therefore they sought wrest the victory to him by a ruse, and after waiting until the night the burnt by the sun's face recreated the sky in cool Taubade and Ghiennarone had fallen into a deep sleep, began Knabberich to gnaw him the ring finger so that those who believed that the ring press it, put it next to a small table at the head of the bed. Hardly Springerle took this to be true, he quickly took the ring in his mouth, and it rennend headlong, he reached soon with his companion at Aniello in which more pleased than the poor sinner, if he is pardoned, the two wizards once in donkey turned on which one he spread his cloak, and like a count associated rode while he loaded the other with bacon and cheese and then made his way to deep hole, where he the king and his counselors delightfully entertained and give them for all the good that he learned of them, warmly thanked by the same time begging the sky that they never cause a trap damage ambush another cat, nor arsenic would cause harm. Then he went away, and when he arrived in a much nicer shape than before black hole, he was received by the king and his daughter with the greatest flattery and lived with the latter, after the two donkeys from a rock can fall down , immediately there in great pleasure and joy; However, he never again took his ring off his finger, not about to commit a new String Bock, because: The Burnt fear the Fire.
The blueberry branch	3371	652	German	Still a mouse were all, as long as Zeza told; but once they stopped talking, was a loud chatter, and the talk of the evacuations of the donkey and the enchanted beatings seemed to have no end; and some of the enpresenting said that if there was a forest of sticks like more would be less simple, and be much smarter more than one as a rogue and that nowadays probably as little ass like those than usual spend some of this kind. After But for a while on this subject back and talked ago, ordered the Prince of Cecca that they should continue in the story of fairy tales, after which she began thus: If man bedächte how much damage, disaster and destruction by the damned , dissolute wenches done, he would near a lewd woman more escape than not give a poisonous snake and his honor for the ejection of the brothels, his life for an entire Hospital of diseases and their possessions for prostitutes who are not a Chanterelle are worth and give him nothing but to enjoy vermouth pills from sorrow and anger, as you will hear that happened to a prince who had been hanged at that brood. There once lived in the village of Miano a couple who also had not the slightest trace of children and yet eagerly wished to have an heir, thus especially the wife used to say, "Lord God in heaven, if I still want to give birth only slightly and it would be even a blueberry branch. "as it often repeated these questions as long as they harassed the sky with these words that the body finally swelled, the abdomen rounded her and after nine months instead of the mother, a Knäbchen or a female in to put his arm from the Elysian fields of the body of a beautiful blueberry branch out sent. These now planted the farmer with great joy into a container provided with many beautiful ornaments flower pot, he turned to the window and took care of him early and late with more care than the tenant a coal field from which he hopes to bring out the lease of the garden. But once the king's son, going on a hunt, was passing there, he was hell-bent so tremendously on these beautiful branch that he ask the woman she wants him but to sell it, if it should cost him an eye. After multiple abschlägigen answers and refusals by the promises irritated, frightened by the threats and defeated by the requests, she gave him the pot, but asked him to keep him carefully as they same loved more than he were her own child and as great affection for him feel as if he had sprung from her mother's womb. The Prince left with the greatest joy of the world the flower pot in his own room wearing and put on a balcony, where he always him personally used and watered. This is what happened after all that had gone as the Prince one evening to bed and the lights had been extinguished and all the world will have gone to bed and was on the first sleep, he quietly sneak someone across the room and stopped patting go on the bed and, therefore, thought it was some kind of valet who empty out his pockets, or a house goblin who wanted to pull his blanket from his body. As a determined man, however, who had also against the worst hell no fear, he acted as if he was asleep, and waited to see what would be the end. But when he, the further approach of the noise reaching out, grasped the hand of a smooth object and place as he thought, to pack the tips of a porcupine, slightly touched which is delicate and soft felt as wool from Barbary, milder and gentler than the tail of a marmot, smoother and more elastic than Stieglitz springs, he jumped right up to it, seized because he thought it was a fairy, how it was really the case, this as tight as a polyp, and by not giving both make a sound she began to play the game of love. However, before the sun like a doctor began to pay their visits to the dull and sick flowers, the fee rose and disappeared by leaving the prince intoxicated by the gehabten delights, full of curiosity and beside himself with astonishment. but after the matter had been driven off in this way for seven days, then burned and he was burning to know with desire what he has since sent a lucky so unawares by the stars and what a loaded with the joys of love ship in its deposit would have run. Thus, while in one night the beautiful child heia heia made, he turned one of her braided hair tightly around his hand so she could not escape him, then called a valet, and after the lights were lit, he saw the flower of women, miracle of beauty, the mirror and eyeball of Venus, the charming magic of Cupid, saw a doll, a lovely little dove, a mirage, a beautiful painting, a golden jewels, saw a heart hunter, a hawk's eye, a full moon, a Taubenmäulchen, a morsel for a king, a true gem, saw a sight in a word, to fall in amazement beside himself. So when he for a while had enjoyed him, he exclaimed: "Now do not let you even longer see Cypriot goddess, you loop a rope around his neck, O Helena, turn again, princess Tausendschön; indeed, goeth just getting to where you have come; because your beauty is only shadows compared to this beauty with two suns, perfect for this, perfect, dignified, tangible beauty to this lovely, lovely, graceful, wondrous, extraordinary stimuli in which one does not find blame, encounters, not a fault. O sleep, trauter sleep, heaping poppies on the eye of this delicious gem and do not spoil my pleasure to look at all that I wish to look at this triumph of beauty! Your beautiful lichens that it captivated me, her beautiful eyes that ye make me erbrennen of love fire, her beautiful lips that you fulfill me with delight, you beautiful hand you verwundest me where in which miracles workshop of nature was this created living statue? Which India gave the Gold forth to weave these hairs? What Ethiopia ivory, to form this front? Which Schacht to create the carbuncle to those eyes? Which Tire to paint that face the purple? Which Orient to drechseln the beads around these teeth? Which mountains you took the snow to sprinkle it on this chest? A snow that resists the course of nature the flowers cultivates and hearts warmed, "and exclaiming that he embraced her as a branch, to quench his desire. While he was thus held her in his arms, she awoke from his sleep and replied with a gracious yawning on the sighs of the amorous prince, who, awake sight, so she addressed: "O you my only salvation, if I except amazement I felt as I saw this temple of love, because it has not yet lit by candles, shone, how will it happen to me now that you've lit two lamps? O beautiful eyes, her sprinkleth with a small trump of light, the Bank of stars, her, her alone me all were wounded my heart, and you alone könnet like fresh eggs lay an egg white plaster on it! And you, my beautiful doctor, have pity, indeed, have pity on a sick love, which the fever has gripped because he came from the darkness of night to the light of this beauty; put his hand on my chest, I feel the pulse, I prescribe a prescription! - But what I'm asking recipes, O my dearest treasure? Put me with your beautiful mouth five cups on my lips; I require no change rub than a caress this Händchens; for I am sure that I again Get through the heart drop of your grace and by the medicinal herbs of your tongue my health and my life "At these words, the beautiful face of the fairy as Searing Blaze reddened, so what she said:"! Not so much adulation, my Prince, I'm just your servant, and to serve before your face, I would do anything and consider it very fortunate that this planted in a pot of clay blueberry rice has become a laurel branch as a symbol attached to the hostel of a heart . lives of meat, a heart in which so much size and virtue "the Prince, which melted at these words like a tallow candle, she hugged again, sealed the letter with a kiss and said, as he shook hands with her," here you have my word, you shall my wife, his mistress of my scepter and the keys of my heart have, as you rule and the rudder of my life! " After these and a hundred other courtesies and conversations they rose from the camp and tried if you could use some stomach as it because these meetings continued for some time. But as the fate liked spoils the people the game divides marriages, fewer prevents the delights of Cupid and always makes the joy disturbers of lovers, so it happened that the prince to hunt down a mighty boar that large in that region devastation wreaking invited was and saw therefore compelled to tell his wife or to the right, two-thirds of leaving his heart. Since he but loved more than his life and she looked more beautiful than all the beauty of the goddess of love and out of this beauty up grew bitter weeds of jealousy for him, which is a storm in the sea of ​​love bliss, a downpour on the clothes of love bliss, a piece soot that falls within the rich court of the joys of love, that weed, I say, which is a stinging snake, rottenness, a poisonous bile, a rigid-making frost, weeds, I mean, by which life is always in uncertainty floats, the spirit full of trouble, his heart full of fear, so he called the fairy and said to her: "I am forced marriage tests to be two or three nights absent; God knows with what pain I get from you, you are my soul, separate myself, and heaven knows whether before I travel, and the thread of my life torn from you; I now but once not help but may to want to go to my father, so I must leave you and ask you therefore for all the love you hold for me that you begebest you in the pot and not rather forsake him as to I return ., which will happen as soon as possible "-" This is what I want to do very much, "replied the fairy; "Because I like it, will not and can not contradict the what you ask of me. therefore go in escort any happiness from here; because I always stay yours. However, legally favor me that you zurücklassest attached to the tip of the branch blueberry a bell with a silk string, and if you wiederkehrst, so pull the cord; because I will then come out immediately and say, 'Here I am. ' "This did so the prince, also called back the valet, and said unto him," Come here, boy, come here, I say, do the ears and give well-eight; every night'm my bed as if I even wanted to sleep in it; water every morning this flower pot and was so careful; for I have counted the leaves, and if on my return even one is missing, so I'll take you on the way of all flesh! "After he said this, he mounted his horse and went like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, on the way to chase a wild pig. Meanwhile it happened that seven wanton wenches who held the prince and those who perceived that he lukewarm to them, had become so cold in love, and had ceased to cultivate their tilth, conceived the suspicion that he might by some others love trading the old friendship must have forgotten. Therefore, to get the thing on the track, they sent a worker who dug them for a good chunk of money an underground passage from her home up in the room of the prince. Through this transition now these changing hospitals made quickly on the way to see if any new love affair, any other apron would have robbed them of their harvest and charmed its customers, however, no one found; then they opened the window, and while they saw the so beautiful blueberry branch, they picked each a piece of it, but the youngest broke all the top from where the bell hung. Hardly, however, this was touched, so it began to ring; therefore, the Fee, which believed that it would be the Prince, emerged without delay. Once the hideous hags saw this enchanting shape, they fell upon them by exclaiming: "So you do the water redirecting to your mill our hopes? So you have spirited away us pretty rest of the affection of the prince by all kinds of arts? So you're the clean man who snatched us our roast? Egg thousand times welcome; you come to us just at the right! It would have been better to you, your mother had you never brought into the world! Potz weather, you're also fix and you always made you from the dust quickly, but today you're advised on the sand again! Traun, you were more than nine months old dog in the basement, if you escape chest us this time. "Saying this, they gave her with a club a fatal blow to the head, and by then divided the body into five pieces, and took every one of them for themselves. Only the youngest did not want to participate in this cruelty, but prompted by the sisters, just do as she asked, she is nothing but a lock of hair of gold; whereupon they all rushed them headlong. Meanwhile came the valet to how his master ordered him to make the bed and to douse the pot, and when he saw this mess, he nearly died of fright. So he bit his madly into the hands clawed then the remnants of flesh and bone, and after the blood of the. scraped earth, he piled everything on one another in the flowerpot. He then watered them, made the bed, locked the door, put the key under the threshold and took then as fast as he could run away. But as soon as the prince had returned from hunting, he pulled the silk cord and rang; but you ring the bell just getting into all eternity, all for nothing! He could have ring with bells, was the fairy and turned a deaf ear. straight so he went to his room, and there he was in no mood to call his valet and be giving the key, he kicked his feet to the door, she shattered into a thousand pieces, went inside, opened the window, and as he saw the flowerpot its adornment robbed, he began to tousle the hair, to scream and cry and cry out: "Woe is me Pauper me unhappy, I pity full; who has played me this trick on? Who abgetrumpft me so? O ruined, exiled, destroy made Prince, you defoliated O my blueberry branch, oh my lost Fee, O my sinister life, O ye in smoke risen joys, O water had become bliss! What will you do now, you gloomy Hans Unlucky? What will you do, misfortune child? Jump but over the ditch! Make yourself of this ink! You have every Good lost and do not cut your throat from? You are deprived of any treasure, and do not make you a full end? You are cheated out of your life and do not want to weghimmeln? Where are you, oh, where are you, my beloved blueberry branch? What heart, harder than flint, I have destroyed this beautiful flower pot? O cursed hunting as you chased me out of every joy! Oh, I'm lost, I'm a child of death, with me it's over, my days are numbered; nothing I can save my life, because my life is robbed me; I must now stretch from me already all fours; because without my only good I will sleep a misery, the food to poison the pleasure of wormwood and life to bitterness. "These and many other words that have the stones may soften the prince exclaimed, and after long wailing and bitter complaints, full of pain, with a sad heart, and while still ever able to open his mouth to eat never emulate an eye to sleep, he gave so much grief to the fact that his face, which used to be the oriental red lead was like, now looked like ocher and the ham lips turned into spoiled bacon. When, however, the fee, which was grown up from down in the flower pot relic anew, perceived the wailing and Haarausraufen her poor lover and how he in a blink of an eye the color of a sick Spaniard, a poisonous lizard, the juice of white cabbage, a jaundice , a lemon pear, the rump of a fig snipe and a fall foliage had assumed they felt very sorry for him, and by suddenly came out of the pot, like the glimmer of a light from a thief lantern, she went to Hans unlucky, closed it firmly in her arms and said to him: "enough, enough, my Prince, listen to, cease from such suits, dry your tears, appease your grief, smoothing your mouth, here I am, alert and healthy, despite those hags to me the head have split up and are dealt with my flesh as well as Medea with her poor brother. "When the prince this phenomenon so unexpectedly vo r looked draw near, as he awoke from death to life, the color came into his cheeks, the heat in the blood and the breath in the chest back and ever-renewed hearts and caressing and coaxing and stroking, which he the fairy received, he wanted what happened, to know everything, from beginning to end. Having now learned that the valet was innocent, he let him come back and held thereto with the consent of the father a big party, where he married the fairy. All the princes of the kingdom were invited by him, but especially, he wanted the seven witches who had slaughtered that milk lamb, thereby currently befänden after feasting come to an end, asked and he all guests in order, which is probably one earned that this beautiful child would do any harm, pointing to the Fee, which looked so charming that it pierced the heart like a jack of all trades, the souls in itself moved like a winch and love as forced by force. Now it came to pass that all those who sat at the table, and the king first, saying, namely the one that such a gallows TO ISSUE, another that he was the wheel, another that he was glowing pliers, a others that he a fall from rocks, again another; that he that he deserved this and yet another that penalty. So when the number to speak last came to the seven clean pike, which of course found in this conversation not very big favor and foresaw a bad night, they answered yet because where the wine to bubble, usually bore the truth that who it would bring about the heart, even to touch this quintessence of love joys, deserved to be buried alive in a sewer. Having done with her own lips this saying, the Prince exclaimed, "You yourselves have broken the staff against you, you have even passed sentence me is it now only if that I will execute your decision, because you you who have made a pancake with the heart of Moors, with the cruelty of Medea from this beautiful head and chopped those lovely limbs like sausage meat. Therefore nimble, quick, lost no time cast her up right now, how they said it, in a sewer, so they there decide their lives miserably. "After this command was quickly been followed, the prince married the youngest of these wenches with the valet by having them endowed with a rich dowry; But the parents of the blueberry branch he granted a comfortable and secure, which he led a happy and merry life with the fairy. Thus, these children of the devil ended in a painful way her life and tried again the saying of our wise ancestors: How does it lead, how it works
St. Joseph in the forest	1902	480	German	There was once a mother who had three daughters, the oldest of them rude and wicked, the second was much better, although she had her faults, but the youngest was a pious, good child. But the mother was so strange that she had just the eldest daughter liked and did not like the youngest. Therefore, they often sent the poor girl out into a big forest to make it from the neck, because she thought it would get lost and never come back again. But the guardian angel which every good child has, did not left, but always brought back to the right path. Once however, the guardian angel behaved as if it was not at hand, and the child could not be found out again from the forest. It always went away until evening, was because it saw in the distance a little light burning, ran to it and came to a small hut. She knocked, the door opened, and it came to a second door, where she knocked again. An old man who had a snow-white beard and looked venerable, opened it up, and that was none other than St. Joseph. He said quite kindly, 'Come, my dear, sit by the fire on my little chair and warm yourself, I will take thee clear water if you are thirsty; to eat but I'm here in the forest not for you than a few roots, which you have to scrape you only and cook. ' Since St. Joseph gave her the roots The girl scraped cleanly off, then she brought a piece of pancake and the bread that had given him his mother and did everything together in a Kesselchen beis fire and cooked herself a thick soup. When it was ready, St. Joseph said, 'I'm so hungry, give me some of your food.' Since the child was quite willing, and gave him more than it kept to himself, but God was blessing is that sick ward. When they had eaten, St. Joseph said, "Now we will go to bed: I have only a bed, put into it you remember, I will lie down in the straw on the ground. ' 'No,' she replied, 'you stay in your own bed, for me the straw is soft enough.' St. Joseph took the child in his arms and carried it to bed, as it did his prayer and fell asleep. The next morning, when she awoke, she wanted to say good morning to St. Joseph, but it did not see him. Then she got up and looked for him but could not find him anywhere corner: last she perceived, behind the door, a bag with money so heavy that she could just carry it, it was written that it was for the child tonight had slept there. Since it took the bag and ran away with it and came to his mother happy, and because it gave her all the money she could not help it, she had peace with him sein.Am following day, the second child also wanted to play in the forest to go. His mother gave him a much bigger piece of pancake and bread. It happened with her just as the first child. Evening she came to the hut of St. Joseph, who gave her roots for a thick soup. When it was ready, he likewise said to her 'I'm so hungry, give me some of your food.' Then the child said 'eat your share.' When he later when St. Joseph offered his bed and wanted to lie on straw, she replied 'No, lie down in the bed, we do both have is plenty of room.' St. Joseph took her in his arms and put her to bed and lay down on the straw. In the morning, woke up when the child and looked for St. Joseph, he was gone, but behind the door there was a bag of money that was hands long, and on it was written, it would be for the child who had been sleeping here tonight. Since it took the bag and ran home, and it brought his mother, but kept it secret for a few pieces sich.Nun the eldest daughter became curious and wanted the next morning and out into the forest. The mother gave her pancakes as much as they wanted, bread and cheese. The evening she found St. Joseph in his little hut, just as they found him the other two. When the soup was ready and St. Joseph said, "I'm so hungry, give me some of thy food," the girl answered, "Wait until I'm tired, I then let left thou shalt have. ' but it ate almost everything on it, and St. Joseph had to scrape the dish. The good old man offered him afterward his bed and wanted to lie on the straw, which accepted it without question, lay in the crib and let the old man the hard straw. The next morning when she awoke, St. Joseph was not to be found, but it also was not worried She looked behind the door for a money bag. It seemed to him as if there were something on the ground, but as it could not quite make out what it was, it bent down and pushed his nose in it. But it remained hanging on the nose, and she got up again, it looked to his horror that it was a second nose, which at the hanging fast to her. Since it began to scream and howl, but that did not help, it always had to look at his nose, for it stretched out so far. Then she ran out and screamed until St. Joseph met, where it fell to the feet and begged until he took the nose back out of pity and gave her two farthings. When she got home, standing in front of the door his mother and asked, "What did you get paid? ' Since it lied and said, "A big bag of money, but I have lost him go. ' 'Lost !, cried the mother, "oh, but we will soon find it again,' it took them by the hand and wanted to look for him. At first it started crying and did not want to go along, but finally went with, but o n the way were so many lizards and snakes broke loose on both that they do not know to save that last they stung the wicked child dead, and they stung the mother in the foot, because she had not brought her up better.
The godfather	404	332	German	A poor man had so many children that he had already asked the world to be godfather, and when he got one, no one was more left, he could ask. He did not know what to do, lay down in her distress and fell asleep. As he dreamed, he should go outside the gate and the first person who came to him asking to be godfather. When he woke up, he decided to follow his dream and went out to the door, and the first to meet him, he asked to be godfather. The stranger gave him a glass of water and said, 'this is a wonderful water so that you can cure diseases, you just have to see where death is. he is standing by head, give the patient some of the water and he will be healed, but he is at his feet, all trouble will be in vain, he must die. ' The man was able to say from now on always, whether a patient could be saved or not, became famous for his skill, and earned a lot of money. Once he was summoned to the child of the king, and came for him, he saw death in their heads are and cured it with the water, and it was the same a second, but the third time Death was standing by the feet, as had the child sterben.Der man wanted to visit his godfather once and tell him how it had gone with the water. But when he came into the house, was such a strange household in it. On the first stair shovel and broom were quarreling, and smashed violently at each other. He asked them, "Where does the godfather live? ' The broom replied, "One flight of stairs höher.'Als he came to the second flight, he saw a lot of dead fingers lying. He asked, "Where does the godfather live ?, one answered from the fingers 'a flight of stairs.' On the third flight lay a heap of dead heads, which again directed him to a flight of stairs. On the fourth flight, he saw fish on the fire, which frizzled in the pans and baked themselves. She said, "One flight of stairs. ' And when he had ascended the fifth, he came to a room and peeped through the keyhole, he saw the godfather who had a pair of long horns. When he opened the door and went in, the godfather got into bed and covered himself up. Then the man 'Lord said godfather, what a strange household in your house? when I came to your first flight of stairs, the shovel and broom were quarreling, and beating violently at each other. ' 'As you are so stupid, "said the godfather,' That was the boy and the maid talking to each other. ' 'But on the second flight I saw dead fingers lying.' "Oh, how silly you are! those were some roots of scorzonera. ' 'On the third flight lay a heap of skulls.' 'Foolish man, those were cabbages.' "On the fourth I saw fishes in a pan, which were hissing and baking themselves. ' As he had said that, the fishes came and served themselves up. 'And when I read the fifth flight had come up, I peeped through the keyhole of a door, and there, I saw you godfather, and you had long, long horns.' "Oh, that's not true. ' The man became alarmed, and he ran away, and who knows what the godfather would have done to him.
The Dog and the Sparrow	558	248	German	A shepherd had left the hungry not a good master, but a him. As he could no longer endure it with him, he went away very sad. On the road he met a sparrow who said, "Brother dog, why are you so sad?" The dog replied: "I am hungry and have nothing to eat." Then said the sparrow, "Dear brother, come into the city, and I will make you sick." So they went into the city, and arrived than they were a butcher's shop, the sparrow said to the dog: "There remains standing, I will peck you down a piece of meat," sat on the store, see if anyone looked around, noticed and pecked and pulled and tugged so long at a piece which lay on the edge until it slid down. Since the dog seized it, ran into a corner and ate it up. The sparrow said: "Now come with me to another shop, I will bring down you up a notch, so that you will fill." When the dog and the second piece had eaten, said the sparrow, "Brother dog, you're now had enough?" - "Yes, I'm tired of meat," he replied, "but I've got no bread." The sparrow said, "You shall also have come with me." Then he took him to a Bäkkerladen and pecked at two rolls, till they fell down, and when the dog even more wanted, he brought him to another, and even brought him once bread for him. That was consumed, the sparrow said, "Brother dog, you're now had enough?" - "Yes," he replied, "Now we want to go a bit out of the city." They both went out on the road. but it was warm weather, and when they had gone a corner, the dog said: "I am tired, and would like to sleep." - "Yeah, just sleep," answered the sparrow, "I sponsor wants me meanwhile on a branch." So the dog lay down on the road and fell fast asleep. While he lay there asleep, a truck driver came by who had a cart with three horses and had two barrels of wine loaded. But the sparrow saw that he did not turn aside, but remained in the wheel track in which the dog was lying. "Not Fuhrmann, do it, or I will make you poor!" So he called But the carter growled to himself, "You will not make me poor," cracked his whip and drove the cart over the dog that it totfuhren the wheels. Then the sparrow cried, "You gave me my brother totgefahren dog that will cost you cart and horses." - "Yes, cart and horses," said the driver, "What could you hurt me!" and drove on. Since crawled the sparrow under the cart, and pecked at one bunghole until he losbrachte the bung: since all the wine ran out without noticing the carter. And when he looked behind him once he saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask and found that one was empty. "Ah, poor man!" he shouted. "Not poor enough," said the sparrow, and flew one of the horses on the head, and pecked out his eyes. When the carter saw this, he took out his ax and wanted to hit the sparrow, but the sparrow flew into the air, and he hit his horse on the head that he fell down dead. "Ah, poor man!" he shouted. "Not poor enough," said the sparrow, and drove on as the carter with two horses, crawled the sparrow back under the cover, and pecked the bung of the second cask going on that all the wine ran out. When it became aware of the carter, he shouted again: "Oh, poor man!" But the sparrow replied, "Not poor enough" to put the second horse on the head and pecked out his eyes. The driver ran up and raised his ax, but the sparrow flew into the air, and the blow struck the horse that fell. "Ah, poor man!" - "Not poor enough," said the sparrow, also the third horse put on the head and pecked out his eyes. The driver suggested in his anger without looking, at the sparrow, but missed him but hit his third horse dead. "Ah, poor man!" he shouted. "Not poor enough," the sparrow answered, "Now I will make you home poor," and flew fort.Der Fuhrmann had to leave the car and went in anger and annoyance home. "Oh!" he said to his wife, "I've had bad luck! The wine has run out, and the horses are all three dead." - "Oh, man," she answered, "what a malicious bird has come into the house, he has brought together all the birds in the world, and are up there fell upon our wheat and eat him up!". Then he went upstairs, and thousands and thousands of birds were sitting on the floor and had eaten the wheat, and the sparrow sat midst of them. Then the driver cried, "Oh, poor man!" - "Not poor enough," answered the sparrow. "Wagoner, it shall cost you your life yet," and flew hinaus.Da the carter all that he had lost, went down into the room, sat down behind the stove, quite furious and bitter. The sparrow but sat out the window and cried, "Wagoner, it will cost you your life!" Then the driver grabbed the ax and threw it at the sparrow, but he hit only the windows in two, and did not hit the bird. The sparrow now hopped in, sat on the stove and cried, "Wagoner, it will cost you your life!" This, quite mad and blind with rage, smote the stove in twain, and so on, like the sparrow flies from one place to another, his household appliance, mirror, benches, table and last the walls of his house, and can not meet him. Finally, however, he caught him with his hand. Then his wife said, "Shall I kill him?" - "No," he said, "that would be too lenient, which is to much mörderlicher die, I want to devour him," and takes him and swallows it whole. But the sparrow began to flutter in his body, fluttering up again, the man in the mouth. Then he stuck his head out and shouts, "Wagoner, it still cost you your life!" The driver gives his wife the hatchet, saying, "Woman, beating me the bird in his mouth dead!" The woman strikes, but fails and suggests the Fuhrmann straight to the head, he died that fall down. But the sparrow flies up and away.
The Jew in the spine	1047	592	German	There was a rich man who had a servant who served him diligently and honestly, every morning was the first out of bed and in the evening of the last to go, and when it was an acidic work where no one wanted to tackle, so he stood still first it. He never complained, but was satisfied with everything and was always fun. When his year around, the Lord gave him no wages, thinking 'this is the cleverest way I save some and it does not go away from me, but stay quietly in the service.' The servant also was silent, for the second year as the first did his work, and when he at the end of the same again got no reward, he had sichs fallen and stayed longer. was and the third year around, the Lord gave, reached into his pocket, but pulled nothing out. The servant finally began, saying, 'Lord, I have served you three years honestly, be so good as to give me what I belongs by right: I wanted to leave, and look me further into the world.' Then the miser replied 'yes, my dear servant, you have served me, but you shall be rewarded mildiglich,' reached again into his pocket and counted out only three farthings, 'that you have for each year a penny, that is a large and liberal pay, as you would have received from few masters. ' The good servant, who understood little of money, stroked his capital, and thought, 'now you have purse full, what do you care, and you any longer with hard work plagen.'Da pulled it away, uphill, downhill, sang and jumped heart's content. Now it came to pass, as he passed by a thicket that a little man stepped out and called him, "Whither away, merry brother? I see you do not carry many cares. ' 'Why should I be sad? "Answered the servant," I have enough, the reward of three years jingling in my pocket.' 'How much is your treasure?' asked the male. 'How much? , Right Three farthings. ' 'Listen,' said the dwarf, 'I am a poor needy man, give me your three Heller: I can not work more, but you're young, and can easily earn your bread.' And as the servant had a good heart and compassion felt with the man, he gave him the three farthings, saying, 'In God's name, it will not fail me.' Then the dwarf said, "because I see your good heart I grant you three wishes, one for each farthing, they shall all be fulfilled. ' 'Aha,' said the servant, 'you're one of those who can blue. Well, if it is to be so, I wish first, for a pipe, which surpasses anything that I aim at; secondly, for a fiddle when I play on it, so everything has to dance, which hears the sound; and thirdly, when I ask a favor of someone, he may not refuse them. ' 'You shall have it all, "said the dwarf, reached into the bush, and think, there lay a fiddle and gun, all ready, as if they were ordered. He gave it to the servant and said, "What you will always ask you, no one in the world dirs to refuse. '' Heart, what do you desire? ' said the servant to himself, and went merrily on. Soon after, he met a Jew with a long goatee, who was standing listening to the song of a bird that was sitting high up in the top of a tree. 'God's miracle!' he exclaimed, '' such a small animal has such a fearfully loud voice! wenns would be my! someone would sprinkle him but salt on the tail! ' 'If that be true, "said the servant," the bird shall soon be down, "aimed, and hit on her hair, and the bird fell into the thorns. 'Go, you rogue,' he said to the Jews, 'and fetch the bird out.' said, "My '' the Jew, 'Let the Lord the boy away as a dog comes running; I myself want to pick up the bird, because you really have hit him once, 'lay down on the ground and began to work their way into the bush. As he was fast among the thorns, the wantonness plagued the good servant, that he took up his fiddle and began to play. DC began the Jew's legs to lift and jump into the air, and the more the servant fiddled the better went the dance. But the thorns tore his shabby coat, he combed the beard, and pricked and pinched him all over. 'My,' cried the Jew, "what I should fiddling? let the Lord, the violins, I desire not to dance. ' But the servant did not listen to it and thought 'you people enough flayed now dirs should not Dornhecke do better,' and began anew fiddling that the Jew had to jump higher and higher, and the scraps of his coat to the got stuck spines. 'Au weih screamed!' cried the Jew, 'I will give the gentleman what he asks if he can just fiddling a purse full of gold.' 'If you're so generous, "said the servant,' I will stop my music, but I must say to, you dance even with that it is quite an art; ' then took the bag and went his Wege.Der Jew stopped and looked after him and was silent until the servant far away and it was quite out of sight, then he shouted with all his might 'you miserable musician, you beer Fiedler: waiting when I catch you alone! I will hunt you that you shall lose the shoe soles; You ragamuffin, stuck a penny in your mouth that you're worth six Heller, 'and scolded on, he could only losbringen. And when he thus had done something and got his breath, he ran into town to judge. 'Your Honor, au weih screamed! Watch as I was mugged on the road a godless man and mauled: a stone on the ground'd have mercy: shredded the clothes! the body bitten and scratched! my little poverty, including the bag taken! louder ducats, each piece better than the other: for God's sake, let the man be thrown into prison. ' Said the judge 'Was it a soldier who had prepared you with his saber?' 'God forbid!' said the Jew, 'he has a naked sword not had, but has a pipe he had hanging on his belt and a violin at the neck; the villain is easy to see. ' The judge sent his people out to him who found the good servant, who had moved very slowly, and also found the bag of gold from him. When he was put on trial, he said 'I did not touch the Jew, nor take his money, he did it to me offered voluntarily, so that I might leave off fiddling because he could not bear my music.' 'God forbid!' cried the Jew, "his lies are like flies on the wall. ' But the judge also did not believe, and said, that's a poor excuse, no Jew would do, 'and sentenced the good servant, because he had committed in broad daylight robbery to the gallows. And when he was discharged, he screamed the Jew again 'you Bearskin, you dog of ikant, now you get your well-deserved reward.' The servant walked quietly with the hangman up the ladder to the last rung but he turned and said to the judge 'I granted one more request before I die.' 'Yes,' said the judge, 'if you do not ask for your life.' 'Not for life, "replied the servant,' I ask myself let finally again on my violin playing. ' The Jew raised a hue and cry 'for God's sake, alloweds not alloweds not.' But the judge said 'why should not I give him the short pleasure. It is granted to him, and so it shall have it' However, he could not refuse because of the gift that was bestowed on the servant. Then the Jew cried 'weih au! au weih! binds me, binds me tight. ' Since the good servant took his fiddle from his neck, put them cope, and how he gave the first scrape, they all began to billow and waver, the judge, the clerk and the officers: and the cord fell out of the hand of wanted to tie the Jew: the second line all raised their legs, and the hangman let go of the good servant and went to the dance finished: in the third line all jumped up and began to dance, and the judge and the Jew were front and jumped best. Soon danced everything that had gathered in the market out of curiosity, old and young, fat and lean, one with another, even the dogs that had run there got up on his hind feet and hopped with. And the longer he played, the higher sprang the dancers that they encountered each other on their heads and began to shriek terribly. At length the judge cried, quite out of breath 'I give you your life, you will only stop fiddling.' The good servant let move the violin took off, hung it back around his neck and climbed down the ladder. As he approached the Jew, who lay on the ground, gasping for breath, "You rascal, now confess where you got the money, or I'll take my fiddle and begin to play again. ' "I stole it, I stole, 'he' but you hasts richly deserved. 'Screamed Since the judge gave the Jew taken to the gallows and hanged as a thief.
The young giant	861	650A	German	A countryman had a son who was as big as a thumb, and was not bigger and not grow one hair's breadth in several years. Once the farmer wanted to go out to plow, the little one said 'Father, I want to go out with.' 'You want to go out with?' said the father, 'you stay here, there you are nutz to nothing; you could me are lost. ' Since started the Tom Thumb to cry, and to have peace his father put it in his pocket and took him. Out on the field, he took him out and put him in a fresh furrow. Whilst he was sitting, came out of the woods a big giant therefore. 'Do you see the great bogie?' said the father, he wanted to frighten the little fellow to make him good, 'is coming to fetch you.' But the giant had scarcely taken two steps with his long legs, he was in the furrow. He lifted the little Tom Thumb carefully with two fingers in the air, looked at it and went, without saying a word, with him gone. His father stood by, but could not utter a sound lost and thought no differently than his child in terror, not that ers his life again with eyes see würde.Der giant but carried it home and had it on his breast sucking, and Tom Thumb grew and became big and strong on the type of giants. At the end of two years, the old man went with him into the forest, wanted to test him and said, "you pull out a whip. ' Then the boy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree with roots from the earth. But the giant thought 'that needs to come out better,' took him back to and suckled him two years. When he tried him, his strength had increased so that he could tear an old tree out of the ground. That was the giant still not enough, he again suckled him for two years and when he went into the woods with him and said, "Now reiss up a proper stick out," the boy tore up the strongest oak tree out of the ground that he crashed, and he was just a fun. 'Now that will do, "said the giant," thou art perfect,' and led him back to the field where he had taken him. His father was there following the plow, the young giant went up to him and said, "Does my father what his son has grown for a man. ' The farmer was alarmed, and said, 'No, you're not my son, I do not want you, go away from me.' 'Truly I am your son, let it get to work, I can plow as well as you, even better.' 'No, no, you're not my son, you can not plow go away from me.' But because he was afraid of the big man, he left the plow, stepped back and sat on the side to land. The boy took the harness and pressed merely with a hand on it, but the pressure was so great that the plow went deep into the earth. The farmer could not bear to watch that and called to him 'if you wanna plow, you do not press so powerful that makes bad work.' but the boy harnessed the horses, pulled the plow himself, saying 'go he just go home, father, and he let the mother a large dish of food; meantime I will just outline the field. ' Then the farmer went home and ordered the food at his wife but the boy plowing the field, two acres large, all alone, and then he harnessed himself to the harrow, and harrowed all with two harrows at once. As he finished, he went into the woods and tore two oak trees from, put them on his shoulders, and back and forth a harrow it and behind and in front, a horse, and carried all as if it is a bundle of straw, after his parents' house. As he came into the court, he did not recognize his mother and asked 'Who is that horrible tall man?' The farmer said 'this is our son.' She said, "No, our son is never so great we had one, ours was a little thing. ' She called him, "Go away, we do not want you. ' The boy was silent, but led his horses to the stable, gave them hay and oats, all as sichs belonged. When he was done, he walked into the room, sat down on the bench and said, 'Mother, now I should like to eat it soon be ready?' Then she said, 'yes, and brought two great great dishes full, it would have been long enough eight days she and her husband. The youth, however ass himself, and asked if she could no longer set before. 'No,' she said, 'that's all we have.' 'That was have only a taste, I need more.' She did not dare to resist him, went and sat a huge caldron full of fire, and as it was ready, she carried it in. 'At length come a few words,' he said and ate everything into it; but it was not enough to satisfy his hunger. And he said, 'Father, I see well that with him I will not be satisfied, he will get me an iron staff which is strong and I can not break against my knees, and I will go on in the world.' The farmer was glad, put his two horses in the car and fetched from the smith a staff so large and thick, that it could only just bring the two horses. The boy took him to his knees and ratchet! He broke it in two as a rail in the middle and threw it away. The father harnessed four horses, and took a staff so large and thick, that it could only just the four horses. The son snapped this also in twain against his knees, threw him back and said, "Father, I can not help it needs more horses, and bring a stronger staff. ' So the father harnessed eight horses, and brought one so large and thick, that could cause him ride horses eight. When the son took the hand he broke in the top of a piece of it and said, 'Father, I see, he can buy me any such staff as I want, I will no longer be with him bleiben.'Da he left and gave himself a blacksmith's aus.Er came to a village, wherein lived a smith who was a greedy man, no one begrudged something and wanted everything for himself; When he went into the smithy and asked if he needed a journeyman. 'Yes,' said the blacksmith, saw him and thought, 'That is a strong guy who is well, and earn his bread.' He asked 'how much wages dost thou want?' 'None at all I want,' he replied, 'only a fortnight, get when the other journeymen paid their wages, I will give you two blows, and you have to endure.' That was pleased the miser heart and thought he would thus save much money. The next morning, the strange journeyman should first suggest how but the master brought the glowing bar, and the youth struck the first blow, the iron flew apart and the anvil sank into the earth, so deep that they could not release him again. Then the miser grew angry and said, 'Oh, but you I can not do, you strike far too what do you want for an auction?' And he said, 'I will give you only quite a small blow, nothing more.' And raised his foot and kicked him that he flew away over four loads of hay. Then he sought out the thickest iron bar, who was in the blacksmith shop, took him as a stick in his hand and went weiter.Als he had moved a while, he came to a small farm and asked the bailiff if he had needed no big servant , 'Yes,' said the magistrate, 'I need a: you look like a capable guy who has what can, how much will you have year wage?' He again replied that he wanted no wages, he would give him three strokes but all year, he would have to endure. That was pleased the bailiff, because he was a miser. The next morning, as the servants should go into the wood, and the other servants were already up, but he was still in bed. Since he called one of 'get up, it's time, let into the wood, and you have to.' "Ah," said he quite roughly and defiantly, 'Just go there, I shall be back again before any of you.' Then the others went to the bailiff, and told him that the big man was still lying in bed and did not want to go into the wood. The magistrate told them to wake him even once and tell him to harness the horses. But the United servant said as before, "Just go there, I shall be back again before any of you. ' Then he remained for two hours lying because he got finally out of bed, but only two bushels picked up of peas from the ground, cooked porridge and ate it at his leisure, and how all this had happened, he went and stretched the horses over and ran into the wood. Not far from the wood was a ravine, where he stopped by had, as he drove the car first forward, then had the horses silent, and he went behind the car, took trees and brushwood, and made a big Hucke (abatis) so that no horse could get through. As he was entering the wood, drove the others just with their loaded carts to go home, he said to them, "Drive on, I will still get you home. ' He did not drive far into the wood, tore two of the very greatest trees out of the ground, threw them on de n car and turned around. When he came to the barricade, the others were still there and could not get through. 'Do not you see,' he said, 'you were still with me, you were just as quickly come to the house and would have been able to sleep one hour.' He now wanted to drive, but his horses were unable to work through, as he stretched them out, put them on top of the car, took the shafts in his hand, and hüf! he pulled everything through, and it was done so easily as if it had been laden with feathers. When he was over, he said to the others 'well you see, I have got over quicker than you,' went on, and had to stop the others. In the yard but he took a tree in his hand, showed it to the bailiff, and said, "Is not that a fine bundle of wood? ' So the bailiff said to his wife, "The servant is good; when he sleeps too long, it is still home before than the andern.'Nun he served the bailiff one year: that was over, and the other servants were getting their wages, he said it was time, he wanted also his reward to take. But the magistrate was afraid of the blows, which he should get, and implored him, he wants to give him, he preferred to be self Gross servant, and he should be bailiff. 'No,' he said, 'I will not be a bailiff, I'm big servant and stay wills, but I will administer that which we agreed.' The magistrate wanted him to give what he demanded, but it did not help that the United servant said no to everything. ' As the bailiff did not help and asked him for a fortnight's delay, he wanted to remember something. The majority servant said, the deadline he should have. The bailiff summoned all his clerks together, they should bear in mind and give him advice. The clerks pondered for a long time, finally they said, before the big no one was sure of his life, who was beating a man like a mosquito dead. He should it be called into the well to rise and it cleaned if he were down, they were one of the millstones, which would lie there, induced roll and throw him on the head, then he would not come to the light of day again. The Council pleased the bailiff, and the United servant was ready to descend into the well. When he was down on the ground, they rolled the biggest millstone down, and said that the head had hit him, but he called 'chasing the hens from the well, they are scratching in the sand up and throwing the grains into my eyes, I can not see. ' So the bailiff cried, "Sh! shoo! ' and pretended to frighten the hens away. was ready when the big servant with his work, he came up and said, "Just look, I do have a beautiful neck-tie, 'as it was the mill stone that he wore around his neck. The majority servant wanted now te take his reward, but the bailiff again begged for a fortnight's delay. The writers came together and gave the advice, he should send the United servant to the haunted mill to grind there for the night Grain: from then no man would have come out alive in the morning. The proposal pleased the bailiff, he called the United servant that evening and told him to go and grind it that night eight bushels of corn to the mill; for it was wanted. Since the United servant went to the floor and put two bushels in his right pocket, two to the left, four half he took a knapsack on his back, half on his chest, and thus laden went to the haunted mill. The miller told him that day he could quite well as grind, but not at night, since the mill was haunted, and who was there yet gone that could have been found dead in the morning. He said, "I will manage it, you give away only and puts you on the ear. ' Then he went into the mill, and poured out the corn. About eleven o'clock he went into the miller's room and sat down on the bench. When he had sat there a while, the door suddenly opened and came in a great big panel and the panel is placed wine and roast and lots of good food, everything nobody there to carry it by itself, because it was. And then the chairs pushed themselves, but there were no people, until suddenly he saw fingers, which handled knives and forks, and laid food on the plates, but otherwise he could not see. Since he was hungry and saw the food, he also continued on the board, ass and left with what he ate. When he was fed up and change their bowls had made quite empty because the lights were suddenly snuffed out all that he distinctly heard, and now had pitch black was, he felt something like a box on the ear. And he said, 'when once something comes, I also participate again.' And when he had received a slap for the second time, as he struck out. And so the fort went on all night, he took no free lunch, but repaid and did not lay around him: At daybreak, however, everything ceased. How had stood the miller, and he wanted to check on him and marveled that he was still alive. And he said, 'I ate my fill, slaps've got, but I have given some slaps.' The miller rejoiced, and said that the mill was now redeemed, and gladly want him as a reward give a lot of money. And he said, 'I do not want money, I do have enough.' Then he took his meal on his back, went home, and told the bailiff that he had directed the matter and would now have the reward agreed. When the bailiff heard that, so he really did feel fear: he knew not to be, went into the room up and down, and the drops of sweat ran down from his forehead. As he opened the window for fresh air, sichs but before he knew it, had given him the big servant given a kick that he flew into the air through the window, all the time until it no one could see more. Since the Great servant to the bailiff's wife 'He's not coming back, so you must take the other blow.' She cried, "No, no, I can not bear it, 'and opened the other window, because the drops of sweat running down his forehead. And he gave her a kick that it flew away also, and there she was easier, much higher than her husband. The man shouted 'come to me,' but she said 'come thou to me, I can not help you.' And they floated there in the air, and could not get to each other, and whether they are still hovering about, I do not know; but the young giant took up his iron bar and walked on.
The businessman	3375	303	German	One could imagine impossible how much each one finite luck Lucretia went to the heart, and despite being the low-cost additions of heaven in terms of the same höchlich advertised, they found fault but just as much the low penalty of their stepsisters as them for the pride of any punishment seemed too heavy and strong for the envy no visitation. Now while here on many was whispered, the Prince Thaddeus slept with the forefinger of his right hand over his mouth and pointed them in such a way that they should be silent, whereupon they all fell silent at once, as if they saw the wolf, or as a schoolboy , the middle of the best chat unexpectedly seen next to the teacher. The prince waved then the Ciulla that they should begin and these began as follows: The suffering of the people are for the most part only spades and shovels, which tracks him to an unexpected luck the way, and some man curses the rain that his head wet does, and does not know that he brings his abundance, with which he can banish hunger, how this was also at a youth whose story I want to tell you now. Because it was once a very rich merchant named Antoniello; This had two sons who were called Cienzo and Meo and so similar saw that they could not be distinguished from each other. Now it happened once that Cienzo, the elder played by the two, with the son of the King of Naples on the sea shore and while they bombarded with stones, gave him a hole in the skull. Here About Antoniello flew into a terrible rage and said to his son: "Bravo, that was done pretty; that was once a capital strike; you'll get the glory anywhere and be happy and cheerful, because now you have everything you need! As you've kicked a hole in his head the king's son? And have not thought of what you were doing really, you sheep face? What will happen to you now now? Not three pennies I would bet that you have you not stirred in a very bad porridge, and if you zurückkröchest also back into the hole from which you come forth, so I would not vouch nevertheless, that the hand of the king you not could reach there; for thou knowest people like the have long legs and go everywhere; therefore he will do you a fatal Animosity "After the father of this and a thousand other things now had said again and again, Cienzo replied." I have, Father hear always say, 'Dear due to beatings sued as of Spanking cured! 'if it were not have been worse, if that I would have smashed your head? Moreover, he had begun, we are still young, and the case is therefore in dispute; except that a first offense will not be as severely punished and the king is a reasonable man. At worst, but what can he me because such great things to do? it seems so, so I come to and I do not help me in this way, so I help myself but to those; where's lives well, since one is as good as at home, and frighten does not. "" What he can do to you? "replied the father. "He can get you over the head and neck from the world, you may require a change in the air can make you a schoolmaster with a twenty-four shoe long ruler, that you may give the fish Stock shillings, that they learn to speak; he can send in up with a three foot long soapy collar, so that you (the gallows) to hold yourself with the widow tripod, but instead to take the mistress at hand, tanztst with your feet in the air. Dawdle so not as long as you did not know what you do shalt but make you standing foot on the way, so you can still hear something old about you not anything new and you do not hängenbleibst at the end of his foot. Better a bird in the open than in the cage. Here is money, you also take one of the charmed horses that I have in the stable, and the charmed dog and not wait any longer; because it is better to pay heels than to be paid in the same coin, it is better to take the legs over the hump than to have his neck between two legs, the better it is to stretch your feet properly, as from reach out to let three feet hemp; seeking only the satchel out, or you get up by the ear "Cienzo now asked his father for his blessing, then sat on the horse, and the little dog under his arm taking, he started out of the city to ride on. but as soon as he had the Capuan gate behind him, he turned to the city and called out: "Look, now I need you to leave my beloved Naples, who knows if I'll ever see you again, their bricks of sugar, their walls of marzipan, where the stones of real manna, the bars of sugar cane, the doors and windows of leaves cakes are! Oh, most beautiful Pennino, as I'm leaving you, I feel my chest like complaining from the Apennines; as I leave you, great place to cramped my breath; putting myself from you removed, elm place, I equip myself almost to death; by I depart from you, Lanzieren, it seems to me that I would get a Catalan spear; as I losreiße me from you, Forcella, so I feel as if someone would prefer continuing my life! Where I'll find such a port, you o friendly harbor all happiness in the world? Where still such a mulberry space on which the lamb goddess of love always joking sheer joy and bounce? Where still such a> hole <, this stay of all virtuous people? Where still such a loggia, where the abundance approved and the lust settles? Oh, yours too, I can not remove my trauter Lavinaro me without hot tears equal to the lava flow out my eyes! I can not leave you, o market without buy me a lot of heartache! I can tell you no good-bye, nice Chiaja, without the painful mourning: Farewell, parsnip and cabbage! Farewell, you Pfann- and millet cake! Farewell, you sprouts and tuna! Farewell, her meatballs and cutlets! Farewell, flower of cities, you trim Italy, you jewelry in Europe, you mirror of the world! Farewell, Naples, you know where the virtue their limits and grace has reared its ultimate Mine! now I am leaving to live forever deprived of herbal soups; I pull back from this superb residence; her cabbage stalks, I have you now! leave forever "While he was speaking, and exuded a winter of tears with a summer heat of Sighs, on he went on and on, until he arrived on the first night in the area of ​​Cascano in a forest, which kept away the team of the sun from its perimeters and prefer enjoyed at the silence and the shadows. Here now he came across an old house at the foot of a tower at the gate he knocked; but as the Lord the same for fear of robbers and would not open because of the already broken in overnight, so the poor Cienzo was forced to stay in the dilapidated house. He therefore had tied the horse grazing in a meadow, but himself, he threw the little dog to the side on some straw down, which he found. But no sooner had he had closed his eyes, he was awakened by the barking of the puppy dog ​​and heard in the house quiet footsteps. Courageously as he was, he took his thumb and began furiously to lash out in the dark; but since he realized that he hit no one and led vain blows in the air, he stretched out again on his bed. Some moments later, however, he felt very gently at the foot pulled and he jumped, the Plempe moving again, once more, exclaiming: "Holla, Patron, you kujonierst me too much. be let these jokes and show me dear, if you have courage; Just come just bring your cool and Mütchen; for you have found your husband. "So saying, he heard a roar of laughter and then one voice among you, which said," walks down to me, and then I'll tell you who I am. "Cienzo did not lose heart, but said," Wait a bit I'm coming, 'and then groped around for so long until he found a ladder that led down to a cellar. In this he went down and saw there a lighted lamp and three ghost-like figures which raised a loud wail by exclaiming. "Oh no, you pretty darling, now we have to lose you" When Cienzo this wailing heard, began he of the company due to whine, and after this weeping and wailing lasted for some time and the moon had already poured the sauce its rays over the middle of the sky pie, said those who uttered the cry of distress, finally Cienzo: "Take now this treasure, which is only for you, and see to it that you understandest you to save him, too! ", after which they disappeared, so that Cienzo also was unable to discover the slightest trace of them, where they had got there. As soon as he saw now appear through a hole in the wall, the sun, he wanted to go up, but the manager could not be found and thus began as loud screaming that the Lord of the tower, which was entered into the dilapidated walls to there a need to do, heard him and when he asked him what he was doing down there, and the course of the matter had heard brought brought another ladder by which he descended. They have now discovered a great treasure from which Cienzo than that wanted to give him his share, but absolutely nothing accepted, but only with his little dog in her arms mounted the horse and then rode away. After some time, now he got into such a desolate and grim forest, that one was not awful feel so dark he was, and met there on the banks of a river that of the shadows to please, into which he had fallen in love, in the meadows like a snake around ran away and jumped over the stones, a fairy of which was surrounded by a crowd of robbers who tried to rob her of the honor. As Cienzo perceived the worthlessness of these rogues, he took his sword and raised among them a terrible slaughter, so that the fairy full gratitude to this brave act thanked him a thousand times, and invited him to her not far away palace, they woselbst him her wanted to reward service rendered. Cienzo but merely said, "Best thanks, is no Ursach ', other times I'm so free, now I am in a hurry; for I have "to do something important, and did well to this. Having now back laid a good part of the way he arrived at a Royal Palace, which was all black knocked out, so that one did in the heart hurt to look at him, and asked as Cienzo the cause of this grief, he learned that in that country a dragon had pitched with seven heads domiciled, the most terrible, the one seen in the world, with a comb like a rooster, a cat's head, eyes like burning fire, a throat like a Corsican mastiff with wings as a bat, with claws of a bear, and the tail of a snake. This dragon, however, swallowed daily a Christian man, and since this had been continued until that day, it was, unfortunately, this results in the king's daughter, named Menechella, fallen, and so now this weeping and wailing took place in the royal house by the loveliest creature that country should be swallowed up by such a horrific animals and eaten. As Cienzo heard this, he stepped aside and looked Menechella in mourning robes at hand, accompanied by all the noble ladies of the court and all the women of the city, which beat up his hands and his hair in bunches plucking while they mourned the fate of the poor girl and exclaimed: " Who would have guessed that this unfortunate Virgin of goods would be deprived of life in the body of this ugly monster? Who would have guessed that this beautiful little bird, get the belly of a dragon to the cage who guessed that this beautiful angel should spin-out of the fullness of his life thread in this wretched prison? "As she proclaimed this, suddenly came out of a cave the dragon out - Mr. du mein was how ugly the, so much so that the sun hid in fear behind the clouds, the sky darkened and the hearts of all those people like the mummies shrank; so, so great was the fear and trembling that they were one and all close to it, to bemachen. Cienzo but which, ratz this with looked at, seized his sword and ritz, he cut the dragon from a head that he hinrollte on Earth. Once, however, the dragon his neck at a certain, not far from growing herb had rubbed him jumped once again the head of such a lizard that brings back with her tail. Not once but Cienzo took this to be true, he exclaimed: "Nothing ventured, nothing gained"; bit then teeth and gave the Dragons a so terrible prank that he felling him all the seven heads in and this continued rolling of the neck as the peas from the trowel. Then reaper their tongues out, put it to himself, then threw their heads a mile from the trunk continues to prevent them together would grow again with the same, and after a handful of the herb that the dragon's head again the neck had the same connected, plucked, he sent Menechella to the palace of her father back, while he stopped off at an inn. When the king saw his daughter, he showed an incredible joy, and as soon as he learned how they had been saved, he was on the spot publicly do that, who would have killed the dragon, imagine and of his daughter should be women. A worthless rogue of a farmer now raised the heads of the dragon, walked with it to the king and said to him: "By me Menechella has been saved, these hands have freed your kingdom from such a large disaster. Here you have the heads, they are witnesses of my courage and my strength, so now fulfilled even now your promise. "As soon as the king heard these words, he took the crown from his head and put them to the farmer on the head, so that this gutted like the severed head of a bandit on a pillory. The rumor of this incident now spread through the city, until it finally came to Cienzo ears, which then in himself said, "Truly, I am a big fool! I was lucky by the hair and have let me get away from the hands! For there wants to give me a half of the treasure, and I care so little it like a German at a drink of water; a fairy me wants to prove a lot of good in her palace, and I care so little about how the donkey to the music, and now and again I am called to the crown, and I stand there like a drunks with its spindle and look calmly on, as a rogue anticipates me and a fraudulent cheats me take this beautiful engraving from his hand. "As he said this, he takes an inkwell, takes the pen, loading paper in front of him and begins to write:" To the most beautiful gem among women, the Princess of fools Menechella country. Since I saved you by the grace of heaven's life, and now hear that another of my deeds attributed illegally, another usurps the price I myself won, so you can inform the king of the truth and prevent, that another eaten the soup, which I stirred. So it is fitting to take action and give the deserved reward of my brave fist of your royal grace. Finally, I kiss you your delicate hands. . Written in the inn to the golden chamber pot, today on Sunday, "After writing this letter, and to seal with chewed bread, he put it to his pooch in his mouth and said to him:" Run quickly and bring this to the daughter of the king, give it but yes others no, but only for the attention of that angel face. "the dog ran up to the hall just flew to the royal palace, where he encountered the king, who made yet with the Bauernlaffen many compliments. So when he saw the dog with the letter arrive in Maule, he ordered that they pick up it to him, but wanted to give it to anyone, but jumped to Menechella back and laid it in her hands. This rose then from their seats, and by bowing to the king, she handed him the letter, that he read it, which he did. Once he was done, he ordered that they should pursue the little dog and see where it was going, and then the Lord of the same to bring to him. There were thus two courtiers to the little dog and arrived at the inn, they woselbst Cienzo found and placed him by the command of the king to accompany him to the palace discretion. in before the king, he has now asked him how he could boast of having killed the dragon, seeing that the man who is befände with the crown on his head next to him, had brought the same to him the heads what Cienzo said, "This farmer guy deserves more of a hangdog cap of wrapping paper as a crown because he was so rude to make you an X for a U. So you but it convince you that I've really done this deed and not this blockhead, the heads of the dragon let fetch, none of which can be taken as evidence for him; all that is missing the tongues that I have to convict you of the truth of my statements, brought here. "So saying, he pulled out the tongues, so that the farmer stood quite taken aback and did not know what was happening, and more so cried out as Menechella: "Yes, this is my Savior! . But you're not worthy farm dog gave me to play a great match, "Hardly the king heard these words, he tore this dirt finch the crown of the head, she sat Cienzo and those wanted to send to the galleys; Cienzo but asked him for the favor, the audacity of the same to be able to shame by pardon. Then was a great feast organized feasted in which all like the noble lords, and upon completion of the panel Cienzo went with his bride in a still fresh fragrant after washing bed to sleep, where he the trophies of the won over the dragon victory built and triumphant moved into the chapter of love. but once the morning came and the sun, about riding with the two-handed sword of light under the stars, exclaimed: "Go back, you scoundrels," saw Cienzo by he dressed at a window, are just about a beautiful girl and is therefore said to his wife turned: "What's that for a pretty thing that it says here towards" - "What do you mean," replied Menechella. "Where are you looking back? Were you taken about an evil lust? Are you tired of the fat and you is not enough, the meat that you have in your home, "Cienzo dropped his head at these words like a cat that has caused harm and said nothing?; but placing himself as if he had a gear to go, he left the palace and sneaked into the house of that beautiful girl who really was a really beautiful bite; because it looked like the freshest cream and like a sugar dough, they never turned the cautery of the eyes without pulling Love bubbles in the heart, they never opened the washing vessel of the lips, to douse without souls with hot water, and she moved her foot is not without those who floated to the rope of hope, capable of stepping on the shoulders of how to do the hanged man. Besides so many charms but she had also a special magic by which they, when they just always wanted, the men tied them with her hair, bound, bewitched and enchanted, as was the case with Cienzo the case, hardly a foot in her house had set when he already as a foal had a jump chain on the legs. During this period, Meo, Cienzos younger brother had, because this was nothing heard from him, taken it into his head to see him. He therefore asked his father for permission and received from him also a horse and a charmed dog. By now so Meo moved away, he arrived one evening at the tower, where Cienzo was, and the Lord, him holding for the brother, received him with the utmost civility in the world. Since Meo saw the circumstances that made him, he remembered that well might have been there, his brother, and hoped therefore also to locate him. Therefore, once the moon, this enemy of the poet, the sun turned his back, he went on his way and reached then on to the fairy, which also took him for Cienzo and received him in the most friendly by always repeated the words: . "Be welcome, my handsome young man, you saved my life," Meo however, thanked her for the kindness, saying: "Pardon if I do not stop me with you, because I am in a hurry, but goodbye at found my return, "and full of joy, full of traces left by his brother, he continued his journey continues on until he arrived at the palace of the king on the very day that Cienzo from the hair of the fairy had been tied up. So when Meo entered the palace, he was received by the servants with great reverence and embraced by the young woman full of tenderness, by exclaiming ,, Heaven help me, a poor woman by! you go in the morning continued, and in the evening you come back! but if looking for all the other birds feed, then at least the siskin remain in the nest! Where have you been all this time, my dearest Cienzo? How can you stay away from your Menechella so long? You got me ripped the kite from the teeth and hurl me now of jealousy in the throat, unless that you always rob me of the light of my eyes, but yours are! Was "Meo, which does not fall on my head , thought at once that this would be his brother's wife, and as he turned to Menechella, he apologized for his absence, after which they went to sincerely embraced and table. But as soon as the Sun summoned a hen the stars for lifting the rope, they went to sleep, but Meo wanted his brother's honor not stain, turned away and the bed sheet between himself and his sister put to must not touch. As the latter, however, saw this new facility, she said to him with a sullen expression and a true stepmother face: "Since when is the fashion, dear husband? What kind of game we play there? What kind of invasion? Are we contentious border neighbors about that you as accurate abteilst our camp? Are we perhaps two hostile armies that you pull this ditch? Or are we about some wild horses that you raise up this crate "Meo, who always had an answer at hand, replied:" Do not be angry with me, my love, but through the doctor prescribed me a purgative and therefore, a strict diet has prescribed, that I also exhausted from the chase, and therefore "Menechella am unfit for other work. now that was very gullible, to let this make believe and fell asleep. Um, used but the hour when the night of the sun followed sharp dawn to lace around her bundle, entered Meo while he dressed, to the same window where the brother had been when tightening, and saw the same girl had fallen into the power Cienzo so that it struck with delight at her to Menechella said, "What kind of a woman standing over there by the window," to which the latter replied fully annoyance: "then so is? directed your mind? If things are so, then I know where I stand! Also yesterday you annoyed with this grotesque face, and I fear only too much so that the tongue feels there where the tooth hurts. You should respect me but to some extent, because in the end I am a king's daughter, and yet every dirt piles has its haze. Not without reason, therefore you tonight my back turned and made me the double eagle; now I understand the matter; you beobachtetst diet in my bed to revel in others! But when I behind it come, I will make a killing spectacle that the chips are flying through the air. "Meo but that is not so easily lost his temper, soothed again by much persuasion by repeatedly said, zuschwor that he also the most beautiful females in the world would not be unfaithful to his wife and that he loved her as did his eyeball. Very comforted by these words, Menechella went in her cabinet to be massaged by her ladies-in the forehead, make the hair, the eyebrows coloring, make-up face, to let in a word completely decorate so that they in the eyes of him she held for her husband, the more beautiful appearing. Meo but where the words Menechellas had aroused the suspicion that Cienzo itself was staying at that girl, now took his dog, left the palace and went to the house where he was hardly occurred when she already exclaimed: "Bind ! this man, my hair "But Meo wasted no time and replied," Hurtig, my little dog, devour this wench on, "to which the dog swallowed easily as an egg yolk!. Meo now stepped further into the house and found his brother standing there as if enchanted; But as soon as he hung up two hairs doggie him Cienzo seemed to come out of a deep sleep. Then he told him all he had last happened on the trip and in the palace of the king, as he had also held by Menechella for his brother slept with her, and just going to tell him on as he between the bed sheet and the sister down when Cienzo as driven by the devil, grabbed an old sword, felling his head like a cucumber. This noise, however, the King and his daughter appeared, and since the latter saw that Cienzo had killed a very similar to him man, she asked him the reason, to which he replied: "Ask yourself, you who slept with my brother have by you held it for me, so I took him off. "-" Oh, "said Menechella, ,, how many will be killed but undeservedly! Once upon a time a brave indeed! You deserve certainly not one so brave brother, as he, lying with me in a bed, be returned to the züchtigste way of me and me not even touched. "When Cienzo heard this, he regretted most bitterly so great haste, which the daughter of an ill mind, and mother had been a serious crime, and mangled his face in pain. However, he suddenly remembered the herb shown to him by the dragon, rubbing it on the neck of his brother, which is soon approached the head, and by again with the same grew together, Meo was fresh and healthy. Cienzo hugged him then most tenderly, and after him because of his hasty heat and that he him without hearing his story to an end, removed from the world, asked for forgiveness, they all went back in a carriage to the royal palace, where they were also Antoniello come with his whole family, which acquired the full favor of the king and his son saw a new example of the saying: Better luck than judgment
Little Claus and big Claus	2010	1535	German	In a village two people lived, had both of the same name. Both were called Klaus, but one owned four horses and the other only one. In order to be able to distinguish them, people called him who possessed four horses, the great Klaus, and those who had only one, Little Claus. Now we want to hear what happened to the two, because it is a true history.The whole week Little Klaus had to plow for the big Klaus and lend him his one horse, the great Klaus helped him with all his fours, but only once a week, and Sunday was. Hussa as Little Klaus clapped his whip over all five horses! You were now as good as on the one day. The sun shone brightly, and all the bells in the church tower rang the church, the people were all dressed up and went with the song book under the arm to listen to the preacher, and they looked at Little Claus plowing with five horses, and he was so gleefully that he smacked his whip, and said: "Gee-up, my horses" "So you do not speak," said the big Claus, "a horse is only your" but passed as again someone forgot! little Klaus that he should not say it, and he exclaimed, "Gee-up, my horses" "Now I must beg you not to do this," said the big Klaus; "Because you say it again, I shall hit your horse on the head, it's dead on the spot." "I will certainly not say it!" said Little Klaus. But as soon as people came and nodded him good day, he was very pleased and thought it look quite good, that he had five horses plowing in his field, and he clapped his whip and said, "Gee, all my horses! "" I'll up your horses! " said the big Klaus, took a hammer and hit the little Klaus single horse on the head that it fell down and was dead. "Oh, now I have no horse!" said Little Claus and began to cry. He later moved the horse the skin and left them well in the wind to dry, then put it into a bag, which he threw on the shoulder, and went to town on the way to his horse's skin to a verkaufen.Er had very long way to go, had to go through a large, dark forest, and now it was tremendously bad weather. He lost his way completely, and before he came back to the right path, it was evening and too far to go to the city or back home before it wurde.Dicht night by the way was a big farm; the shutters were closed out on the windows, but the light could still shine out about it. "I'll probably be able to get permission to stay the night," thought Little Klaus and knocked an.Die peasant woman opened; but when she heard what he wanted, she told him to go on, her husband was not at home, and they admit strangers. "Well, I must out lie there," said Little Claus, and the farmer's wife shut him . the door in his face zu.Dicht stood a large haystack, and between it and the house a small shed was built, with a thatched roof, "Look, I can do," said little Claus, as he saw the roof; "This is a wonderful bed. The stork flies probably not down and bite my legs." Because a stork, whose nest on the Dache.Nun crawled Little Claus on the scales up, reached down and turned to right to lie well. The wooden shop on the windows shut up not to, so he could just into the room hineinblicken.Da was a large table covered with wine and roast and a splendid fish; The farmer's wife and the sexton were sitting at the table and no one else different, she poured him, and he forked in the fish, because that was his favorite dish. "Who could take something like that!" thought Little Klaus and sticking her head against the window. he saw a delightful cakes also are in the room! Yes, that was a feast Now he heard someone from the road fro against the house ride!; this was the man of the peasant woman, the home kam.Das was a very good man, but he had that he could never bear to see the strange peculiarity of a sexton; seemed a sexton before his eyes, he was quite mad. So it was that the clerk had gone to his wife to tell her good day, because he knew that the man was not at home, and the good woman sat him for the house to eat. When they heard the farmer coming, they feared greatly, and the woman asked the sexton to hide himself in a large, empty box, because he knew that the poor man could not bear to see a sexton. The woman hid quickly all the wonderful food and wine in her oven; for if her husband had seen this, he would certainly have wondered what was the meaning of it. "Oh!" sighed Little Claus up on his shed when he saw all the food away. "Is anyone there?" asked the farmer, looking up and discovering Little Claus. "Why are you lying there? You'd better come with into the room." Well told Little Claus, as he had lost, and asked that he could stay the night. "Yes, indeed," said the farmer, "but we must first have something to live! "The woman received both very friendly, covered a long table and gave them a big bowl of porridge. The farmer was hungry and ate with good appetite, but Little Claus could not help, on the magnificent roasts, fish and cakes that he knew in the oven to denken.Unter the table at his feet he had laid the sack with the horse's skin he'd want to sell in the city. The grits it did not taste as he stepped on his sack, and the dry skin in the sack squeaked loudly. "St" said Little Klaus to his sack, stepped back out at the same time; as it creaked louder than before. "Well, what do you have in your sack?" . Asked the farmer to "Oh, it's a magician," said Little Claus; "He says we should not eat porridge, he had conjured the whole oven full of roast meat, fish and cake." "Egg of a thousand!" said the farmer and made opening the oven door, where he saw all the nice things that had conjured in the bag for them in his opinion, the magician. The woman was allowed to say anything, but continued once the food on the table, and then both ate the fish, the meat and the cake. Now Little Claus trod again upon his sack, that the skin squeaked. "What does he say now?" asked the farmer, "He says," replied Little Claus, "that he has conjured three bottles of wine for us! They are there in the corner by the stove." Now the woman had to bring out the wine they had hidden, and drank the farmer and was funny. Such a conjuror as Little Claus in the sack had, he would have been only too glad. "Can he conjure up the devil?" asked the farmer. "I want him well see, because now I'm funny!" "Yes," said Little Claus, "my conjuror can do anything I ask. Is not that right, you?" he asked and stepped on the bag that creaked. "Do you hear He says yes, but the devil looks ugly, we do not want to look at him!" "Oh, I is not afraid;? How will he be like" "Yes, he is quite like a sexton show! "" Who! " said the farmer, "that's ugly! You know, I can not bear to see a sexton! But never mind, I know so, that it is the devil, so I'll probably easier to find in there! Now I have courage, but it must me not to get too close. "" I'll ask my wizard, 'said little Klaus, stepped on the bag, and stooped his ear. "What does he say?" "he says go you can and open box that stands in the corner, so you will see the devil as he crouches in it; but you must keep the lid that he not escaped "" will you help me to hold him? ". asked the farmer, going towards the chest where his wife had hidden the sexton, who sat in it and very fürchtete.Der farmer opened the lid a little and peeped in. "Who!" he screamed and jumped back. "Yeah, well I've seen him, he looked just like our sexton That was terrible!" Then had to drink again, and they drank till far into the night. "The magician you have to sell me," said the Farmer; "Ask for what you want! Yes, I equally give you a bushel of money!" "No, I can not!" said Little Klaus. "Just think how much profit I could make of this wizard." "Oh, I want him very much have," said the farmer and ask continued. "Yes," said Little Claus last, "since you have been so good are, I grant this night shelter, so it may be. you shall love the wizard for a bushel of money have, but I want heaped bushel have accomplished. "" so you shall, "said the farmer," but the box there you need to take with you; I will not keep an hour longer in the house. you can not know, maybe he was still sitting in it "little Claus gave the farmer his sack with the dry skin, and received a bushel of money, heaped measured for it. The farmer also gave him a big cart, proceed to the money and the box it. "Farewell!" said Little Klaus. Then he went with his money and the big chest, in which even the clerk was sitting, davon.Auf the side of the forest was a big, deep river; the water flowed so tearing the fact that it was hard to swim against the current; they had beaten a big, new bridge over it; Little Klaus stopped in the middle of her and said in a loud voice so that the clerk could hear it in the box, "What shall I do with this stupid chest She's so heavy as if stones were in there I'm just tired of it! they continue on, and I will throw them into the river; floats it to my house, so it's good, but if not, it has nothing to say, "then took he the chest with one hand and raised them. little, just as if he were going to throw into the water. "No, let it be!" cried the clerk inside the box. "Let me out first!" "Who!" said Little Klaus, pretending he was afraid. "He is still sitting in it! I'll have him quickly throw into the river, so he drowns!" "Oh no, oh no!" said the sexton; "I you want to give a bushel of money, if you let me go!" "Yes, that is something else!" said Little Claus, opening the chest. The sexton crept out, the empty box joined in the water, and went to his house where Little Klaus got a bushel of money; he had a get from the farmer, now he had thus his barrow full. "Look, the horse I got very well paid!" he said to himself when he was at home in his own office and all the money into a heap in the middle of the room. "This will annoy the big Klaus when he finds out how rich I have become through my one horse; but I want him but light bluntly!" Now he sent a boy to the big Klaus out to borrow a bushel measure. "What he may well want to do with it?" thought the great Klaus and smeared tar on the ground so that from what was measured, something might get stuck in it. And so it happened; because when he was returned to the bushel measure, hung three dollars in it. "What's that?" said the big Klaus and immediately ran to the small. "Where did you get all that money?" "Oh, this is for my horse's skin, I sold it yesterday." "It was certainly well paid" said the big Klaus, and he ran home, took an ax and knocked all his four horses on the head, they pulled the skin up and drove with these skins to the city. "Skins, skins, who'll buy skins?" he called through the Strassen.Alle shoemakers and tanners came running and asked what he wanted for it. "A bushel of money for each," said the big Klaus. "Are you mad?" all cried. "Do you think we have money by the bushel?" "Skins, skins, who'll buy skins?" he called again, but all those who asked him what should cost the skins he replied: "A bushel of money." "He wants to fool us," they all said, and as the shoemaker tightening their belts and Gerber took their Schurz furs and began to, loszuprügeln on the big Klaus. "skins, skins!" they called for him; "Yes, we will tan you skin! Out of the town with him!" they shouted, and the great Klaus had to run what he could. He had never been beaten by "Well," he said when he came home, "Little Claus shall be punished I will kill him!" At home in the small Klaus old grandmother had died. it was certainly quite been evil and bad against him, but he was sorry, and took the dead woman and laid her in his warm bed to see if she will not return to life. As they should be up all night, he wanted to sit in the corner and sleeping on a chair; he had earlier getan.Als he sat in there at night, the door opened, and the great Klaus came in with an ax; He knew well where Little Klaus bed stood, walked right up to it and struck the old grandmother on the head, because he believed that Little Claus lying there in his bed. "Look," he said, "Now you shall I no longer have the best! " And then he went back home. "This is a very wicked man!" said Little Klaus; "Because he wanted to kill me! It was a good thing for old mother that she was already dead, or he would have taken her life!" Now he put on the old grandmother Sunday clothes, borrowed from the neighbors a horse, it stressed in front of the car and the old grandmother sat on the back seat, so they do not that could fall out when he drove, and rode away through the forest. As the sun rose, they were in front of a large inn since held the Little Claus and went in to get something to geniessen.Der landlord had a lot of money, he was also a very good, but hot-tempered man, as if pepper and tobacco in him. "good morning!" he said to the little Klaus. "You've come to the wheel this morning" "Yes," said Little Claus, "I want my grandmother to the city; she sits outside in the car, I can not they bring in into the room Will you not the old one. give glass of mead? But you have to right to speak loudly, because she does not hear well. "" Yes, I will do it! " said the host and poured a large glass of mead with which it out to the dead grandmother, who sat upright in the car. "Here's a glass of mead from your son!" said the landlord, but the dead woman did not answer a word, but sat quite still as if they anginge everything is nothing. "Do you not hear?" cried the host, was so loud it. "Here's a glass of mead from your son!" Once more he shouted and again, but they certainly did not move, he became angry and threw her glass in his face, and ye that the caraway just above the nose was running and she fell backwards, because she was only seated there, not tied. "Heda!" cried Little Claus, rushing out the door and grabbed the landlord by the throat, "because you killed my grandmother! See, there is a big hole in her forehead!" "Oh, that's a disaster!" cried the landlord, wringing his hands over his head together; "That all comes from my violence! Dear Little Claus, I will give you a bushel of money and will bury your grandmother as if it were my own, only keep silent, otherwise I will cut off the head, and that I would be uncomfortable. "so little Klaus got a bushel of money, and the landlord buried his old grandmother as if it had been wäre.Als now little Klaus came back with all that money home, he immediately sent a boy over to his own great Klaus to let ask him to lend him a bushel Mass. "What's that?" said the big Klaus. "Did I not kill him? Because I must see for myself!" And so he went himself in the bushel measure to Little Claus. "Where you've got all the money get?" he asked, eyes widened when he saw all that was added. "You have my grandmother, but not kill me!" said Little Klaus. "The I have now sold a bushel of money to get it!" "That's certainly well paid" said the big Klaus, rushed home, took an ax and hit his old grandmother dead, put them on the car, and drove into the town to the apothecary, and asked if he wanted to buy a dead body. "Who is it and where did you get him? " asked the pharmacist. "It's my grandmother!" said the big Klaus. "I have killed to get a bushel of money" "God protect us!" said the pharmacist. "You're talking crazy! Does not like, or you will lose your head!" And now he told him properly, what that was for an evil deed he had committed and what a bad person he was and that he must be punished. Since the great Klaus was so frightened that he jumped from the pharmacy straight into the car and struck the horses and went home; But the pharmacist and all the people thought he was crazy, and so they let him go where he wanted. "You shall pay me!" said the big Klaus when he was out on the road, "yes, I will punish you, small Klaus!" As soon as he got home he took the largest sack he could find and went over to Little Claus and said, "Now you have fooled me again, until I killed all my horses, and then my old grandmother; that's all your fault but thou shalt never more fool me! " As he grabbed the Little Claus round the body and put it in his bag, took him on his shoulders and called out to him: "Now I'm going to drown you!" It was a long way to go, he had to go before he came to the river, and little Claus was not easy to carry. The road went right past the church; The organ sounded and the people singing beautifully. Since the great Klaus put down the sack with Little Klaus in it close to the church door, and thought that it could probably be quite good to go in and hear a psalm before he went any farther Little Claus could not come out, and all the people were in the church. So he went in. "Oh God, oh God!" sighed Little Claus in the sack and turned and turned, but it was not possible for him to dissolve the band. As an old, old drovers came along, with snow-white hair and a big stick in her hand; he drove a herd of cows and bulls in front of them, and they ran to the bag in which the little Klaus was sitting so that it was overturned. "Oh God!" sighed Little Claus, "I'm so young and is soon going to heaven!" "And poor me," said the drover, "I'm so old and still can not get there!" "Open the sack!" cried Little Klaus. "Crawl instead of me into it, and you will soon go to heaven!" "Yes, all my heart," said the drover, on the bag, from the Little Claus as quickly jumped out. "Will you now take care of the cattle? " the old man asked. Then he crawled into the bag, Little Claus tied the bag again and pulled with all his cows and bulls Weges.Bald on the big Klaus came out of the church. He took his bag on his back again, although it seemed to him that had become the lighter, for the old drover was not half as heavy as Little Klaus. "How easy he's made to wear! Yes, so that is that I have been to a church!" So he went to the river, the deep and was great, threw the bag with the old drover into the water and cried back of that, because he believed so, that the little Klaus was: "See, now you're not supposed me more fool!" Then he went home; but when he came to the place where the paths crossed, he encountered unexpectedly the small Klaus, who all his cattle, therefore drove. "What's that?" asked the great Klaus. "Did I not drown you just now?" "Yes," said Little Claus, "you threw me half an hour ago in down the river!" "But where did you get all these fine beasts?" asked the great Klaus. "It's sea-cattle!" said Little Klaus. "I you want to tell the story and you give thanks that you drowning me, because now I'm rich! I was frightened when I put in a sack, and the wind whistled in my ears when you take me down from the bridge the cold water threw. I fell immediately to the ground, but I did not met, because down there the most beautiful, soft grass. then I fell, and once the bag has been opened, and the sweetest girl, green in snow-white robes, with a wreath to the hair, took me by the hand and said, 'Are you there, little Klaus since you first some cattle a mile farther on the road is still a whole herd, which I will give you one!' Now I saw that the river formed a great highway for the sea people. Went below at the bottom and drove it straight from the sea and all the way to the country to where the river ends. There were the most beautiful flowers and fresh grass ; the fish I shot on the ears over, just as here the birds in the air What was it there for pretty people, and what fine cattle were grazing on the moats and ramparts "" But why are you right back.! come up to us? " asked the great Klaus. ". That would I not have done, if it's so beautiful down there" "Yes," said Little Claus, "that's just acted wisely by me you heard me say that I am telling you. The mermaid told me a mile farther on the road - and the road she meant the river, for it is nowhere Anders get there - I should find a whole herd of cattle for me, but I know what the river makes for bends, now here, now there. that's a long detour No, you do it shorter off when you come here to the land and drives across again to the river;. I shall save half a mile and come quickly to my cattle, "" Oh, you're a lucky! Man!" said the big Klaus. "Do you think that I would receive sea-cattle if I went down to the bottom of the river?" "Yes, I think so," said Little Claus, "but I can not let you wear there in a sack, you are too heavy for me! will you go along, and then creep into the sack, I will throw you in with the greatest pleasure. "" thank you, "said the big Klaus. "But I get no sea-cattle when I come down, so believe me, I'll beat you the way you were never beaten." "Oh no, do not be so bad!" And as they went to the river. As the cattle water saw, it ran as fast as he could, thirsty down to drink. "See how a hurry they are" said Little Klaus. "It longs to get back on the ground!" "Yes, help me, make haste," said the big Klaus, "or you'll get a beating!" And so he crawled into the big bag, which had been lying across the back of the bulls. "Put in a stone, I'm afraid that I otherwise not falling," said the big Klaus. "It's on!" said Little Klaus, still he put a large stone into the bag, which tied it tightly, and then joining it. Thud! Since the great Klaus was in the river, and immediately sank to the bottom. "I'm afraid he will not find any cattle! But he forced me to yes!" said Little Claus, and then drove home with what he had.
The King of the Golden Mountain	879	810	German	A merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl, both of which were small and still could not walk. There were but two heavily laden ships from him on the sea, and all his property was in it, and as he thought, to win much money, the news came that they had gone. Here he was, instead of a rich man and a poor man had nothing left but a field outside the city. To his misfortune to hit a little from the idea that he went out into the field, and as he was so walked up and down, suddenly a little black dwarf next to him and asked why he was so sad and what he was taking so much to heart. Then the merchant said, "If you could help me, I want it to tell you well." - "Who knows," replied the black dwarf, "maybe I'll help you." Then the merchant told him that his entire wealth would have perished at sea him, and he had nothing left but this field. "Do not trouble thyself," said the little man, "if you promise me what you pushes to house the first resis leg to bring the twelve years here to this place, you must have money, all you want." The merchant thought: What can that be but my dog? But his little boy he did not think, and said yes, gave the black man a written and sealed promise, and went Haus.Als he came home because his little boy was so delighted that he kept to the banks to he tottered up and firmly grabbed him by the legs. The father was shocked, for he remembered his promise to him, and he knew what he had prescribed. Because he still found no money in his chests and boxes, he thought it was just a fun of the male. A month later he went to the ground and intending to gather together and sell old tin, when he saw a big pile of money lying. Now he was happy again, made purchases, became be a good man, a greater merchant than before, and let God. Meanwhile, the boy was big and this smart and sensible. but the closer brought came the twelve years more anxious grew the merchant, so that his fear in the face could be seen. The son once asked him what was wrong. The father did not want to say, but that lasted until he finally he said he had it without knowing what he would promise promised a black male and get much money for it. He would have given his hand and seal it, and now he would have him if twelve years would be around, deliver. Then the son said. "Oh, Father, you do not let be uneasy, all will be all right, the black man has no power over me" Bless The son was inspired by the clergy, and came as the hour they went on out the field, and the son made a circle and placed himself inside with his father. Since the black man came and said to the old man: "Did you bring what you promised me" He was silent, but the son asked, "What are you doing here" Since the black guy said, "I have to talk to your father and not with you." The son replied: "You have betrayed and misled my father, give back the writing out!" - "No," said the black dwarf, "my right, I will not give up." As they talked for a long time together, finally they agreed, the son, because he belonged to the hereditary enemy and not his father, should climb into a boat, which at one descend the running water, and the father should with his own foot continued poking, and then the son should be left to the water. Then he took leave of his father, got into a boat, and the father had it with his own foot away encounter. The boat capsized so that the keel was uppermost, but the ceiling in the water; and the father believed his son was lost, went home and mourned ihn.Das boat but did not sink, but flowed on quietly, and the young man was sitting safely in it, and it ran until it was finally trapped on an unknown shore , As he went on shore, saw a beautiful castle in front of him and went out. But as he entered, it was cursed. He went through all the rooms, but they were empty until he came to the last, where there was a snake in a ring. The snake, however, was an enchanted maiden, who rejoiced as she saw him, and said to him: "Are you coming, my Redeemer On I have you already waited twelve years, this kingdom is bewitched, and you've got to deliver." - "How can I?" asked he. "To-night come twelve black men, covered with chains who will ask you what are you doing here, keep silent and give them no answer, and let them do to you what they want. They will torture you, beat and stab, all let it happen, just do not talk;. at twelve o'clock they must away again and on the second night twelve others will come back, twenty-four in the third, who will cut off your head, but at twelve o'clock their power over, and if you have then endured and not said a word, I shall be released. I come to you, and have a bottle of the water of life, I will rub you, and then you're back alive and healthy as before. " And he said, "Gladly will I save you." And everything happened just as she had said. The black men could wring a word of it, and on the third night the snake became a beautiful princess, who came with the water of life and brought him back to life. And then she fell on his neck and kissed him, and there was joy and joy throughout the Castle. Since their wedding was held, and he was king of the golden Berge.Also they lived happily together, and the queen gave birth to a beautiful boy. Eight years had already gone by since he remembered his father, and his heart was moved, and he wished to visit him. but the Queen did not want him omit and said, "I already know that it is my misfortune," but he let her have no rest until she consented. When they parted, she gave him a wishing-ring and said, "Take this ring and put it on your finger, you will immediately be transported whithersoever thou wouldst be, only you have to promise that you not to use it, me away from here to wish to your father. " He promised her, put the ring on his finger, and wished himself at home in front of the town where his father lived. At the moment he found himself there, and made for the town. But when he came to the gate, he would not let the sentinels because he was wearing strange and yet so rich and fine clothes. Then he went to a hill where a shepherd herding, exchanged clothes with, put on his old shepherd coat, and then went undisturbed into the city. When he came to his father, he made himself known, but the thought never that it would be his son, and said he certainly had had a son who would be long dead; but because he saw that he was a poor, needy shepherd, he would give him full to eat a plate. Then the shepherd said to his parents: "I am verily your son, you know of no mark on my body by which you could recognize me?" - "Yes," said the mother, "our son had a raspberry mark under his right arm." He slipped back his shirt, and they saw the raspberry under his right arm and did not doubt more that he was their son. Then he told them that he was King of the Golden Mountain, and a king's daughter was his wife, and they had a fine son of seven years. Then the father said, "Now or ever this is true this is a fine kind of a king who goes about in a ragged shepherd Rock!" As the son was angry and turned without thinking of his promise to ring round, and wished both his wife and his child with him. The moment they were there, but the queen, who complained and cried and said he had broken his word and made them unhappy. He said: "I have done it thoughtlessly, and not with evil intention," and spoke to her; she turned even as they were after, but she had mischief in Sinn.Da he led them out of the city into the field, and showed her the water where the boat had been repelled, and then said, "I'm tired, sit you down, I will sleep awhile on your lap. " Then he put his head on her lap, and she picked his lice a little until he fell asleep. When he was asleep, she first drew the ring from his finger, then pulled his foot out from under him and just let the slipper back; and she took her child in her arms and wished herself back in her kingdom. When he awoke, he lay quite deserted, and his wife and child were gone, and the ring was on his finger, the slipper only still there as a token. Home to thy parents thou canst not return, he thought, they would say that you were a warlock, you want to pack up and go until you come into your kingdom. So he went away and finally came to a mountain, standing before the three giants and quarreling with each other because they did not know how to divide their father's legacy. When they saw him pass, they called him and said little men had quick wits, he should distribute them the inheritance. "All off but mine does not Kopf!": But the inheritance consisted of a sword, if one took it in his hand and said, so all heads lay on the ground; secondly, of a cloak, who put it on invisible; thirdly, of a pair of boots when it had attracted and where desired, so it was at the moment there. He said, "Give, and that I may see whether they are me the three still in good condition!" So they gave him the coat, and when he had switched it on, he was invisible and changed into a fly. Then he resumed his own form and said: "The coat is good, now I give the sword!" They said, "No, we do not give, if you said: All heads off but mine, our heads would be off, and you'd only with thine." But they gave it to him on condition that he should try it against a tree. This he did, and the sword cut the trunk of a tree as a straw. Then he wanted to have the boots, but they said, "No, we will not give away if you had attracted her and wish thyself at the top of the mountain, we should be left down here with nothing!" - "No," he said, "I do not want to do." So they gave him the boot. As he had all these things, he thought of nothing but his wife and child, and said so in front of himself: "Oh, I would be on the Golden Mountain," and he vanished before the eyes of the giants, and was so shared their heritage. When he was close to the castle, he heard shouts, violins and flutes, and people told him that his wife was celebrating her wedding with another. But he was angry and said, "False woman, she betrayed and deserted me when I was asleep." So he put on his coat and unseen by all went into the castle. When he entered the hall, a large blackboard was there occupied with delicious food, and ate and drank and joked guests. but they sat was in the middle, in magnificent clothes on a royal chair and the crown on the head. He stood behind her and no one saw him. If they put a piece of meat on a plate, he took it away and ate it; and when she poured out a glass of wine, he took it away and drank it they gave her always, and yet she never got anything, for plate and glass disappeared immediately. Then she became dismayed and ashamed she got up and went to her room and cried, but he went after her. She said, "Has the devil, above me and my deliverer never come?" "Never Came your Redeemer He is you I have earned over you cheat that about you?!?" Then he struck her in the face and said, And he made himself visible, went into the hall and cried, "The wedding is off, the true king has come!" The kings, princes, and councilors who were gathered there, mocked and derided him. but he gave them, and said: "Do you want out or not?" "All off but mine does not Kopf": because they want to catch him and pressed upon him, but he drew his sword and said, Since all heads rolled to the ground, and he alone was master, and once more King of the Golden Mountain.
The king's son who feared nothing	1151	590	German	There was once a king's son, who was no more go home to his father's house, and because he had no fear of anything, he thought 'I want out into the world, because I will find time not long, and I'll whimsical things see enough. ' So he took leave of his parents and went away, all the time, from morning till night, and it was the same to him where also led him the way. It came to pass that he came to a big house, and because he was so tired he sat down by the door and rested. And when he so forth his eyes and let fro, he saw on the court of the Giant's work are: those were a couple of enormous balls, and bowling, as big as a man. After a while he took a fancy to the cone up and then rolled the balls at them, screamed and cried when the cone fell, and was in good spirits. The giant heard the noise, stuck his head out the window and saw a man who was no bigger than others, and yet played with his bowling. 'Worms,' he cried, 'what are you playing with my balls? Who gave you the strength to do it? ' The king's son looked up, saw the giant, and said, 'O you block, you mean, you had only strong arms? I can do everything I would like. ' The giant came down and the bowling looked very surprised and said, 'Son of man, if you're the kind, go and bring me an apple from the tree of life.' 'What do you want with that?' said the prince. 'I do not want the apple for me, "answered the giant," but I have a bride who wishes for it; I am far in the world was passing through and can not find the tree. ' 'I wants to find him,' said the prince, 'and I do not know what is to prevent me from getting the apple.' The giant said, "do you think that would be so easy? The garden, which the tree stands is surrounded by an iron railing, and in front of the railing lie wild beasts, one beside the other, and they keep watch and let no man go in. ' 'Do be sure to let,' said the prince. 'Yes, you will reach well into the garden and see the apple hanging on the tree, so he's not your: it depends a ring in front of it, by the need of putting your hand when it reach the apple and break it wants, and the is still not succeeded. ' 'I already succeed hell, "said the Königssohn.Da he took leave of the giant went away over hill and dale, through fields and woods, until he finally found the miracle garden. The animals were all around, but they had their heads down and slept. They did not awake when he came, but he converted them away, climbed the fence, and got safely into the garden. There stood midway of the tree of life, and the red apples were shining upon the. He climbed up the trunk into the air, and as he was about to reach for an apple, he saw a ring hanging before it, but he put his hand effortlessly through and broke the apple. The ring closed tightly on his arm, and he felt a tremendous power came at a time through his veins. When he came down again with the apple from the tree, he would not climb over the fence, but summed up the big gate and needed only once to shake it, it jumped up with a crash. And he went out, and the lion which had been lying in front of it, was awake and sprang after him, not in rage and fierceness, but following him humbly as its Herrn.Der prince the giant brought the promised apple, saying look ' you, I have brought it without difficulty. ' The giant was glad that his desire had been so soon satisfied, hastened to his bride and gave her the apple they had demanded. It was a beautiful and wise maiden, and as she did not see the ring on his arm, she said, "I do not think so, that you have brought the apple, until I see the ring on your arm. ' The giant said, 'I need to just go home and fetch it, "and said it would take away a light, the weak people by force what he would not give willingly. He therefore demanded the ring from him, but the prince refused, 'Where the apple is, must also be the ring, "said the giant,' you do not give it voluntarily, you need to me about kämpfen.'Sie wrestled long time together, but the giant could not harm the king's son, to the magical power of the ring strengthened, nothing. Since the giant thought of a ruse, saying, "I have got warm with fighting, and you too, we want to bathe in the river, and cool ourselves before we begin again. ' The king's son, who knew nothing of falsehood, went with him to the water, pulled off with his clothes the ring also from his arm and jumped into the river. Immediately the giant grabbed the ring and ran with it on, but the lion, who had noticed the theft, pursued the giant, tore the ring from his hand and brought it back to his master. Then the giant placed himself behind an oak tree, and was employed as the king's son to put on his clothes again, surprised him, and put both his eyes aus.Nun stood the poor prince who was blind and knew not how to help. Since the giant came back, took him by the hand like someone who wanted to guide him, and led him to the top of a high rock. Then he left him standing, and thought a few steps further, he plunges dead, and I can take him the ring. ' But the faithful lion had not deserted its master, it held fast by the clothes, and drew him gradually back again. When the giant came and wanted to rob the dead man, he saw that his cunning had been in vain. 'Is such a weak man not to spoil!' said he angrily to himself, took the king's son and led him on a different path again to the precipice: but the lion which saw his evil design, his Lord helped out of danger here. When she came close to the edge, the giant let the hand of the blind drive and wanted only to leave him, but the lion joined the giant that he fell down and smashed on the floor fiel.Das drew its master back from the precipice faithful animal back and guided him to a tree where a clear stream flowed. The king's son sat down there, but the lion lay down, and sprinkled with his paw the water in his face. Hardly had a few droplets wet the eye sockets, he was able to see something, and noticed a little bird flying quite close by, but met at a tree trunk: this, it let himself into the water down and bathed in it, and then it soared stroked without poking through the trees down, as if it had recovered its sight. Since the king's son recognized a sign from God and stooped down to the water and washed and bathed his face. And when he straightened up, he had his eyes as bright and pure as they have never been waren.Der king's son thanked God for the great grace and with his lion onwards through the world. Now it came to pass that he came to a castle which was enchanted. In the gateway stood a maiden of beautiful form and fine face, but she was all black. They spoke to him and said, "Ah, you could deliver me from the evil spell which is thrown over me. ' 'What should I do?' said the prince. The maiden answered, "three nights you have to bring in the great hall of this enchanted castle, but it should have no fear in your heart. When you on the worst torment and you keep it off without giving a sound from you, I shall be released; the life they dare not take. ' Since the prince said 'I am not afraid, I will try it with God's help.' So he went gaily into the castle, and when it was dark, he sat down in the large hall and waited. But it was quiet until midnight, suddenly caught a big noise, and from every corner came little devils. They acted as if they did not see him in the middle sat in the room, lighted a fire, and began to play. When one of them lost, he said, "it is not right, some one is here who does not belong to us, it is his fault that I lose. ' 'Wait, I'm coming, you behind the stove,' said another. The screaming became still greater, so that no one without terror could listen. The prince remained calm sitting and was not afraid but at last the devils jumped up from the ground and fell on him, and there were so many that he could not help her. They dragged him around the floor, pinched, stabbed, beat and tortured him, but he gave no sound. Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted that he could hardly move his limbs, but when day dawned, there came the black virgin in him. She carried in her hand a little bottle wherein water was of life so that they washed him, and immediately he felt all the pain disappeared and fresh strength came in his veins. She said, "one night you have held out successfully, but you two are imminent. ' Then she went away again, and going, he observed that her feet had become white. The following night the devils came and began their game anew They fell on the king's son, and beat him much more severely than the night before that his body covered with wounds was. But he bore all quietly, they had to leave him, and broke as the dawn, the Virgin appeared and healed him with the water of life. And when they went away, he saw with joy that she had already become white to the tips of his fingers. Now he only had to endure one night, but it was the worst. The devilish came back: 'Are you still there?' they shouted, 'You shall be tormented that you breath stops.' They stabbed and beat him, threw him back and forth, pulling him by the arms and legs, as if to tear him, but he tolerated everything and was no sound. At last the devils vanished, but he lay passed out and did not move: he could not raise his eyes to see the virgin who came in and bathed him with the water of life and watered. But suddenly he was freed from all pain, and felt fresh and healthy as if he had awakened from a sleep, and when he opened his eyes, he saw her standing next to the Virgin, which was snow white and fair as day. 'Get up,' she said, "and swing your sword three times over the stairs, so everything is redeemed. ' And did he that, there was the whole castle freed from Z auber, and the maiden was a rich king's daughter. The servants came and said, in the great hall, the board would be prepared and applied food. As they sat down, ate and drank together, and in the evening was celebrated the wedding in great joy.
Donkey Cabbages	1159	567	German	There was once a young huntsman who went into the forest to lie in wait. He had a fresh and cheerful heart, and so was he, and whistled on the sheet, was an old ugly woman, who spoke to him and said, "Good day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry and happy, but I suffer from hunger and thirst but, I give alms. ' Since the hunter took the poor mother, he reached into his pocket and handed her what he could afford. Now he wanted to continue, but the old woman stopped him and spoke hear ', dear huntsman, what I tell you, for your good heart I will give you a gift: go just getting your way, in a short while you will to a tree come to sit nine birds that have a coat in the claws and plucking at it. Since you put on thy rifle and shoot the midst of them: the coat they will probably let you fall, but also one will be taken and will drop down dead from the birds. Away the cloak with you, it is a wishing-cloak when you throw it around her shoulders, you need only you to a place to be desired, and the moment you are there. From the dead bird's heart take out and swallow it whole, then you will each and every morning when you get up a gold piece under your pillow finden.'Der Hunter thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself, 'beautiful things they promised me has, if only it also all einträfe like that. ' But as he was about gone a hundred steps, he heard above him in the branches of a screaming and twittering that he aufschauete: he saw a bunch of birds that tore with their beaks and feet a cloth around, shouted, tugging and fighting, as if each wanted have alone. saying 'Well,' the hunter, 'that is whimsical, it is indeed just as the old woman said, "and took the rifle from his shoulder, put on and did his shot straight into that the feathers flew. The birds instantly took with great cries to escape, but one fell down dead, and the shell also fell down. As did the hunter, as was made to feel it the old, cut on the bird, sought the heart, swallowed it and took the cloak of Haus.Am next morning when he woke up, he remembered the promise, and he wanted to see whether they would be received. But when he lifted his pillow in the air as he shone the coin counter, and the next morning he found one, and so on, every time he got up. He gathered together a heap of gold, but finally he thought 'what good is all my gold if I stay at home? I will draw and me in the world umsehen.'Da he took leave of his parents, his huntsman pouch and gun and went out into the world. It happened that one day he came through a thick forest, and when that was over, lay in the plain before him a handsome castle. it in a window was an old woman with a beautiful maiden, looking out. but the old woman was a witch and said, comes to the girls' where one out of the forest, who has a wonderful treasure in his body, we must filch it, my dear daughter us is more suitable than him. He has a bird's heart about him, lies every morning a piece of gold under his pillow. ' She tells her how it would procure it, and would like them to play it, and at last they threatened him and said with angry eyes 'and if you do not obey me, you're unhappy.' So when approached the hunter, he saw the girl and said to himself, 'I have traveled about for so long, I want to rest and enter that beautiful castle once, money I got completely, yes.' Actually, however, was the cause that he cast an eye on the beautiful picture hatte.Er entered the house and was kindly received and polite hosts. Before long, he was so in love with the young witch that he thought of nothing but more and saw only her eyes, and what they wanted, he did like. Then the old woman said, "Now we have the bird's heart have, he will not feel anything when it lacks. ' She prepared a drink, and when it was ready, she did it in a cup and gave it to the girl, who had him rich to the hunter. Pronounced it 'now, my dearest, drink to me.' Then he took the cup, and when he had swallowed the potion, he broke the heart of the bird from the body. The girl had to take it away secretly and then swallow it herself, because the old man wanted to have it. From now on he found no more gold under his pillow, but it was the girl under the pillow, where it took the old woman every morning, but he was so in love and infatuated that he thought of nothing else than the with the girl time to vertreiben.Da said the old witch 'the bird's heart we have, we have the desire but also coat relieve him.' The girl replied, "We will let him, he has yet lost his wealth. ' The old woman was angry and said, "Such a mantle is a wonderful thing that is rarely found in the world that you want and I'll take it. ' She gave the girl, and said that if she did not obey, it should go ill with him. So she did the behest of the ancients, placed herself at the window and looked out into the wide area, as it would be very sad. Asked the hunter 'why are you standing so sad ?,' Oh, my dear, "was her answer," over yonder lies the Garnet Mountain, where the precious stones grow. I wear so great desire that when I think of it, I feel quite sad, but who can pick them up! Only the birds that fly, get there, never a man. ' 'Do you have anything else to complain, "said the hunter,' the sorrow I will soon remove from the heart. ' He took her under his mantle, wished himself on the Garnet Mountain, and at the moment they were sitting on it together. Since Precious stones were glistening from all sides that it was a pleasure to look at, and they gathered the finest and most precious pieces together. Now, however, she had caused the old woman through her witchcraft that the hunter's eyes were heavy. He spoke to the girl 'We will sit down and rest awhile, I'm so tired that I can not get on their feet me.' As they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and fell asleep. When he was asleep, she unfastened the cloak from his shoulders and hung it to yourself to, read the grenades and stones, and but the huntsman wished herself back Haus.Als his sleep had ausgetan and woke up, he saw that his dearest had him betrayed and left on the wild mountain alone. 'Oh,' he said, 'what treachery so great in the world!' sitting there in sorrow and heartache and did not know what to do. But the mountain belonged wild and monstrous giants who dwelt thereon and lived their essence, and he sat not long before he saw striding three. As he lay down, as if he had sunk into a deep sleep. Now the giants came up, and the first pushed him with his foot and said, "What is there for an earthworm and beholdeth himself inwardly? ' The second said, 'kicks him dead.' But the third said contemptuously 'that would be worth the effort! let's just live it, here he can not stay, and when he climbs higher on the mountain top so it grab the clouds and carry him away. ' Under this conversation they passed, but the hunters had noticed on her words, and once they were gone, he rose and climbed the mountain top up. When he had sat there a while, so a cloud floated towards, seized him, carried him away and took some time on heaven, they fell and settled on a large, round walled herb garden down, so he that between cabbages and vegetables gently on the ground kam.Da saw the hunter around and said, "if only I had something to eat, I am so hungry, and it gets difficult for the next round; but here I see neither apples nor pears, nor any fruit, nothing anywhere but cabbages. ' Finally, he thought, "At a pinch I can eat from the salad, which tastes not particularly, but is me refresh you. ' So he chose a beautiful head and ass about it, but hardly had he swallowed a few bites, so he felt so strange, and he felt quite changed. It grew his four legs, a thick head and two long ears, and he saw with horror that he was transformed into a donkey. But because he felt it still very hungry and juicy leaves were suitable to his present nature, he ate with great avidity all the time. Finally he came to a different kind of salad, but no sooner had he swallowed it, he again felt a change, and returned to his human form zurück.Nun hunters to put down and slept off his fatigue. When he awoke the next morning, he broke a head of the bad and one of the good salad, and thought, 'that I should help my own again and punish treachery.' Then he took the cabbages with him, climbed over the wall and went to look for the castle of his beloved. When he was wandering around a few days, he happily found it again. Since he dyed his face that he did not recognize his own mother, went to the palace and begged for shelter. 'I'm so tired,' he said, 'and can not continue.' Asked the witch 'compatriot, who are you and what is your business?' He answered, "I am a messenger of the king, and was sent to seek the most delicious salad which grows under the sun. I also was lucky enough to find it, and carry it with me, but the sun's heat is so intense that threatens to wither the tender herb and I do not know if I werde.'Als further bring the old from the delicious salad heard she longed, and said, "dear countryman, let me but try this wonderful salad. ' 'Why not?' he replied, 'I have brought two heads and you want to give one,' made his bag and handed her the bad. The witch suspected nothing amiss, and her mouth watered so for this new dish that she herself went into the kitchen and prepared. When it was done, she could not wait until it was on the table, but they immediately took a few leaves and put them in his mouth, but no sooner had they swallowed, including the human form was lost, and she ran as a ass down into the courtyard. Now the maid came into the kitchen, saw the salad standing there ready and wanted to carry it, but on the way they attacked, according to ancient custom, the desire to try, and she ate a few leaves. Instantly the magic power showed, and she also became an ass and ran out to the old woman, and the bowl of salad fell to the ground. came the messenger sat in time to the beautiful girl, and when no one with the salad, and it too was lusting after that, it's not, I know where the salad is. "said The huntsman thought, "The salad have already taken effect, 'and said,' to the kitchen I will go and ask me. ' As he went down, he saw running around the two donkeys in the yard, but the salad was on the earth. 'All right,' he said, 'the two have taken their portion,' and picked up the other leaves, put them on the bowl and brought them to the girl. "I bring you the delicate food myself, 'he said,' so you do not need to wait any longer. ' Since ass they could and it was once like the other human form deprived and ran as a donkey in the Hof.Nachdem the hunter had washed his face, so that the transformed ones him realize he went down into the courtyard and said 'now shall receive the reward of your treachery to her. ' He tied them all three to a rope and drove it away until he came to a mill. He knocked on the window, the miller put his head out and asked what would be his desire. 'I have three evil beasts,' he replied, 'I do not like to keep any longer. Will you take them with you, feed and provide storage, and hold them, as I you say, then I will pay what you demand. ' The miller 'why not? how can I keep them though? ' Since the hunter to the old donkey said, and that was the witch, he should be eating three times a day blows and once; the younger one, which was the maid, one beating and three meals; and the youngest, which was the maiden, no beatings and fed three times daily; because he could not but have the heart that the girl should be beaten. Then he went back to the castle, and what he needed, he found everything darin.Nach a few days ago came the miller and said he would have to report that the old ass which had received three beatings and eat only once, had died. 'The other two,' he added, 'are not dead, and are fed three times, but they are so sad that it can not last much longer.' Since the hunter pity, let go of the anger and said to the miller to drive them back again. And as they came, he gave them to eat of the good salad that they became human again. As the beautiful girl fell in front of him on his knees and said, "Ah, my dear, I forgive what I done evil to you, my mother drove me to it; it happened against my will, because I have loved you from my heart. Your Wish coat hanging in a closet, and for the bird heart I will take a vomiting potion. ' Since he thought otherwise, and said, "Keep it, it's all the same, for I will take you to be my true wife. ' And there was held wedding, and they lived happily together until her death.
The dearest Roland	540	1119	German	There was once a woman who had a right witch, and had two daughters, one ugly and wicked, whom she loved because she was her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, hated her, because she was her stepdaughter. at one time the stepdaughter had a beautiful apron that liked the others, so they envy that was and told her mother she wanted and would have the skirt. "Be still, my child," the old woman said, "you shall have it. Your stepsister has long deserved death, last night when she sleeps, so come and cut off her head off. Worry just want you back come to lie in bed, and push her right vornen go. "to the poor girl had it happen if it's not just stood in a corner and everything would have listened to. It could not came out the door, and when bed all day, it had into bed first so she could lie down behind; But when she was asleep, because it stepdaughter pushed her back and took the place back on the wall. At night, the old man sneaked in her right hand she held an ax, with the left she felt only whether someone was lying outside, and then she took the ax with both hands, slash and cut her own child came from his head. When she was gone, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, she said to him. "Listen, dearest Roland, we must flee in a hurry, the stepmother wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child Come the day, and she sees what she has done, we are lost. "" But I advise you, "said Roland," to bring away her wand, otherwise we can not save us if they nachsetzt us and persecuted. " The girl fetched the magic wand, and she took the dead head and trickled three drops of blood on the ground, one by the bed, one in the kitchen and on the stairs. Then it ran with his loved ones fort.Als now the morning the old witch got up, she called her daughter, and wanted to give her the apron, but she did not. Then she cried, "Where are you?" "Well, here on the steps, sweeping!" Answered one of the drops. The old woman went out, but no one saw on the stairs, and cried again, "Where are you?" "Well, here in the kitchen, warming myself," the second drop of blood cried. She went into the kitchen, but they found no one. Then she cried again, "Where are you?" "Oh, here in bed, I sleep," cried the third drop of blood. They went into the room to the bed. What she saw there? Her own child who swam in his blood, and she got himself head cut hatte.Die witch in anger, rushed to the window, and she could see far into the world, she saw her stepdaughter hurrying with her sweetheart Roland , "That you will not help," she said, "if you get ever so far away, you not escape me." She pulled her boots on, which took her with every step an hour, and it was not long before she had overtaken them. But the girl, when she saw the old woman striding, transformed with the magic wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself who swam in a duck in the middle of the lake. The witch stood on the shore, threw bread chunks and made every effort to entice the duck; but the duck would not be decoyed, and the old woman had to evening without having achieved anything again umkehren.Darauf took the girl with her dear Roland again their natural shapes, and they walked all night until daybreak. Since the girl and her dear Roland turned into a beautiful flower that grew in a hedge of thorns in the middle of a violin player. It was not long before the witch came striding up, and said to the musician, "Dear musician, may I interrupt the beautiful flower well?" - "0 yes," he replied, "I want to play it." Now when she tried to break to the hedge crawled and the flower, because she knew well who was the flower, he began to play, and whether she liked it or not, they had to dance, because it was a magic dance. The faster he played, the more powerful jumps had to make, and the thorns tore her clothes off, she stood bloody and sore, and he did not stop, she had to dance until they are dead blieb.Als she redeemed were, Roland said, "Now I will go to my father and for the wedding." - "I will remain meanwhile here," said the girl, "and wait for you, and no one recognizes me, I will change myself into a red stone." So away went Roland, and the girl stood as a red stone on the field, and waited for his Liebsten.Als but Roland came home, he got another one that brought it as meaning that he forgot the girl in the pitfalls. The poor girl waited a long time, but when he finally did not come back, so they were sad and turned into a flower, thinking, "It will probably therefore going one and me umtreten." And it came to pass that a shepherd on the fields tending his sheep and saw the flower, and because she was so beautiful, so he broke it off, they took with them, and put them in his box. By the time everything went wonderfully well in the shepherd's home. When he got up in the morning, all the work was already done: the room was swept, tables and benches rubbed, made a fire on the stove and carried the water; and noon when he came home, the table was set and applied a good meal. He could not understand how it happened, because he never saw a man in his house, and there was also no one in the small hut hid. The good waiting liked him, of course, but I lost him but was afraid, so he went to a wise woman and asked her for advice. The wise woman said: "It" there is magic in it Give even know if something stirs in the morning early in the morning eight in the room, and if you see something, it may be what it wants, throw fast a white cloth over it, then the spell is inhibited. "The shepherd did as she had said, and broke the next morning, just as the day he saw the chest open and the flower herauskam.Schnell he sprang forward and threw a white cloth over it. and immediately, was the change over, and a beautiful girl standing before him, the well-known to him that it would have been the flower and its budget would have been worried. it told him his fate, and because he liked it, he asked if it was going to marry him, but she answered "no," because it but it promised that it will not go away, but it henceforth households wollte.Nun approached the time that Roland wedding should keep: wanted his sweetheart Roland, although he had left it, but remain faithful to was traditionally published in the country that all Mädche n should be present, and sing in honor of the couple. The faithful girl when she heard it was so sad that it thought that the heart would shatter him, and did not want to go, but the others came and fetched her. but when the series was that it was going to sing, it stepped back until it was the only one left, because it could not anders.Aber as soon as her song, and he came to Roland's ears, he jumped up and shouted: "the voice I know, this is the true bride, another will I have." All he had forgotten and had vanished from his mind, that was suddenly home to him in his heart. And the faithful maiden held wedding with her sweetheart Roland, her sorrow came to an end and her joy began.
The Lion and the Mouse	9515	75	German	A mouse ran across a sleeping lion. The lion woke up and grabbed it with his huge paws. "Forgive me," the little mouse, "pleaded my carelessness, and grant me my life, I will be thy eternal grateful. I have you do not want to interfere. "Magnanimous he gave her the freedom and smiled to himself, as well a mouse will be grateful a lion. Shortly afterwards heard the little mouse in his Loche the terrible roar of a lion, was curious then, from where the sound came, and found her benefactor in a net caught. They immediately rushed hither and gnawed some nodes of the network, so that the lion could tear up the rest with his paws. So the little mouse repaid the proven him Großmut.Selbst insignificant people can sometimes benefits repay with interest, so treat even the lowliest not cocky.
The Lion and the Mouse	9048	75	German	A Lion asleep in his lair was awoken by a mouse that ran across his face. He lost his temper and grabbed it with his paw and was about to kill them. The frightened mouse begged pathetic that he spared their lives. "Please let me go," she cried, "and one day I'll pay you back your kindness." The idea that such an insignificant creature might be able ever to do something for him, the lion amused so much that he laughed aloud, and let them go in a good mood. But finally came the opportunity of the mouse. One day, the lion caught in a net, which had been strained for fun by some hunters, and heard the mouse recognized his anger growl and came running. To torches without long, she began to work and gnawed the ropes with its teeth, and freed the lion after a short time. "There!" said the Mouse, "You laughed at me when I promised it to pay you back. But now you see, even a Mouse can help a Lion"
The beetle, mouse, and the cricket	3392	559	German	While the wisdom of Sapia Liccarda of the prince and his wife was highly praised; far more, however, they praised Tolla, who had told the story so alive that everyone believed to be even present at all. now that Popa was now the next in line, they took heart and began: Dame Fortune is a headstrong woman and flees the wise, because as care more about the works of scholars to facts. It therefore goes much rather the ignorant and scapegraces to, and to be honored by the common people, she shares her goods among fools of, as you will see from the following story. There once lived a very rich country Vomaro man named Miccone, who had a son named Nardiello. This son now was the greatest simpleton, which one ever seen in the world, so that the poor father about it felt very unhappy and did not know in what way he should get him something sensible, something that hand or foot had to do; because if Nardiello went to the restaurant with Andren funny brothers to make up with them there a good day, he was always teased by them to the worst; when he went to dissolute wenches, he always got the worst meat and had it on top of that pay over the tax, and if, they played about who should foot the bill so cheated, outwitted and you overreached him such that he soon one way or another, had spent just over half of his father's assets. Here now About Miccone always got a hell of noise by shouting, threatening and used to say: "What's come of it, you Liederjan? Do not you see that my belongings already goes on tilt? Let it really is time those damn inns in cuckoo where you always begin with evil and ends with even worse, these caves that are a migraine for the head, a dropsy for the throat and diarrhea on the wallet; let it really is time the damn game that puts life in danger belongings hinbringt, joys destroyed increasingly suffering where by dice and cards waiting for you only poverty and misery and it is so thin by war, and anger like a spindle; and yet let them finally starting to run after the dissolute Menschern, these figments of hell, this shameful, shameful breeding for which you're wasting blood and treasure; on rotten meat you feel now being and then have to gnaw a bone later; because they do not appreciate Metzen bring evil upon thee not metzen- but the bushel. Avoid therefore the opportunity to pull yourself off from the truck; because if the cause 'is removed - as someone once said - the effect is removed. Now take these hundred ducats, so go to the cattle market to Salerno and buy for nothing but calves, who will give us then after three or four years louder oxen; these oxen we begin then to order as much as possible field; the fields are appointed, we take a grain trade, and may turn even a famine, then we need to measure the Taler bushel. At the very least I'll buy you then a title could be liable of any on the land friend, and then you're as much a Dubbed like so many others. Therefore watch out, my dear son, leave nothing unnoticed, not negligible; because everything is hard. "-" Let you take me only worry, "said Nardiello," for I have made my bill after all the rules! "-" That's nice, "said the father and handed him then the hundred ducats , That now at once made herself on the way to the fair, had not yet arrived at the waters of the Sarno, that beautiful river, which the old family of Sarnelli gives her name as he, a beautiful elm grove next to a rock, with the help a constant bloodletting of fresh water had around dressed in ivy, saw a fairy who was playing with a dung beetle, which buzzed so graceful that it echoed like a guitar and a Spaniard would have thought it quite deliciously, Ungemeines. When Nardiello saw this, he remained there as if bewitched are to listen, and said that he would give an eye about if he had such an art-rich animal, to which the fairy replied that if he paid her a hundred ducats, they him would give the beetle. "It meets quite magnificently," said Nardiello, "for I have just as many foxes in your pocket." And saying this, he gave her the hundred ducats in your lap, put the beetles in a little box and hurried then with beaming eyes to the father, to whom he has called out from a distance, "now you shall see, father, if I have porridge in the head and knows what to do, how things; . Because without me first herumzuplagen at the show, I met half way my luck and bought this gem for a hundred ducats "heard as the father of this speech, and saw the little box, he believed certainly that Nardiello any diamond jewelery had bought; no sooner had he but opened the box and sees the Beetle, the anger was about his booby of son and the pain of his loss to bellows that puffed him like a toad, such that Nardiello, who tell him about the characteristics of the beetle wanted to could get a word not by the father cried constantly, "be quiet, boy, do not open my mouth, you'll stuff's foot, holding the edge, not muckse, you sheep, you horse, you ass; equal you go and give the beetle back again, and here you have a hundred ducats, but you buy louder calves and come again soon. Let yourself but not blinded by the devil, because otherwise I will break in half in the body every rib. "Nardiello now took the money, went back on the road and found in the same place as before another fairy who dallied with a mouse, made that the best dance tours that you ever saw. Nardiello stood for a while with his mouth open and petrified by seeing the skill and agility that turns, jumps and capers of the little animal until he finally asked the fairy if she wants to sell it well, because he wanted her hundred ducats for it give. The fairy then went to the bid, took the foxes and gave him the mouse, with which Nardiello returned home. When the poor father the magnificent department became aware that he behaved like nonsensical and thrashing about like a protocols engined horse so that it Nardiello, would not be just a neighbor at the spectacle been present, surely the hump would thrashed with a vengeance. Finally, however, he was the father after he somewhat mollified, nor even a hundred ducats and said to him: "Look before that you do not again commit such a folly; because for the third time you come not as inexpensive purchase it. So go to Salerno and buy the calves; because, in the soul of my parents, if you now back doing such Bock prank, then woe to the mother who bore you! "Nardiello crept bowed head of it, and again Touching on the way to Salerno in the same place, he found another Fee, the listening to the vocals of a cricket with the greatest delight, the sounded so on sweet manner that the listening ends while sinking into a sweet slumber. Hardly Nardiello heard this new type Nightingale, as it also took the desire to buy what really succeeded for a hundred ducats, and after he put the animals in a cage made of pumpkin and wooden sticks which, however, he returned to his father in this third donkey String lost patience and, a club poignant, Nardiello so powerful durchwalkte how to think only some. Once, however Nardiello escaped the hands of his father, he took the three animals all left the country and made his way to Lombardy. There is now a gentleman named Cenzone, who had an only daughter, welcomed the Milla and was biased due to an illness of such great sadness that they are in a period of seven years and did not even have to laugh to see and therefore the father was alive at the time of thousandfold futile means and after everything set possible, who issued a public notice that whoever could move his daughter laugh, she should get a wife. "Watch out, my friend, because if you fail, it will cost your cap and: as Nardiello heard hereof, he wanted to try his luck, therefore stepped forward Cenzone and offered to bring his daughter laugh, whereupon he replied what is in it. "-" May it cost what it wants, "said Nardiello," and arise from what may, I will try, "the king now was the daughter come and sit down under a canopy, followed. moved Nardiello the three creatures out of their container and this play on so graceful and playful manner, dancing and singing began, that Milla about to laugh, but the Prince began in his heart to cry because he was forced by virtue of his invitation to give a gem of a woman dregs of man. Since he could not break, however his word, he said to Nardiello: "I give you my daughter in marriage and my kingdom as dowry, but on condition that, if you have not consummated the marriage within three days, I ask you the lion let reproach. "-" I'm completely without fear, "said Nardiello," because until then I wanted to make not only the marriage of your daughter, but a lot of other things. "-" only gently, "replied the other," said . is easier than done, "and when the evening of the wedding feast came and the sun as a thief, was taken to prison in the West with a cap over his face, the couple went to bed; the king had but let the Nardiello behind cunningly give a nightcap, so that this all night did nothing but snore; also fared's him in the second and third night, so the king finally cast him into the den of lions left. When Nardiello looked that way in the greatest danger, he opened the container in which he had the animals, and said, "Since I am now even my evil fate has drawn by a fatal attraction in this sad situation and I you, beautiful you little animal, can leave nothing, yet I will at least release you, so you can go wherever it seems good to you. "as soon as the animals found themselves such formative freely set, they began so funny to jump and jump, that the lions stood petrified while the mouse to Nardiello, who was already near death with fear, that said, "Take heart, friend; if you give us the freedom we are still serve you faithfully from now on than ever because you tell us constantly fed with so much care, maintained with so much attention and have recently been a sign so much love by our release us. Was convinced that whoever does good, receives good, and how it echoes in the forest, it echoes out again; because we are clever and you want to show if we have power and authority enough; therefore we only follow after, thou shalt surely freed from this danger. "Nardiello so went after them, and the mouse quickly made such a big hole that a man could crawl through whose Nardiello by means such as on a circuit from the pit rose and arrived in safety, after which the animals took him to a hut and told him to tell them what he wanted humanly; for they would do whatever he wanted. "My desire would be," said Nardiello, 'that if the king's daughter has given to another man, her erweiset me a favor, not to let him make his marriage; . Otherwise he would also carry out a death sentence "-" That's nothing, and light as a feather, "replied the little animals," be of good cheer and expect us here; because we will get you soon in a better position, "The animals went then to the court and found that the king had married his daughter to a noble English and the barrel should be tapped just this evening. Therefore, they crept unnoticed into the bridal chamber and waited until evening, the moon came out to the hen with the chicks to feed on dew, and walked the couple to bed. but had since taken the groom too much charge and stuffed their bellies too full, so he was barely crawled into bed, when he already dead asleep. Therefore, once the beetle heard him snore, slipped it quietly ascended the bedstead and crawled, reached under the blanket, the groom quickly in the butt where he so served as a suppository that he ran through the barrel and you could say Petrarca: "the love gentle stream now he elicits." as the bride bubbling of the fountain perceived "the air, the smell, the freshness and shadows," so she woke her husband, who hardly noticed with what scents he his idol was incensed when he thought to burst with vexation and die of shame. however, he got up, washed clean over with lye and sent for the doctors who reported the excess of the wedding feast as the cause of the accident gehabten. The following evening he consulted with his valets anew, and all were of the opinion that he should put on thick towels, to forestall a new accident, what advice he followed, and then went to bed. Then he went back to sleep again this time and now the beetle wanted to turn him play the same trick, he found the entrance blocked up, so that he returned sullenly to his companions and they told how the bridegroom ramparts of napkins, bulwarks of diapers and jumps did underpants. When the mouse heard this, they said to him. "Come with me, and you shall see if I am a good leaf miners and understand digging" And come to the spot, she began a hole other just above the to gnaw through which the dung beetle then crept and the groom was a new enema, such that he emanated a sea of ​​liquid topaz and the scents of Arabia permeated the whole palace. Here About once awoke the bride who almost lost his breath and his nose zuhaltend, rushed in the lemon colored flood that had turned the sheets of snow-white Dutch linen in gelbmoirierten Venetian Taft in the room of her maid. The unfortunate groom but again called his valet and began a long lament about his misfortune that his inner life should have such an unreliable seat, which his servant him as best they could, comforted, however, advised him to watch more closely on the third night, where they told him the story of the suffering from bloating sick and the quick-witted doctor; of which the former once a Fist escaped what the doctor said to scholarly way "Sanitatibus" than that but did follow a second, saying that: "Ventositatibus"; by now but the third rang, the doctor shouted top of his voice: "Asinitatibus". Therefore, when the first mosaic work he had done in her wedding bed, overeating and the second the upset stomach that causes him a diarrhea, attributed, one would write the third but a habitual Bettmacherei and him ignominiously driven away. "Have no fear," said the groom, "for tonight, costly 'what it wants, I have decided to take care and not to let myself be overcome by sleep; but we also want to think about how we need to start it to plug the main channel, so you can not say of me, 'Three times he fell and was the third time changed,' "This appointment as did the bridegroom, who is now room and bed. had the following evening, his people come and discussed with them how he could barricade the back door, so they do not again play him such a bad prank; because what would concern staying awake, so it should not euthanize all sleeping potions in the world. but it was among his servants one who likes dealt with pyrotechnics, and since now everyone likes to talk about his craft, he advised the groom to make a wooden stoppers as you need it in the firecrackers. This proposal was immediately generally approved, and after they had installed the plug properly so that he sat firmly, the groom went to bed, but without him, destroy the beautiful invention for fear that he might at any movement to touch the bride shut or even the eyes ventured so he would be ready at every call of his body. So when the beetle groom looked always stay awake, he said to his companions: "This time we are given, and our arts avail us nothing; because the groom does not sleep, and I can therefore plan my not perform. "-" Wait a bit, I will help you soon, "said the cricket and started so lovely to sing that the groom asleep about what the beetle once rushed to perform the services of an enema. As he found, however, closed the door and moved off, he hurried, confused and desperate to his companions and told them how things stands. therefore immediately the mouse whose desire was merely aimed Nardiello went to serve and satisfy, in the pantry, and sniffed by all vessels, she made a Mostrichfäßchen identify in which they eintunkte the tail; Then she ran into the bed of the bridegroom and smeared the poor Englishman nostrils properly one so that it began by sneezing on the most violent, out came the pins with all their might, and because he was facing the back of the Meet the same with such force in the chest shot that he almost killed her. When the loud cry of the bride once the king rushed, and as he asked her what she would, she replied that she had been thrown against the chest a petard. Although the king that they could in fact speak with a petard in the chest wondered very much about this absurd speech; But when he lifted the blankets and sheets, he found the yellow charge and Böllerpfropfen who had made the bride a capable callus, although it was not certain what inflicted her more damage if the smell of the powder or the impact of the ball. When the king saw this mess, and knew that the groom had now already made their capital liquid for the third time, he chased him right out of his land, and he believed that all these adversities would happen because of the proven poor Nardiello cruelty him so he began to lash out violently in the chest and uttered just been the lautesten lawsuits, when suddenly the beetle appeared before him and said to him, "Do not despair, o king, for Nardiello lives and deserves for his good qualities sake to become the son-in-your Majesty; . If you so is agreeable, that he may come, and we will send for him immediately "-" Do me the best welcome pleasing with this message, my dear little animal, "then said the king; "You have saved me from a sea of ​​sorrow because I felt in my heart because of the poor fellows angetanen wrong certainly great suffering. Let therefore come soon him; for I will embrace him as my son and give him immediately my daughter to wife. "As soon as it heard the beetle, so he hurried singing and jumping into the hut, who was in the Nardiello, told him all that had happened, and rushed with him in the royal palace, where he was received by the king with heartfelt hugs and received then the hand of the princess and he was transformed by magic suddenly into a handsome youth. He was then pick from the plow his father and lived with him from now on, cheerful and happy by feeding had experienced a thousand sufferings and tribulations that: If the need is greatest, is the Help 'at the next.
The nail	1757	2039	German	A merchant had done good business at the fair, selling wares, and lined his money bags with gold and silver. He now wanted to return home and be before nightfall to house. So he packed his trunk with the money on his horse and rode away. At noon he rested in a city; when he wanted to continue, he led the servant the ross before, but said, ". Mr. missing the left hind foot in the shoe of a nail" "Let missing him," said the merchant, "the six hours that I still have to make , the iron will probably hold I am in a hurry "afternoon, when he once more alighted and had to give the Ross bread, the servant came into the room and said,".. Lord, missing from your horse on the left hind foot, a horseshoe Should I take him to. lead blacksmith? "" Let's missing, "said the Lord," the few hours that are left will probably withstand the horse. I am in a hurry. "He rode away, but not the horse began to limp long time , It limped not long before it began to stumble, and it had not stumbled long before it fell down and broke his leg. The merchant had to let the horse do, unbuckle the trunk, take on the shoulder and go on foot to the house where he gained only late at night. "To make matters worse," he said to himself, "is to blame the cursed nail . " Haste makes waste.
The Raven	3406	516	German	If I had a hundred throats that never silent, a breast of ore and thousands lungs of steel, I still could not describe how much the history Paola liked when they heard how none of the good works which they have done, remained without reward was so that the dose of the requests, which Ciometella should tell theirs, had to be doubled, as some had lost by the still remaining narrators the courage to pull the car of the royal command; but since they could not have failed to obey, not to spoil the whole game, they finally began thus: It is indeed a true saying. 'Better blindly face as blind to mind "But so difficult to achieve that the mind only a few people hit the nail on the head; Rather, most of the dense forest of the events of this world only bad hunters who shoot nothing but goats, and who wants that to which he is aiming to take on genauesten a bead, just often shoots most are over; the natural consequence is then that all start walking blindly on all struggle in vain, all the judge wrong, all act silly, all go into the blind and a sensible remorse buy for the misfortune price of an absurd decision, as with the king of darkness Busch was the case, and you shall hear how it came to him when their calls me by the ringing of kindness into the meeting room of indulgence to me to begrudge a sloping hearing for a short time. Once there was a king of dark bush, called Millucio who loved hunting so passionate that he neglected the most essential business of government and of his house to the track of a hare and the flight to pursue a choke. but while he was responsible for this pleasure in such a way, chance led him one day in a forest that had formed from his earth rich and its trees a closely packed battle line so that they would not be broken by the sun's steeds. There the king was now on a beautiful marble one frischgetöteten ravens and saw splashed across the snow-white stone as he whose purple blood, he let out a deep sigh and said, "God, I could not get one as white and red woman as this stone is here whose hair and eyebrows were as black as the feathers of this raven? "In these thoughts, he immersed himself so much that he and a marble statue seemed for a while the stones resembled that applied for the love of another marble. While he now these unhappy thoughts sat in the head, and nourished it without ceasing to the supply of desire, he grew suddenly from toothpicks to beams, wood apple for Indian pumpkin, from poker to the blast furnace, up from dwarf to giant, he that nothing else thought as to the picture that was inserted into his heart like a stone in a mosaic. Wherever he turned her eyes, she showed him the form he about had in his chest, and all the rest Forgetting he had nothing else in mind than those marble, yes, he cut always so very fond of this stone that it recently even so thin looked like a knife edge, and the stone became his millstone zermahlte him all the joy of life, for porphyry on which the colors were crushed his days, for lighter, which put the match burns his soul on fire, the magnet it drew to a stone finally, who could never rest; so that his brother Jennariello who saw prowling so pale and disfigured him, finally said to him: "What's come over you, dear brother, that the pain in your eyes quartered and despair has under the faded flag of your face enlisted? What's happened to you? Say, your brother open your heart; the enclosed room in a carbon vapor numbs the persons located therein, the product placed on a rock powder scattered debris in it in the air; scabies, which does not break out and spoil the blood; the restrained in the body winds produce flatulence and colic; why do your mouth and tell me what you is; at least you can feel assured you that I would do its thousand lives to help you. then "Milluccio gave a mixture of words and sighs out, thanked him for his offer and said that he did not doubt his love, but that his would not overcome grief, as he herkäme from a stone on which he had sown his desires without hope of fruit; from a stone, not even from the he expects a fungus of satisfaction; from a Sisyphussteine, which he wore on the mountain of the plans and, having reached the summit on the, shoo, back down role. But finally, after many requests, he told his brother all the circumstances of his unhappy love with what Jennariello him as best he could, comforted and said to him that he should only be of good cheer and his sad thoughts do not give too much; because he was determined for his sake the world to go through until he found a woman who would be the image of that stone. Jennariello was then immediately a big ship equip it loaded with goods and sailed as a merchant dressed to Venice, the mirror of Italy, the rendezvous virtuous of all and clever people and general ledger of all wonders of art and nature, where he is a safe conduct to drive to the let ausfertigen Levante and then went to Cairo under sail. When he had arrived there and went to town, he saw a man wearing a beautiful hawks, bought the same Jennariello to bring him his brother because he was an avid hunter. Soon after he met another man with a magnificent horses he bought likewise, he followed in a tavern went to recover from the hardships of the voyage. The following morning, however, to the time when the army of the star stops by the fire of the Sun general tents on the celestial plane and retreats, began Jennariello on to wander the city by around cast his eyes like a hawk everywhere and all women, he encountered on his way, just looked to see if he might perceive on a face of flesh resemble a stone. While he was walking so without a definite goal anywhere, like a thief, the fear of the captors, has DA soon, soon turned there, he met a beggar a whole Hospital of patches and a whole junk Bude of rags on their backs had said to him: "What's the matter, brave man? You're so depressed. "-" What use to tell you, "replied Jennariello?. "It only lost toil and almost deaf ears would be preached." - "Only gently, friend," said the beggar, "if Darius a grooms what pushed him, had not told he would not become master of Persia , It is therefore no truth when dost Thou know a beggar what you have on your mind; . For there is no Spänchen so thin that it could not serve as a toothpick "When Jennariello the beggar heard them speak so intelligently and thoughtfully, he told him what had brought him to that country, said what the beggar:" Now look, my son, as one must despise no one; because if I'm just rubbish, I'm good enough, the field to fertilize your hopes. Give therefore probably careful what I tell you now. I will namely to solicit on the pretext of a charity, to the doorstep of the young and beautiful daughter of a magician insist, then do your eyes belong to, look at it, contemplate it, look at it, begucke them, they mis from head to toe ; for you will find that the image in her that wants your brother. "So saying, the beggar knocked on the door of a house not far away, opened what Liviella and gave him a piece of bread. As Jennariello saw them he believed a building after him to see his brother given model in front of him; He was therefore the beggar a rich alms and dismissed him, but he returned to the inn back, disguised himself there as a pedlar, by leading in two castes, the most glorious things of the world to himself, and then went his wares crying so long before the home Liviellas up and down until it inside cried, and all the beautiful frills, veils, ribbons, Flore, edges, points, scarves, collars, needles, potties and beautiful headdress, which he carried with him, took a close look , Having considered all his stuff over and over again, she told him that he should show her something beautiful nor any why Jennariello said, "In these two box noble virgin, I just trite and ordinary things. If your but the kindness have Wollet to come to my ship so I would be able to show you the rarest things in the world; . For there I have treasures that are worthy of a crowned head "Liviella that to the women nature to do no harm, had the corresponding degree of curiosity, replied to," Faith, if my father would not just from the house, so wanted I probably even go for a walk after your ship. "-" The sooner could you now get there, "said Jennariello," for it would you not grant perhaps this joy, and I promise to show you the glories that you get out of you about it will; Collars and earrings, boxes, cleaning tables and pasteboard, in a word, things that you shall beat their hands in amazement. "And when Liviella these beautiful things heard list them all, she called a neighbor, so they go with her, and went to the Ships. But no sooner had boarded it, so let Jennariello while chained held her by the sight of the many glories, which he brought, raise anchor and span the sails, so that they perceived before Liviella the eyes of the goods away and that they had left the shore, there were already far out at sea. hardly Liviella whom you played string was finally aware, they began to play Ariosto Olympia in wrong sense; because while those had complained about the fact that she was found abandoned on a rock, Liviella whined about leaving the rocks of the shore. But when Jennariello told her who he was, where he lead them, how lucky she was expecting and it is also the beauty, magnificent properties and virtues Milluccios but particularly described the love with which he would receive, he brought it finally time that she calmed down, and even begged the wind, they establish the full picture of the outline, the Jennariello marked her as soon as possible to see. By now weiterschifften so happy, suddenly caught the waves under the ship to murmur, so that, although they initially only very quietly talking, the skipper, who well understood this kind of language, exclaimed: "Hello, everyone to its place; because it is approaching a storm, in which our God be merciful may. "No sooner were these words spoken, they were confirmed even by the whistle of the wind, and at the same moment the sky with clouds was covered, and the sea began to go hollow. Now that the waves, knowing full of curiosity, what did not concern her, uncharged came on deck, they drew the with a tub in a tub, that they chased by a pump out, and while by the sailors because it around own thing acted, the one on the wheel, the other on the sail, the third stayed on the ropes, Jennariello ascended to the masthead to umherzuspähen with a telescope if he might discover the country where they could find refuge. When he was about to traverse a distance of fifty miles with two spans periscope, he suddenly saw a pair of doves cause fly which sat down on a sailing rod, and then the man said: "jerk, jerk," and the female asked him: " What's the matter, dear man, that you complain so? "-" poor Prince, "said the pigeon," has bought a hawk who barely reached his brother's hands, he will scratch his eyes, but brächt 'he . not reun him because it did it ', or would he leihn him warning, he would for Marmelstein "then called that again," jerk, jerk "and in turn asked the female"! accuse you still? Is something going on "-" Yes, "said the pigeon," because he bought a horse, and the first time when his brother to be his rider, immediately breaks it neck and leg; ! But ''s not it, because it's him doing' brächt reun, or should he leihn him warning, he would for Marmelstein "No sooner had the pigeon said this, he shouted again:" jerk, jerk "-" Christ, so many! jerk, jerk, "said the dove," what then is still going on, "and he continued:"? the Prince brings his brother also a beautiful woman; But the first night where they sleep together, they will be devoured by a horrible dragon both; but 'it does not it, because it's him doing' brächt reun, or should he leihn him warning, he would become the marble stones. "He had not yet ended these words, the storm abated, and the restlessness of the sea as the roar of wind lay down; but now a far größrer storm arose in the chest Jennariellos by what he had heard, and twenty times he wanted to throw all those things into the sea, not to bring the cause of his ruin to his brother, on the other hand, he thought of himself itself and that the whole thing as for himself so close by when he did not bring his brother the gifts he warned, afraid to be transformed into a marble stone, which is why he chose rather to think of the proper name as the nickname because the shirt he was thicker than water. When he arrived at the port of dark bush, he found the brother already on the shore, the ship had seen return and therefore fully expected him hope. Once he saw, therefore, that Jennariello earned him the one he wore in his heart, and perceived by comparison of the two faces that not even the slightest difference was between them, he felt such great happiness that too heavy a burden of delight him almost would have crushed beneath its weight. His brother embracing with great joy, he said therefore, "What kind of a hawk that you as carry on the fist" - Jennariello replied:. "I bought it for you as a gift" - "I see very well" replied Milluccio, "that you love me because you give yourself every effort to fulfill all my wishes, and if you had brought me a precious treasure, he would give me doth not so much joy did like this hawk." as he but just wanted to take him in hand, Jennariello quickly took a large knife, which he had hanging on the side, and cut off the bird's head off. When the king saw this, he was seized with the greatest astonishment and believed his brother had gone mad, that he had committed such an insane act; But in order not to spoil the joy of reunion, he was silent. When he then saw the horse and his question to whom it belonged, knew that it would be him seized with the desire to ride it once; However, while he was holding the stirrup, Jennariello average fast with the knife the legs of the horse. This drove the king mightily in the nose because he believed that Jennariello done this to him out of malice, and the crest began to swell him; but it did not seem at the time to make his displeasure to his bride not to exacerbate the very first meeting. From this but he did not related his eyes for a minute and pressed continually hands; arrived at the royal palace, he invited then are all fine gentlemen and ladies of the town to a beautiful festivals one in which you made a very natural riding school full of horses Kurbetten and cross voltes in the room, along with a number Fill in the form of women saw; after the end of the ball, however, and after a hearty meal made a full end, we went to bed. Jennariello but who thought of nothing else than to save his brother's life, hid behind the bed of the couple, and as he stood by to await the arrival of the dragon, suddenly a greuliches monster appeared at midnight in the prison, the flame spat eyes and black steam from the throat and would have carried the terror it inspired by his vision, a good broker for pharmacists would have been, and gives all reflected powders rapid disposal. Hardly so Jennariello saw the monster, he began with a Damascus saber, which he had under his cloak, on the dragon right and loszuhauen left, and among other things he took once out with such force that it has a post of the bed in the the king slept right through it, cut so that it woke up at the noise and the dragon disappeared. And when Milluccio stand his brother with a sword in his hand and looked through carved the bedpost, he shouted with a loud cry and said, "Heda, holla, people! Help! Help! This traitor of a brother I want to kill! "In this noise rushed some valet, who slept in the hall, brought about so that the king Jennariello take immediately and let to jail. But no sooner opened the sun the next morning her office to the creditors of the day to pay their light requirements, so Milluccio summoned his council, and after he told them the incident, nor the set to the in the killing of the Falcon and the horse of the day evil intent to offend the king, drew near, all agreed that Jennariello deserve death; and even the entreaties Liviellas were not able to soften the heart of the king, rather, said, "Surely you do not love me, woman, as you apply the life of the brother in law more than that of your husband; because with your own eyes you saw how the assassin wanted me to pierce with a sword that would split through in the air a hair; and when the pillar of the bed would not have been for me a pillar of life and I would have protected you were now deprived of your husband. "So saying, he ordered to let justice run wild. Now as Jennariello heard his judgment and the fact that he acted rightly, found himself plunged into such a disaster, he knew neither save nor help themselves; because if he did not speak, so it was bad for him, in the opposite case but worse; as he might also turn, he was seized and was afraid to come out of the bad to worse; because if he was silent, he lost his head under the iron, and when he spoke, he ended his life in a stone. Finally after many changing his decision, he remained standing by, all to discover his brother; namely it absolutely had to die, he thought it better to teach his brother from the truth and to end his days after he proved in his eyes as innocent than to keep the truth for themselves and as a traitor from the to be managed in the world. He therefore let the king know that he had most to talk to him about something important, and brought before him, he only made a long introduction by the love he always had for his brother, then went to the bluff above, he performed against Liviella to satisfy his desires, and also on what he heard from the pigeons over the falcons, and that, to avoid being turned into a marble stone, it indeed brought him to but without him the secret reveal the bird killed (in which words Jennariello already felt his legs froze and became marble); and by reporting also the matter of the horse, he turned increasingly to their buttocks in stone and hardened on pathetic manner that he has indeed paid in combat and fire with ready money would, but now it broke his heart. When he finally came to the story of the dragon, he remained completely turned to stone in the middle of the hall like a statue standing, so that the king at the sight his folly and ill-considered judgment he passed upon such a good and loving brother had cursed and mourned more than a year to him by always did when he thought of him, shed a flood of tears. Meanwhile Liviella had given birth to a beautiful twin pair of sons, and when she was a few months after one day strolled out into the field, but the King was with the two little middle of the hall and the statue, a monument to his folly through which he is the best all people deprived looked with tearful eyes, suddenly stepped a stately old man, whose hair herabwallte on his shoulders and his beard covered his chest. He bowed to the king and said to him: "What you gave it, O King, when your brother wiederbekäme its former shape?" To which the king replied:. "I would give my kingdom it" - "This is not to be things, "said the old man," can be rewarded by goods, but since we are here to live, it must be paid for by another life. "part out of love for Jennariello, partly because he whose misfortune sounded accused replied the king, "Believe me, venerable old man that I my life for my brother hingäbe. . If only he left the stone, I would be to be like happy, myself included his place in the marble "When the old man heard this, he replied:" Without that you daransetzest your life, since it costs so much trouble, a man Bringing up the blood would satisfy both your children and, painted on the statue, giving it right back life "at these words the king replied." children are created, as long as the earthen form to do so; . Matter to me, other administer that a brother but I can never hope to get back "After he said this, he sacrificed before an image of stone two innocent kid; bribed with their blood, the statue came to life again the same, and the two brothers embraced with indescribable joy. But when the two poor children were just put in the coffin and should be buried with all due honor, the Queen returned home, therefore Milluccio his brother's name was to hide and said to his wife: "What would you give it, dear wife, ? if my brother would come back to life "-" I would question the whole kingdom, "said Liviella; whereupon the king went on to ask: "Would you but probably give the blood of your children of it," - "That, of course not," said that, "because I could not be so cruel to tear me with my own hands the stars of my eyes!" - "Woe to me," now the king called out, "to call back to life for my brother, I have slaughtered my children; ! That was the price for Jennariellos life "So saying, he showed her the dead children in the coffin in which horrific sight of the Queen frantically behaved and exclaimed:" O my children, you support my life, you stars of my existence, their sources of my blood, who has the windows painted my sun so red? Who opened without the doctor's permission, the main artery of my life? Woe is me, my children, my children, any hope for me is destroyed with you, eclipsed every light, every joy poisoned, robbed each post, you are pierced by the sword, I pierced by pain; you are drowning in your blood, I suffocate in my tears; hurt that her uncle to euerm reproduce life, all were killed me your mother; because I can without you that you were beautiful counterweights at the loom of my now desolate life, the fabric does not accomplish my days; the organ of my voice must now fall silent, as you are removed from the bellows! O my children, my children! Why do not you answer for your mother who gave you the blood in your veins and it now crying her eyes? Well, since my sad fate now shows me the source of my happiness dried up, I will no longer be deprived of my jewelery, live in the world! "So saying, she ran to a window to rush out to! At the same moment but her father came in a cloud through the same window in the hall and called to her: "Stop, Liviella, my intention has now been achieved, I have to Jennariello who came to my house to give me my daughter kidnapping, characterized avenged that I locked in a stone, let him stand there long Monde as a marble statue; I have that you begabst Up For Your unziemendes conduct yourself without my permission on a foreign ship, chastened by the fact that I you showed your two children, or rather your two jewels murdered by her own father, had the king, your husband, for the lust of a pregnant woman, which he put himself in the head, characterized punished, that I first detective to judge his brother and then the hell made him his children, and killed in this way three birds with one stone. Since I wanted you but all just scratch and not stalling, I want you to transform all the poison in candy now turn; thou shalt also your children and my grandchildren, who are now even more beautiful than before, press again to your heart. But you, Milluccio, come into my arms, because I recognize you from that hour as the husband of my daughter and as my son, as I forgive also Jennariello his crime against me by having everything done for the sake of just one so admirable brother . "as soon as he had finished, the two children, the grandfather could not heart enough and kiss appeared to what joy even was come Jennariello as a third participant. After Erduldung so many sufferings storms he swam now in a sea of ​​happiness, although he was always mindful of the suffered threats by thought how foolish his brother was, and how careful one must be in order not to fall into trouble, because: The people wisdom is all wrong and wrong.
The Raven and the Fox	5213	57	German	squats Mr. Raven on the tree in its beak a KäsHerr Fox, attracted by the scents, calls his wit as: "Ah, Baron of Rabe, How pretty you are, how you proud you are Complies also of song GabeDem beautiful black celebration garment, silk! your Phoenix bird at all, "the Raven hears it with maximum pleasure, Lets equal to his beautiful voice schallen.Da rolls out of the coracoid the FraßDem Fuchs in his mouth, who laughed saß.Der down"! Thanks for the mess I've made take for the appeal: A flatterer lives from the hört.Die him teaching is certainly worth the cheese "the raven sat puzzled and swore. that does not FIGHTING him once before.
The Raven and the Fox	8023	57	German	A raven was wearing a piece of poisoned meat, which had thrown the angry gardener for the cats of his neighbor, in his claws fort.Und just going to eat it on an old oak, when a fox crept cause, and he called out: I bless , bird of Jupiter! - Who are you looking at me? asked the raven. - Who I look at you? replied the fox. Are you not the spry eagle down kömmt daily by the rights of Zeus in this oak me to feed the poor? Why are you pretending you? Do I look not in the victorious claw to send me your God through you still continues? The Raven astonished the implored gift, and rejoiced deeply, to be held for an eagle. I must, he thought, do not bring the fox out of this is mistaken. - Magnanimous stupid he therefore fall him his prey, and flew proudly thereof.The Fuchs began the flesh, laughing, and eating it with malicious joy. But soon the joy perverted into a painful feeling; the poison began to act, and he verreckte.Möchtet ye never otherwise erloben something as poison, damn flatterer!
The knapsack, the hat, and the horn	520	569	German	There were once three brothers who had fallen deeper into poverty, and at last their need was so great that they are suffering from hunger had had nothing more to bite and to break down and. They said: "It can not stay like it is better we go into the world and seek our fortune.." So they set out and have been a long road and gone through many a blade of grass, but luck was not met them. Since they arrived one day in a big forest, and in the middle it was a hill, and came as they more closely, they saw that the hill was all silver. The eldest said, "Now I have found the desired happiness and I desire nothing greater." He took some of the silver as much as he could carry, then turned back and went home again. But the two others said: "We demand that the luck a little more than mere silver," did not touch it and went on. After they were again taken a few days, so they came to a hill that was all gold. The second brother stopped, changed his mind and was uncertain. "What should I do?" he said. "Should I me about the gold take up so much that I have in my life enough, or should I go?" Finally he made up his mind, filled his pockets as would go in, said farewell to his brother and went home. But the third said, "Silver and gold do not move me, I will not renounce my luck, maybe me is brought something better." It continued, and was gone when he three days he came into a forest which was still larger than the first, and seemed to have no end; and when he had found nothing to eat and drink, so he was all but exhausted. As he climbed a high tree if he would like to see as forest close up, but as far as his eye, he saw nothing but the tops of the trees. Then he began to climb down the tree again, but hunger tormented him, and he thought: If I think only once body could satisfying thee. When he got down he saw with surprise under the tree a table that was amply covered with food that contrary deposited him. "This time," he said, "is my wish was fulfilled at the right time," and without asking who brought the food and who had cooked it, he approached the table and ate with enjoyment until he his hunger was appeased. When he was done, he thought: It would be a shame if the little table-cloth were to be spoiled here in the forest, folded it neatly and put it away. Then he went on, and at night when the hunger was stirring again, he wanted to put his cloth to the test, spread it out and said, "So I wish that you were once covered with good," and hardly was. the desire came from his lips, as were so many dishes with the finest food on them than just space. "Now, I realize," he said, "is cooked in what kitchen for me. You shall be to me than the mountains of silver and gold, dear" because he saw clearly that it was a magic tablecloth. The cloth, however, was not enough to put him down quietly at home, but he preferred to wander about in the world and pursue his fortune. One night he met in a lonely wood, a dusty, black charcoal, burning as coals and had potatoes are on fire, that he wanted to make a meal. "Good evening, blackbird!" he said, "how are you's in your loneliness?" - "One day after day," replied the charcoal-burner, "and every night potatoes; have to be you feel like it and want to be my guest?" - "Many thanks!" replied the traveler, "I you do not want to take away, you did not count on a guest, but would you take if you be content with my meal, you shall be invited." - "Who will you serve?" said the Koehler, "I see that you have nothing with you, and a few hours within is no one who could give you something." - "And yet, should it be a meal," he replied, "as good as you've never tasted any." Then he took out his handkerchief out of his knapsack, spread it on the ground, and said, "cloth, spread yourself!" and immediately stood boiled meat and fried, and as hot as if it had just come out of the kitchen. The Köhler made great eyes, but was not to be asked twice, but fell to, and thrust larger mouthfuls into his black mouth. When they had eaten, smirked the Kohler and said, "Listen, your cloth has my approval, that would be something for me in this forest, where I cooked, no one any good I want to suggest to you an exchange, as hanging in the corner. stuck soldier's knapsack, which is certainly old and shabby but in the miraculous powers; as I no longer use it, I will give him the cloth. " - "First I need to know what these wonderful powers," he said. "I'll tell you," replied the charcoal-burner, "when you tap it with their hand, a corporal comes with six men who have upper and lower gun, and what you command that they accomplish." - "All right," he said, "if it can not be otherwise, we will exchange," replied the charcoal-burner the cloth, took the knapsack from the hook, put it on and took his leave. When he had gone a little way, he wanted to try the miraculous powers of his knapsack and tapped it. Immediately came the seven warriors before him, and the corporal said, "What does my lord and master?" - "March with all speed to the charcoal-burner and calls my wishing back!" They faced to the left, and it was not long before they brought what he required, and had it to ask the charcoal-burner without much decreased. He was called back pull, went ahead and hoped fortune would seem to him even brighter. At sunset he came to another Köhler, who was making his supper ready by the fire. "Will you have dinner with me," said the sooty fellow, "potatoes with salt, but no dripping, come sit with me down." - "No," he replied, "for this time you shall be my guest," spread out his cloth, which was instantly covered with the most beautiful dishes. They ate and drank together and were in good spirits. After the meal, the charcoal-burner said, "Up there is on that shelf an old, worn-out hat which has strange properties: If someone touches and turns it on its head around, so cannons go off as if twelve were side by side and shoot everything prostrate that no one, however, can exist. I use is the hat is of no, and for your tablecloth I will willingly give it. " - "This can be heard," he answered, took the hat, put it on and let back his cloth. No sooner but he was a part of the way gone, he tapped on his knapsack, and his soldiers had to fetch him the cloth back again. It comes one to the other, he thought, and it is to me as if not my happiness ended. His thoughts had not betrayed him. After he had walked on a day he came to a third charcoal-burner who is not invited him different from the previous to potatoes without dripping. But he let him also dine from his wishing, and tasted the charcoal-burner so good that he finally a horn for it, offered him the very different properties from those of the hat had. If you blew it all fell walls and fortifications, finally all the towns and villages became ruins. He gave the charcoal-burner the cloth for it, be it but left afterwards again abfordern from his team, he finally that knapsack, hat and horn had collected. "Now," said he, "I am a made man, and it is time for me to go home and see how my fare brothers." When he reached home, his brothers had built their silver and gold a beautiful house and lived in the lap of luxury. He went to see them, but because it came in a ragged coat, the shabby hat on her head and the old knapsack on his back, they did not want him to recognize her brother. They mocked and said, "You're giving up for our brother out of silver and gold scorned and called for a better luck The certainly comes in full splendor like a mighty king, not like a beggar." And sent him to the door out. As he flew into a rage, and tapped his knapsack until a hundred and fifty men in the ranks stood before him. He ordered them to surround his brothers' house, and two should take hazel-sticks and the two arrogant the skin on the body tanning soft until they knew who he was. There was a huge noise, the people came together and wanted to lend the two in the emergency assistance, but they could do nothing against the soldiers. Length came to the king the message of it, who was very angry and had a captain and his band turn out that should chase the rioters from the city. But the man with the knapsack soon got a larger team that beat the captain and his men back that they had to retire with bloody noses. The king said: "This vagabond is too tame," and next day sent a larger troop against him, but she could still align less. He put even more people meet and get ready for even faster, as he turned several times to be little hat on his head around as heavy guns began to play, and the king's men were beaten and put to flight. "Now I do not do more peace," he said, "as to me the king gives his daughter in marriage and I speak the whole kingdom in his name." He let the king tidings, and the latter said to his daughter: "Must is a hard nut to crack, what remains to me when I'm doing what he wants If I want peace and keep the crown on my head, so must I surrender to you. "so the wedding was celebrated, but the King's daughter was vexed that her husband should be a common man, who wore a shabby hat and had put on an old knapsack. You would like him to go again been musing day and night as they could accomplish. Then she thought: If his miraculous powers probably stuck in the knapsack? dissembled and caressed him, and had become soft as his heart, she said, "If you wanted to take only the bad knapsack, he disfigured you so much that I need your ashamed." - "Dear child," he replied, "this knapsack is my greatest treasure, as long as I have that, I'm afraid no power in the world," and told her wonderful virtue with which he was gifted. Then she fell on his neck, as if she wanted to kiss him, but he took with alacrity the knapsack from his shoulder and ran away with it. Once she was alone, she tapped it and ordered the men of war, they should seize their former master and continue from the royal palace. They obeyed, and the wrong woman let more people behind him strutting that should drive him quite out of the land. Since he would have been lost if he had not had the hat. Hardly but his hands were free, he turned it twice: Immediately began the cannon to thunder and beat down everything, and the princess had come himself and ask for mercy. Because they asked so mobile and promised to do better, he was persuaded and granted her peace. She did kindly to him, stood by as if she had very loved him and knew him to charm after a while that he trusted her, even if someone got the knapsack into his power, he could do nothing against him while the old hat was still his. When she knew the secret, she waited until he was asleep, then she took him. Hat away and had it thrown out into the street. But the horn still left him and in great anger he blew it with all his strength. Instantly all collapsed, walls, fortifications, towns and villages, and smote the king and the king's daughter dead. And if he does not put down the horn and only one would have little blown longer, everything would have fallen into disarray and no stone upon another remained. Since no one opposed him any longer, and he sat down to be king over the whole kingdom.
The robber and the Pets	9814	130	German	There was once a miller servant who had served his master for many years faithfully and diligently and had grown old in the mill. But the hard work he had to do here was beyond his powers. And he said one morning to his Lord: "I can no longer serve you, I'm too weak; Dismiss' me why and give me my wages! "The miller said," Now is not the traveling time of the servants; Incidentally, you can go if you want, but pay you do not get. "Then the old servant would rather let go of his wages, when even longer toil in the mill so and said goodbye to his Herrn.Ehe but he left the house, he went to the animals he had previously fed and cared for to bid them farewell. When he first took some of the horse-bye, she said to him: "Where are you going? "" I have to go, "he said," I can not here's stand it any longer. "And as he went, so after the horse followed him. Then he went to the ox, nor stroked him once and said, " 'Now you Behuet God, dude! "-" Where are you going, "said the ox. "Oh, I have to continue. I just can not stand it any longer here, "said the miller's servant, and went away sad, to also take more of the dog goodbye. But the ox pulled behind him, like the horse, and just as it did the rest of the pets, which he said goodbye, namely the dog, the cock, the cat and the Gans.Als he was out in the open and saw that the faithful animals went after him, he spoke to them in a friendly way that they want but to turn back and stay at home. "I now own" anything, he said, "and can no longer take care of you. the animals "alone told him that they would not leave him, and went merrily behind him drein.Da they came after several days in a big, big forest. The horse and the ox found good grass here; the goose and the cock settled taste it; the other animals but the cat and the dog, which had to worry about how the old miller servant and growled and did not grumble about it. Finally, when they were all the way come deep into the forest, they saw standing before him a nice big house at a time; but that was firmly shut; only one stall was open and was empty, and from here you could get through a scouring in the house. Now, since no one was seen in the home, so the servant decided to stay there with his animals and pointed at each place. The horse he put forward in the stable, the ox he led to the other side; the rooster got his place on the roof, the dog on the manure, the cat on the bonfire, the goose behind the stove. Then he gave each his food, which he richly vorfand in the house, and he ate and drank what he liked and then went to sleep in a good bed, the finished dastand.Als it was now in the chamber already night and he fast asleep, the robber, who owned the Waldhaus came back. As the but came into the yard, once the dog jumped like mad at him and barked at him; then the rooster cried down from the roof, "Kikeriki! Kikeriki! "That it was anxious and fearful the robbers; for he had seen in his life no pets who live with the man, but knew only the wild animals of the forest. That's why he took tear it out and jumped hastily into the stable, but since the horse hit back and hit him on the side that he staggered and was able to escape only with difficulty even in the rear side of the stable. But no sooner had he arrived here, then the ox also turned around already and wanted to take on his horns him. Because he got a new horror and ran as fast as he could, by scouring through and then into the kitchen to light to light and to see what was going on. As he fumbled around on the stove and touched the cat, drove the wrong on him and scratched him so much that he jumped headlong them and was about to crawl into the room behind the stove. But as the goose woke up and screamed and flapped his wings, that it was the robber Höllenangst and he took refuge in the chamber. And then the old Müller servant in the bed snoring so strong, like a purring spinning wheel that the robber said that the entire chamber is filled with strangers. Since it raided an evil horror and terror, and he quickly ran out of the house and ran into the woods, and was not too quiet, until he found his prey journeyman hatte.Da he began to tell: "I do not know what has happened to our house; it lives a very foreign people in it. When I stepped into the yard, jumped a big wild man to me and scolded and yelled so fiercely that I thought he would kill me. Another still irritated him up and shouted from the roof down:> Gib'm au for mi! gib'm au for mi! 'So's the first gave me already badly enough so I did not want to wait until her about several fell upon me and took refuge in the stable. But as a shoemaker threw me a strips on the side that I can still feel it; and then when I came back to the barn, there stood a fork-maker and wanted to impale his fork; and when I came into the kitchen, there sat a Hechelmacher and beat me his hackle in the hand; and when I jumped into the room and I wanted to hide behind the stove, as hit me a shovel maker with his shovel; but when I finally ran into the chamber since snoring is still so many others that I have had when I was just glad alive out there. "When the robbers heard this, were all amazed, so much so that no one want was to go into the house. No, they thought that all the country had become uncertain by the foreign people still went that night on, far away in another country and never again gekommen.Da now lived the miller servant with his faithful animals in peace and quiet in the house of the robbers, and did not need more to plague in his old age; because of the beautiful garden next to the house gave him a year more fruits, vegetables and all kinds of food, when he and his animals could eat.
The Robber Bridegroom	385	955	German	There was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter, and had grown up than her, he wished she would be cared for and well married he thought "is a decent sort and keeps them, so I will give him." Not long before a suitor who appeared came to be very rich, and as the miller knew nothing to his disadvantage, he promised him his daughter. but the girl did not love him so right, like a bride her groom love to have, and did not trust him, she often looked at him and thought of him, she felt a chill in her heart. Once he said to her, "you are my bride and not see me again." The girl replied, "I do not know where your house is." While the bridegroom "my house is outside in the dark forest." Said It began to make excuses and said it could pave the way not previously finden.Der groom said "next Sunday you have also come to me, I have already invited the guests, so that you find your way through the forest, and I will strew ashes . " When Sunday came and the girl should have to find their way, he was so scared, it itself does not quite know why, and so it could be called off, put both pockets full of peas and lentils. At the entrance of the forest ashes were scattered, which we went to, but threw at each step right and left a few peas on the ground. It was most of the day until it came in the middle of the woods, where it was the darkest, there stood a lonely house, he did not like, because it looked so dark and very sinister. She entered it, but no one was inside and there was the greatest silence. Suddenly a voice called out, "Turn back, turn back, young maiden dear, you're a murderer's house." The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird who was hanging in a cage by the wall. Again he shouted, "Turn back, turn back, young maiden dear, you're a murderer's house." Since the beautiful bride went on from one room to another, and went through the whole house, but it was all empty and find not a soul , At length she came to the basement, there sat a very old woman, nodding her head. "Can you tell me," said the bride, "if my bridegroom lives here?" -.. "Oh, you poor child," replied the old woman, "Where did you go guess you're in a den of thieves you think you're a bride her wedding soon, but you will the marriage hold with death you see because I have a large kettle of water to set when they have you in their power, they will cut you without mercy, cook you and eat you, for they are cannibals. if I do not feel sorry for you and save you, you're lost. "This is what led the old behind a big barrel, where you could not see it. "Be like a little mouse still," she said, "Do not be active and move not you, or done ists about you. At night, when the robbers are asleep, we will escape, I have been waiting for an opportunity." No sooner was so ungodly gang entered the house. They brought another Virgin dragged, were drunk and did not listen to their cries and lamentations. They gave her wine to drink, three glasses full, white glass, a glass of red and yellow glass, which shattered her heart. Then she tore off her fine clothes off, put them on a table, chopped her beautiful body into pieces and scattered salt over it. shaking the poor bride behind the barrel and shook, for she saw plainly what had destined for a fate her the robber. One of them noticed a gold ring on the little finger of their victim, and when he did not let pull off easily, he took an ax and chopped his finger off: but the finger jumped up on the barrel away and the bride just dropped in the lap. The robber took a light to look for him, but could not find him. As another said, "have you already behind the great cask looking for?" But the old woman cried, "Come and eat, and let the search until morning: the finger can not run away." Then the robbers said, "the old man is right," were on the search and sat down to eat, and the old woman dropped a sleeping potion in the wine that they will soon lie down in the basement, and snored. When the bride heard this, she got behind the barrel out, and had to step over the sleepers, which since the dozen lay on the ground, and was very afraid that she would wake up one. But God helped her that she passed through, and the old woman with her, opened the door, and they hurried as fast as they could, from the den of thieves away. The scattered ash had the wind blown away, but the peas and lentils had budded and risen, and showed in the moonlight the way. They walked the whole night until they arrived at the mill in the morning. The girl told her father everything as it happened hatte.Als the day came when the wedding was to be held, the groom, the miller appeared but had all his relatives and friends to be invited. As they sat at table, each one had something to tell. The bride sat still and said nothing. Then said the bridegroom to the bride "Now, sweetheart, do you know anything? Also tell us something." She replied, "I will tell you my dream. I walked alone through a forest and finally came to a house, there was not a soul in it, but on the wall a bird was in a cage, who cried," Turn back, turn back, young bride, you're a murderer's house "and called again Sweetheart, I just dreamed I went through all the rooms, and all were empty, and it was so scary it;... I went down into the basement since sat a very old woman in it who nodded her head. I asked her "living my bridegroom in this house?" she replied, "oh, you poor child, you have come into a den of thieves, your bridegroom does live here, but he wants chop and kill you, and want you then cook and eat. "Sweetheart, I was only dreaming. But the old woman hid behind a big barrel, and as soon as I was hidden there, so the robbers came home, dragging a maiden with to which they gave to drink three wine, white, red and yellow, of which her shattered heart. Sweetheart, I only dreamed this. Then she took off her fine clothes off, chopped her beautiful body on a table into pieces and sprinkled it with salt. Sweetheart, I only dreamed this. And a saw from the robbers that where Goldfinger was still a ring, and because it was difficult to withdraw, he took an ax and cut it off, but the finger jumped up and jumped behind the large barrel and fell into my the lap. And here is the finger with the ring. "At these words she pulled him and showed him the Anwesenden.Der robber who had become quite kreideweiss in the narrative, jumped up and tried to escape, but the visitors held him, and delivered him . and he was the courts and his whole gang for their crimes.
The giant and the tailor	1748	1049	German	A tailor, who was a great at boasting but ill at doing, it came to mind to go out a little bit and to look around the world. As soon as he could, he left his workshop, and wandered on his way over hill and dale, now here, now there, always on and on. Now when he was outside, he saw in the blue distance a steep hill and behind a sky-high tower, which jutted out of a wild, dark forest. "Thunder and lightning" cried the tailor, "what is it?" And because it stood by curiosity, he went boldly towards it. But what he locked mouth and eyes when he came near, because the tower had legs, jumped in one bound over the steep hill and stood as a large powerful giant before him. "What do you want here, you tiny fly's leg, "cried the with one voice, as if it whispered from all sides donnerte.Der Schneider." I myself want to look around, see if I can earn a bit of bread in the forest "" if it's about the time, "said the giant, so" you can even enter the service with me. "" If his's needs, why not? but what I get for a salary? "" What do you get for a salary? " said the giant. "You shall hear every year three hundred sixty-five days, and if it is a leap year, more into the bargain Is that all right..?" "All right," replied the tailor, and thought in his mind: You have to stretch to its ceiling. I examined soon loszumachen.Darauf me again said the giant to him. "Go, little ragamuffin, and fetch me a jug of water" "Why not rather the well and its spring"? asked the boaster, and went with the pitcher to the water. "What? The well and its spring?" growled the giant that was a bit stupid and clumsily, in the beard into it and began to be afraid.. "The guy may have more fried than apples The have a wizard in his body Be on your guard, old Hans, this is no servant "When the tailor had brought the water, ordered to hew him the giant in the woods a few blocks of wood and carry." for you. Why not the whole forest with a match, the whole forest, young and old, with all that he has, both rough and smooth? " asked the tailor, and went to cut timber. "What? The whole forest, young and old, with everything he has, both rough and smooth and well and its spring?" growled the credulous giant in his beard and was the more afraid. "The guy may have more fried than apples, and has a wizard in his body Be on your guard, old Hans, this is not a servant for you." As the tailor had brought the wood, the giant commanded him, two or three wild boars to shoot for dinner. "Why not rather a thousand at one shot and you to do?" asked the pride of Schneider. "What?" the Hasenfuss called by a giant in great terror. "Let it go just for today and lie down to sleep." The giant was afraid so powerful that he could emulate the eyes all night, thinking back and forth, how to start it to get the accursed sorcerer of servants sooner the better from the neck to schaffen.Kommt time Rat.Am comes next morning the giant and the tailor went to a marsh, round which stood a number of willow trees. Since the giant said. "Listen, Schneider, sit on one of the willow branches, I want for my life like to see whether you're big enough to bend them." Husch, the tailor was sitting up, holding his breath, and went hard, so hard, the whip that niederbog. But when he again had to catch his breath as they jumped him because he had put in his pocket unfortunately no iron to great delight of the giant so far in the amount that you can no longer see him, he konnte.Wenn not fallen down again is, he must be hovering still up in the air.
The tailor in heaven	337	800	German	It came to pass that the good God wished to enjoy himself on a beautiful day in the heavenly garden, and all the apostles and saints with him, so that no one in heaven but Saint Peter remained. The Lord had commanded him to let no one in during his absence, so Peter stood at the door and kept watch. Not long before someone knocked. Peter asked who was there and what he wanted. "I am a poor, honest tailor," said a soft voice, "asking to be let in." - "Yes, honestly," said Peter, "like the thief on the gallows, you made long fingers and pinched off the people the cloth You can not get to heaven, the Lord has forbidden me in while he is out there, let any one in. . "-" be merciful, "cried the tailor," little scraps that fall from himself from the table, are not stolen and not worth Behold, I lame, and have the blisters on my feet, I can. reverse impossible again. Let me just into it, I will do all the dirty work. I will carry the children, wash their clothes, the benches on which they have played, and wash and clean and mend their torn clothes. "saint Peter left off compassion move and opened the lame tailor Himmelspforte so far that he could slip his lean body. He had to in a corner behind the door set and was to stay quietly and peaceably, so that when he came back, did not notice him and angry would the Lord. The tailor obeyed, but when Saint Peter once walked out the door, he got up, went full of curiosity in every corner of heaven, and inspected the opportunity. Finally he came to a place where there were many beautiful and delightful chairs and in the middle a seat all of gold which was set with shining jewels; He was also much higher than the other chairs, and a golden footstool was before it. but it was the seat on which the Lord sat when he was at home, and from which he could see everything that was happening on earth. The tailor stood still and looked at the chair for a good while, because he liked it better than anything else. Finally he was able to restrain curiosity not, climbed up and sat down in the chair. Then he saw everything that was happening on earth, and observed an ugly old woman standing by a stream and washed two veils on one aside secretly. The tailor enraged at this sight so much that he grabbed the golden footstool, throwing through the sky down to the earth under the old thief. But since he could not pick up the stool back again, so he came back crept quietly out of the chair away, sat down at his place behind the door and acted as if he is the lord and master of his heavenly hätte.Als never stirred again he did not see the tailor behind the door unaware as he but sat on his chair the footstool was missing. He asked Saint Peter, where the stool, but got there that did not know. Then he asked if he would let in someone. "I know no one," replied Peter, "which would have been there, but a lame tailor, who is still sitting behind the door." Then the Lord let the tailor right to enter and asked him if he had taken away the stool, and where he had put it. "O Lord," answered the tailor joyously, "I threw it in my anger down to earth at an old woman whom I saw stealing two veils at the washing." - "O thou wicked servant," said the Lord, "were I to judge as you judge, how do you mean that it would be you already been issued, I would have had for a long time no chairs, benches, seats, nay, no oven fork more here? but thrown everything down at the sinners now on you can not stay in the sky longer, but must go outside the gate.. because look at where to get there no one shall give punishment here, but I alone, the Lord "Peter had the tailor out again. bring to the sky, and as he had torn shoes, and feet covered with blisters, he took a stick in his hand and moved to Warteinweil ​​where the good soldiers sit and make fun.
The Singing Bone	269	780	German	Once upon a time in a land great lamentation over a wild boar that laid waste the fields the farmers killed the cattle, and ripped the people with his tusks body. The king promised to everyone who would free the land from this plague, a great reward; but the beast was so big and strong, that no one in the vicinity of the forest ventured in which it lived. At last the king let known that whosoever should capture the wild boar or kill, should his only daughter to wife haben.Nun lived two brothers in the land, the sons of a poor man who came forward and wanted to take the risk. The elder, who was crafty and shrewd, did it out of pride, the youngest, who was innocent and simple, from a kind heart. The king said, "That you may be the more sure the animal, you shall from opposite sides into the woods to go." As the oldest of the evening and the younger on the east went inside. And went as the youngest a little while, a little man stepped to him; which held a black spit in his hand and said, "This Spiess I give you, because your heart is pure and good; so you can boldly attack the wild boar, it will do you no harm." He thanked the little man, the tables on the shoulder and went without fear on. Before long he saw the beast, which rushed at him, but he held the skewer contrary, and in its blind fury it ran so powerful in that the heart was cut in two him. Since he took the monster on his back, went home and it was he came to the king bringen.Als on the other side of the forest, stood at the entrance of a house where people were making merry with wine and dancing. His oldest brother had gone in here and had thought the pig he would not run away, only he wanted to drink a brave. When he saw the youngest, who laden with his booty came from the forest, so let him be envious, evil heart no rest. He called out to him: "Come in, dear brother, rest of you and refresh yourself with a cup of wine." The youngest, who suspected no evil behind it, went in and told him about the good little man who had given him the spit, which he hätte.Der killed the pig oldest held him back until the evening as they left together. But when they came in the dark to the bridge over a stream, let the elder brother go, and when he was half-way across he gave him such a blow from behind that he fell down dead. He buried him beneath the bridge, took the boar, and brought it to the king, pretending that he had killed it; whereupon he received the king's daughter to wife. As the youngest brother did not want to come back, he said: "The boar must have his body," and the thought jedermann.Weil but to God nothing is hidden, should this black deed come to light. Years afterwards a shepherd was driving his herd across the bridge and looked down into the sand, a snow-white little bone lying and thought this would be a good mouthpiece. As he came down, picked it up, and cut a mouthpiece for his horn. When he had for the first blown out, the bone began to great astonishment of the shepherd by themselves to sing: "Oh, you dear Hirtelein, you blow upon my bone, my brother got me killed, buried under the bridge to the wild pig, for the king's "daughter. "What a wonderful horn," said the shepherd, "it sings by itself, I have to bring to the Lord King." When he got it to the King, the squirrels began again to its little song to sing. The King understood it all and let the earth beneath the bridge dug up, and the whole skeleton of the murdered man came to light. The wicked brother could the act does not deny was sewn into a sack and drowned alive, the remains of the murdered man were laid to the cemetery in a beautiful grave to rest.
The sparrow and his four children	1501	157	German	A sparrow had four young ones in a swallow's nest. When they were fledged, bad boys encounter a nest, but they are all happy in the high wind. Then the old bird was grieved that as his sons come into the world, that he did not first warned against all manner of danger and given them good instruction habe.Aufn autumn come many sparrows together in a wheatfield, and there encounters the old man his four boys he might bring full of joy with them home. 'Ah, my dear sons, what did you give me the summer worry, because you got away without my teaching in the wind; hear my words, obey your father heed, beware well: Little birds have to great danger ' Then he asked the eldest where he stopped over the summer and how he had supported himself. 'I have kept myself in the gardens, and looked for caterpillars and worms, until the cherries were ripe.' 'Oh, my son,' said the father, "tit bits are not bad, but it's great danger in it thyself henceforth eight, and particularly when people walk in gardens that carry long green poles which was hollow are and have a little hole. ' 'Yes, my Father, if then a little green leaf is stuck over the hole with wax?' said the son. 'Where did you see that?' 'In a merchant garden, "said the boy. 'O my son,' said the father, 'Kaufleut, folks are quick folks have you been to the world's children, you have learned worldly enough see and consumption only quite well and do not trust you zuviel.'Darauf he asked the next, 'where you have had your being?' 'At the court,' said the son. 'Sparrows and silly little birds are not used at this location, as much gold, velvet, silk, defense, armor, Sperber, Kauzen and Blaufüss are holding you to Rossstall as you swing the oats, or where to thresh, so can dirs luck bring good Fried also your daily grain of corn. ' 'Yes, Father, "said the son,' but when making the stable boy Hebritzen and their stitches and snares in the straw, is there also some behenken. ' 'Where did you see that?' said the old man. "At court, when Ross boys. ' 'O, my son, court boys are bad boys! have you been to court and to the men and have no feathers there, you have pretty much learned and will uproot you know in the world probably, but, look around and on the wolves devour the wisest Hündlein.'Der father takes the third also: "where didst thou seek thy safety? ' 'On the routes and roads I've tubs and ropes and sometimes met with a grain of corn or Gräuplein.' 'This is so,' say the father, 'a fine food, but noticeable nonetheless on the Schanz and see diligently on, particularly when a bucket and wants to pick up a stone, because you can not stay long.' "That is true, 'said the son,' but if a previously wore a wall or stone hand in the breast or pocket? ' 'Where did you see this?' 'The miners, dear father, when they come out, they take little bits of ore with them.' 'Bergleut, Werkleut, anschlägige Leut! have you been to Mountain boys, you have seen something and erfahren.Fahr back and take your stuff nevertheless a good eight, Mountain boys have some Sperling with leprechaun umbracht.'Endlich the father came to the youngest son 'you my dear chirping nestling, wert always the silliest and weakest, you stay with me, the world has many rough, wicked birds that crooked beaks and long claws have and wait for poor little birds and swallow: to your kind just now, and read the Spinnlein and looked for caterpillars from the trees or Häuslein so you wilt live long in peace. ' 'You, my dear father, who feeds himself without injury to other people who come long way, and not a sparrow hawk, hawk, eagle or kite will hurt him if he especially himself and his lawful food, love God all night and morning, faithfully orders that all forest and village birds creator and sustainer is heareth also the young ravens, shouting and prayer, for without his will and not a sparrow or wren ever falls to the ground. ' 'Where did you learn this?' The son answered, as the great blast of wind tore away me from you, I came into a church, as read I the flies and spiders from the windows and heard preach these sayings the summer, as the Father of all sparrows me fed through the summer and kept me from all mischance and from ferocious birds. ' "In sooth my dear son, you fleuchst in the churches and helpest clean up spiders and buzzing flies and zirpst to God like the young ravens and commandest yourself to the eternal Creator, and you will probably remain, and if the whole world full of wild malicious birds wäre.Denn who to God his property, silent, suffering, waiting, praying, need Glimpf does gemach preserved pure faith and conscience, which wants to be Gore protection sure. '
The boots of buffalo leather	1887	952	German	A soldier who is afraid of nothing, cares for nothing. So one had received his resignation, and since he had learned nothing and could earn nothing, he went about asking good people for alms. On his shoulders had an old waterproof coat, and a pair of riding boots of buffalo-leather which were still left to him. One day he left, without paying attention to road and bridge, always in the field and came at last into a forest. He did not know where he was, but saw on a felled tree trunk a man sitting, who was well dressed and wore a green shooting-coat. The soldier shook hands with him, let himself down on the grass beside him and stretched out his legs. 'I see you have good boots on, which are blacked,' he said to the huntsman, "if you had but about as I have so they would not hold for long. Look at mine, they are of buffalo leather and have served for a long time, but go through thick and thin. ' After a while the soldier got up and said, 'I can not stay longer, hunger drives me onwards. But, Brother boots, where does this road lead? ' 'I do not know myself, "answered the huntsman," I'm lost in the woods.' 'So dirs goes as I, "said the soldier,' the same and a feather flock together, we want to stay together and seek the way. ' The hunter smiled a little, and they went away, and on, until night fell. 'We're not out of the woods, "said the soldier,' but I see there in the distance a light shining, which it gets to be something to eat. ' They found a stone house, knocked on the door, and opened an old woman. 'We are looking for a night's lodging, "said the soldier," and some lining for our stomachs, for mine is as empty as an old knapsack.' 'Here you can not stay,' replied the old woman, 'that is a den of thieves, and you do the wisest that you continue making you before they come home, because they find you, you are lost.' 'It will not be that bad,' replied the soldier, "I have not had a mouthful for two days, and it's the same to me if I murdered here or die in the forest of hunger. I go in. ' The huntsman would not follow, but the soldier drew his sleeve with him 'come on, brother, it will not go straight to the collar.' The old woman had pity and said, 'crawls behind the stove when they leave anything are asleep, so you want ego zustecken.' As soon as she sat in the corner, then came twelve robbers stormed in, sat down at the table, which was already laid, and vehemently demanded the food. The old woman wore a large dishes of roast meat, and the robbers enjoyed that thoroughly. As the smell of the food to the soldiers climbed into the nose, it 'not me halts longer, I sit down at the table and eat with them.' Said the hunter 'You bring us to destruction, "said the huntsman, and held him by the arm. But the soldier began to cough loudly. When the robbers heard it, throwing them knife and fork, leapt up and the two spotted behind the stove. 'Aha, gentlemen,' they cried, 'you sit in the corner? What do you want here? Have you been sent as spies? waiting, you shall on a dry branch to learn to fly. ' 'But do be civil, "said the soldier,' me hungry, I give to eat, and then you can do with me what you will. ' The robbers were astonished, and the leader said, "I see you are not afraid, good food you shall have, but afterwards you must die. ' 'We shall see, "said the soldier, sat down at the table and began to bravely at the roast meat. "Brother boots, come and eat, 'he called the hunter,' you'll be hungry have as well as I, and a better roast meat, you can not at home; ' but the huntsman would not eat. The robbers looked at the soldier in astonishment and said, 'the guy makes no circumstances.' After this he said 'the food would be good, now also a good to drink.' The leader was in the mood to let in this also, and called to the old 'Bring a bottle out of the cellar, from the best.' The soldier drew the cork that popped went with the bottle to the huntsman, and said, "Pay attention, brother, you shall see your blue wonder: now I want to drink a health of the whole clan. ' Then he brandished the bottle over the heads of the robbers called 'life to you all, but the mouth open and your right hands lifted up,' and he drank a hearty train. No sooner were the words out, they all sat motionless as if they were of stone, his mouth open and had stretched out his right arm into the air. The hunter said to the soldiers 'I see you have other tricks, but now come and let us go home.' 'Oho, brother, that would be marching too early, we beat the enemy, and must first take the booty. That sit tight and opening their mouths with astonishment, but they can not move until I allow. Come and drinking eat. ' The old woman had a bottle of the best pick, and the soldier was not on rather than until he had eaten again for three days. Finally, when the day came, he said, 'Now it's time that we take the tent down, and so we have a short march, so shall the old show us the nearest way to the town.' When they arrived there, he went to his old comrades, and said 'I have found out a nest full of gallows' birds in the forest, comes with, we want it to dig.' The soldier led them, and said to the huntsman 'you have to go back again with. And watch as flutter when we he s pack on your feet' He placed the men round about the robbers, then took the bottle, took a swig, waved it over them, and cried 'life to you all !, Instantly they had their movement again, but were thrown down and hand and foot with knitting bound. Then she was called the soldier like sacks throw on a cart and said, 'they ride just straight to prison.' but the huntsman took one of the team aside and gave him an order mit.'Bruder Brightboots, "said the soldier, 'we have safely routed the enemy and been well fed, now let as a latecomer in quietly walk behind.' As they approached the city, saw the soldier, like a lot of people pouring out of the gate, raising loud cries of joy and waving green boughs in the air. Then he saw that the whole bodyguard to kam.'Was used that mean? ' said he quite surprising to the hunters. 'You Do not you know,' he replied, 'that the king had long been absent from his kingdom, now he returns, and there it all go to meet.' 'But where is the king?' said the soldier, 'I do not see him.' 'Here it is, "answered the huntsman," I am the King, and have announced my arrival.' Then he opened his hunting skirt that you could see the royal garments. The soldier was alarmed, fell to his knees and asked for forgiveness that he, like his peers treated him in ignorance and have addressed with such name him. The king held out his hand and said 'you're a good soldier, and hast saved my life. You shall have no need to suffer anymore, I will soon take care of you. And if you want to eat a piece of roast meat, as good as that in the robber's house, come to the royal kitchen. But if you want drink a health, thou shalt bring this until I leave. '
The sweet porridge	980	565	German	It was a poor but good little girl who lived alone with his mother, and they had nothing to eat. As the child went into the forest, and there he met an old woman who knew of her sorrow, and gave him a little pot, which when she said, "pot, cook," would cook good, sweet porridge, and when it said: "potty, arise," it ceased to be brought kochen.Das girl of his mother's pot home, and now they were their poverty and hunger unmarried and ate sweet porridge as often as they wollten.Auf a time was the girls gone out, her mother said: "potty, cook," as it cooks, and eats his fill; now they want the pot to stop, but she does not know the word. So it boils away, and the porridge rose over the edge and cook all the time, the kitchen and the whole house full and the second house and the road, if it wanted when the whole world sick, and is the biggest need, and no man white there to help. At last when only one single house is left as the child comes home and just said: "potty, arise," as it stands and listens to cook, and who wanted to return to the city, who had to eat through.
The Devil with the Three Golden Hairs	277	461	German	There was once a poor woman who gave birth to a little son, and because it is a caul on when it came to the world, so it was predicted that it would in the fourteenth year of the king's daughter to wife haben.Es came to pass that the King soon came to the village, and no one knew it was the king, and when he asked the men what there would be new, so they said, "it is born in these days a child with a caul, what such an undertaking that beats him, fortunately out. It is prophesied, too, in his fourteenth year he will have the king's daughter in marriage. "the king, who had a bad heart and was angry about the prophecy, went to the parents, did quite friendly, said: "you poor people, let me have your child, and I will sustain it." At first they refused, but when the stranger offered large amount of gold for it and they thought, "It is fortunate child, it should deflect but for his own good," they at last consented, and gave him the Kind.Der King put it in a box and rode away with it until he came to a deep water; as he threw the box into it and thought, "From the unexpected suitor I helped my daughter." The box but did not sink but floated like a boat, and it came not a drop of water into it. And it floated to within two miles of the king's capital, where a mill was at the military they got stuck. A mill-boy, who was standing there and she noticed she pulled it out with a hook, thinking to find great treasures, but when he opened it, lay a pretty boy is quite fresh and lively. He took him to the miller and his wife, and as they had no children, they rejoiced, saying, "God has given us." They used the foundling, and he grew up in all virtues heran.Es came to pass that the king met once in a storm in the mill and the miller and his wife asked if the tall youth was their son. "No," they answered, "it's a boulder, he swam fourteen years ago in a box of the weir, and the mill-boy pulled him from the water." Then the king realized that it was a lucky child was none other, which he had thrown into the water, and said, "Good people, the boy could not bring a letter to the queen, I will give him two gold pieces as a reward? " - "Just as the King commands," answered they, and they told the boy to hold himself ready. Then the king wrote a letter to the Queen, wherein he said: "As soon as the boy arrives with this letter, let him be killed and buried, and all must be done before I come back." The boy set out with this letter the way, but got lost and evening came to a large forest. In the darkness he saw a small light, went towards it and reached a cottage. When he went inside, sat an old woman by the fire quite alone. She started when she saw the boy, and said, "Where are you from and where are you going?" - "I come from the mill," he answered, "and wish to go to the Queen, which is to deliver a letter I; stay because I have lost my way in the forest, I would like to here." - "You poor boy," the woman said, "you have come into a den of thieves, and when they come home they will kill you." - "Let them come, will," said the boy, "I am not afraid, but I am so tired that I can not continue," stretched out on a bench and fell ein.Bald afterwards the robbers came, and angrily asked what was lying there strange boy. "Oh," said the old woman, "it is an innocent child who has lost himself in the forest, and I have let him out of pity. He is to deliver a letter to the Queen" The robbers opened the letter and read it, and in it was written that the boy be immediately as he arrived, was put to death. Since the hard-hearted robbers felt pity, and their leader tore up the letter and wrote another, and it was written as the boy came, he should be married at once to the king's daughter. Then they let him calm until the next morning on the bench are, and when he woke up, they gave him the letter and but showed him the right away.The queen, when she had received the letter and read it, did as it was , and had a splendid wedding-feast prepared, and the King's daughter was married to the child of fortune; was and as the youth nice and friendly, she lived happy and satisfied with ihm.Nach some time the king returned to his palace and saw that the prophecy was fulfilled and happiness child married to his daughter. "As has been received by that?" He said, "I have in my letter gave quite another order." The queen handed him the letter and said that he might see for himself what was written in it. The king read the letter and saw quite well that he was another with a been reversed. He asked the youth what had become of the letter entrusted to him why he had brought another instead. "I do not know anything," he replied, "it must have to be reversed at night, when I slept in the forest." Full of anger the king said: "As easy as it is to you not, who wants to have my daughter, I have to get out of hell three golden hairs from the head of the devil; you bring me what I want, and you shall keep my daughter "so the king hoped to be rid of him for ever.. But the child of good fortune answered, "The golden hair I will fetch, I am not afraid of the Devil." Then he said goodbye and began his journey. The road led him to a big city where it questioned the guard at the gate, what his trade was, and what he knew. "I know everything," answered the child of good fortune. "Then you can do us a favor," said the guard, "if you will tell us why our market-fountain, gushed from the usual wine has become dry, and are not even water." - "That you shall know," he replied, "only wait until I come back as he went on and came to another town because the gatekeeper asked him what a Gewerb he knew and what he knew.." I know everything, "he replied." Then you can do us a favor and tell us why a tree was in our town which once golden apples now does not even puts forth its leaves. "-" that you shall know, "he replied," just wait until I come back. He went on and came to a wide river over which he had over. The ferryman asked him what he trade was, and what he knew. "I know everything," he replied. "Then you can do me a favor," said the ferryman, "and tell me why I always back and will herfahren needs and never be replaced." - "You shall know," he replied, "just wait until I wiederkomme.Als he had crossed the water, he found the entrance to hell It was black and sooty within, and the devil was not at home. but his grandmother was sitting in a large arm chair. "What do you want?" she spoke to him, but did not look so bad. "I wanted to like to have three golden hairs from the devil's head," he replied, "or I can not keep my wife." - "That's asking a lot," she said, "if the devil comes home and finds you, you're doing it in the neck, but I pity you, I will see if I can help you." They turned him into an ant and said, "Creep into my skirt folds, as you're safe." - "Yes," he replied, "that's all right, but I want to know why a fountain gushed from the usual wine has become dry, not now gives even more water three things like: why a tree which otherwise golden apples was not even driving more true: and why a ferryman always herüber- and will go over there and must not be replaced. " - "These are serious questions," she replied. "But hold you still and quiet and pay attention to what the devil says when I pull out the three golden hairs" broke When the evening, the devil returned home. As soon as he had entered, he noticed that the air was not pure. "I smell human flesh," he said, "it is not right here." Then he pried into every corner, and searched, but could not find anything. The grandmother scolded him: "It has just been swept," said she, "and brought all right, now you are upsetting it again with each other; you human flesh in the nose Set've always down and eat your supper!". When he had eaten and drunk, he was mild, the grandmother put his head in his lap and said she should lausen him a little. It was not long before he fell asleep, blew snoring. Then the old woman grabbed a golden hair, tore it out and put it next to him. "Ouch!" cried the devil, "what are you doing?" "I had a bad dream," answered the grandmother, "I told you in the hair taken." - "What did you you dream?" said the devil. "I dreamed, a market well, once flowed from the wine was, dried up, and do not water would it all, what is the cause of it?" - "Hey, if they knew it!" answered the devil, "there is a toad sitting under a stone in the well, if they killed it, the wine would flow again." The grandmother picked his lice again until he fell asleep and snored, the windows shook. As they pulled him out of the second hair. "Who! What are you doing?" cried the devil angrily. "No offense," she answered, "I did it in a dream." - "What did you dream about again?" asked he. "I dreamed that in a certain kingdom there stood an apple-tree which had supported otherwise golden apples and wanted to now not even bear leaves. What was probably the cause of it?" "Hey, if they knew it!" answered the devil, "gnawing at the root a mouse, if they killed it, it will again bear golden apples, but it gnaws much longer the tree will wither altogether. But let me with your dreams in peace, if you love me again disturb the sleep, so you'll get a slap. " The grandmother spoke gently to and picked his lice again until he had fallen asleep and was snoring. Then she took hold of the third golden hair and pulled it out of him. The devil jumped up, screamed and wanted to have treated her ill, she had not quieted him again and said, "Who can help bad dreams?" "What did you dream?" he asked, and was quite curious. "I dreamed of a ferryman who complained that he always back and had herfahren, and would not be replaced. What is the cause?" - "Hey, the blockhead" answered the devil, "if someone comes and wants to go, he has to his oar in his hand, then add the other must run over, and he is free." As the grandmother had plucked out the three golden hairs, and the three questions were answered, she let the old serpent alone, and he slept until daybreak. When the devil had gone out again the old woman took the ant out of the folds of her dress, and gave the child of good fortune, the human form. "There you have the three golden hairs," she said, "what the devil said to your three questions, I'll you have heard. " - "Yes," he replied, "I have heard, and will save it well." - "So you is helped," she said, "and now you can go your way." He thanked the old woman for helping him in his need, and left hell well content that it was all so fortunately. When he came to the ferryman he should give the promised answer. "Ferry me across first," said the child of good fortune, "I will tell you how you can be set free," and had reached when he on the opposite bank, he gave him the devil's advice "if another one comes and wants to be ferried over, so he just give the rod in your hand. "He went on and came to the town wherein stood the unfruitful tree, and there too the watchman wanted an answer. So he told him how he had heard from the devil, "Kill the mouse which is gnawing at its root, and it will again bear golden apples." As the watchman thanked him and gave him as a reward two asses laden with gold, which followed him. Most recently, he came to the town whose well was dry. Then he said to the watchman what the devil had said: "A toad is in the well beneath a stone, you have to find and kill, he will give plenty of wine again." The watchman thanked him and also gave him two laden with gold Esel.Endlich reached fortunate child at home with his wife, who was heartily glad to see him again, and heard how well everything had succeeded him. The king he took what he had asked that when he saw three golden hairs of the devil, and four asses laden with gold he was quite delighted and said: "Now all the conditions and you can keep my daughter but. dear son, I'm telling you, where did all that gold? this is tremendous wealth! " - "I drove over a river," he said, "and since I have taken it, it is instead of sand on the shore." - "Can I also get that?" said the king, who felt anxious. "As much as you want," he replied, "There is a ferryman on the river from which you let run over, so you can fill your sacks." The greedy King set out in all rush came on the road, and when he to the river he beckoned to the ferryman to put him across. The ferryman came and bade him, and when they got to the other side, he gave him the oar in his hand and ran away. The king had to ferry, as a punishment for his sins. "Perhaps he is ferrying still?" - "What for it is no the rod have taken from him."
Faithful John	56	516	German	There once was an old king who was ill, and thought will probably be the death-bed on which I lie. Then he said: "Let me come Faithful John" Faithful John was his favorite servant that because he his life had been so loyal long and told him. When he came beside the bed, the king said to him, "Getreuester John, I feel my end approaching, and since I have no anxiety except about my son, he is still at a young age, where he was not always. white guessing. and if you do not promise me to teach him everything he needs to know, and to be his foster father, so I can not close my eyes in peace. " Then Faithful John said, "I do not want him to leave and he wants to serve with fidelity, when it also costs my life." Then the old King said, "Now I die in comfort and peace." Then he added: "After my death, thou shalt show him the whole castle: all the chambers, halls, and vaults, and all the treasures which lie therein, but the last chamber in the long gallery, shalt thou not show where the picture of the princess. is the golden Dwelling If he sees that picture, he is a fierce love for her and feel will fall into a swoon and because of them fall into great danger;. therefore thou must preserve him. " And again, the old king had given to it as faithful John's hand, was this quiet, laid his head on the pillow and starb.Als the old king was laid to rest, as told faithful John the young king what he his father had promised on his deathbed, and said, "I will keep you and surely will be faithful, as I was to him, and it should cost me my life." The mourning was over. As faithful John said to him: "It is now time that you see your heritage, and I will show you your father castle." Then he took him about everywhere, up and down, and let him see all the riches, and the magnificent, only the one room which he did not open, in which the dangerous picture. The image was so placed that when the door was opened you looked straight on it, and it was so wonderful that you thought it breathe and live and there was nothing more charming or more beautiful in the world. The young king noticed well that Faithful John always walked past this one door, and said, "Why do you never open this one for me in this?" - "There is something in it," he replied, "which would terrify." But the king replied: "I saw the whole castle, so I want to know what is in it," went and the door was about to open by force. Then Faithful John held him back and said: ". I have promised thy father before his death that you should not see what is in this chamber, it could and me on thee to great misfortune" -.. "Oh no," replied the young King, "if I do not go in, it will be my certain destruction I would no rest day and night have until I saw with my eyes Use Now I do not leave the place until you have unlocked the door. "Since faithful John saw that there was no help, and searched with a heavy heart and many sighs from the large federal remove the key. When he opened the door, he went in first, and thought he could hide the portrait that it did not see the king before him. But what was that? The king stood on tiptoe and looked over his shoulder. And when he saw the image of the Virgin, which was so magnificent and shone with gold and precious stones, he fell fainting to the ground. Faithful John took him up, carried him to his bed, and sorrowfully thought: The harm is done, Lord God, what will come of it? Then he strengthened him with wine, until he came to himself again. The first word he said was, "Oh, who's that beautiful picture?" - "That is the princess of the Golden Dwelling," answered Faithful John. Then the king continued, "My love for her is so great when all the leaves on the trees were tongues, could it not testify it; I put it my life that I gain them you are my getreuester John, do you have me stand. . "the faithful servant considered for a long time how the matter would begin, for it was difficult to come only before the presence of the princess. Finally he thought of a way, and said to the king. "All she has about her is of gold, tables, chairs, dishes, cups, bowls, and household appliance In your sweethearts five tons are gold, let one of the goldsmiths of the kingdom made into all kinds of vessels and equipment to wild beasts and strange animals, such as may please her, we want to go there with them and try our luck. " The king was called fetch all the goldsmiths, who had to work day and night, until at last the most splendid things were done. When everything was loaded onto a ship, Faithful John took Kaufmann clothes, and the king had a match to do to make himself quite unrecognizable. Then they sailed across the sea and drove until they came to the town wherein the princess of the Golden Dwelling wohnte.Der Faithful John was said to remain the king on the ship and wait for him. "Maybe," he said, "I shall bring the princess with, it ensures that everything is in order, the gold vessels and let up the whole ship." Then he gathered together in his apron all kinds of gold things, went on shore and walked straight to the royal palace. When he entered the courtyard, stood by the fountain a beautiful girl who had two golden buckets in her hand, drawing it. wanted and when it carry away the sparkling water and turned around, she saw the stranger, and asked who he was. Then he answered: "I am a merchant," and opened his apron, and let her look in. Then she cried, "Oh, what beautiful gold stuff!" sat down the bucket and looked at one by one. Then the girl said, "This has to see the princess, who has such great pleasure in golden things, that she will buy all you have." It took him by the hand and led him upstairs, for she was the maid. When the princess of the goods saw she was quite delighted and said. 'It is so beautifully worked, that I will surely buy you everything "But Faithful John said." I am only the servant of a rich merchant. What I have here is nothing compared to what those my master has in his ship, and that is what has ever been made in gold beautiful and valuable "She wanted to have everything brought to her, but he said,". This includes many . day, so great is the quantity and so many halls, set up to it, your house that is not space for it has "Because encouraged more and more was her curiosity and longing, they that finally said," Conduct me to the ship, I myself will go and look at your master's treasures. "As they led Faithful John to the ship and was quite delighted, and the king, when he saw her, saw that her beauty was even greater than the picture had represented, and thought no other wanted to be the heart him shatter Then she boarded the ship, and the King led her into it, but faithful John remained with the helmsman and told the ship repel.. "all sail that flies like a bird in the air" the but King showed her the golden dishes, each individually, the bowls, cups, bowls, the birds, the beasts and strange animals. Many hours went by whilst she was seeing everything, and in her delight she did not notice that the ship then drove having looked at the last, she thanked the merchant and wanted to go home, but when they arrived at the vessel edge she saw that it remotely went on high seas from land, and hurrying onwards with all sail. "Oh," she exclaimed frightened, "I cheated s, I'm kidnapped and fallen into the power of a merchant; I would die rather "And the king took them by the hand and said:" A merchant I am not I am a king and not're meaner origin than you. But I've kidnapped you with cunning that has happened over great love. The first time I saw your portrait, I am powerless fallen to the earth. "When the princess of the Golden Dwelling heard that, she was comforted, and her heart was inclined him they that willingly consented to his wife werden.Es but came to pass, while they were sailing on the high seas that faithful John, when he made the front sat on the ships and music, saw three ravens in the air, which came flying. Since he stopped playing and listened to what they talked, because he well understood One cried, "Oh, there he is carrying the princess of the golden Dwelling." - "Yes," replied the second, said the third. "he has not yet." " he has yet, she is sitting beside him in the ship "Then the first began again, and cried." What will that do him! When they reach land, it is a chestnut horse jump out because he will want to mount, and he does, it will run away with him and into the air, he that never his maiden again sees "Spake the second." is there no escape? "-" Oh, yes, if someone else gets on it swiftly, the pistol which must be in its holster takes out, and the horse totschiesst it, the young King is saved. But who knows that! And for those who know, tell him who turns to stone from the foot toe to the knee "Since the second said." I know more if the horse be killed, the young King will not keep but his bride. When they come together in the lock, so is there a wrought bridal garment in a bowl and looks as if it were woven of gold and silver, but is nothing but sulfur and pitch. If he does it, it will burn him to bone and marrow "Said the third," Is there no escape "-" 0 yes, "replied the second," if one with gloves on seizes the garment and throws it into the fire.? that burns it, the young King will be saved. But what's the use! . Who and says it's white it, half his body will stone from the knee to the heart "Then said the third," I know more, the bridal garment be burnt, the young King will still not have his bride. When lifting after the marriage of dance and dances the young queen, she will suddenly turn pale and fall as dead, and does not lift them up and draw from her right breast three drops of blood and spit them out again, she will die. But if any one who knows it, he is the whole body to stone to the sole of his foot "When the ravens that had talked the eddies., They flew onwards, and Faithful John had well understood everything, but it was from the time he quiet and sad because he concealed his master what he had heard, this was unfortunate; he discovered it, he had even sacrifice his life but finally he said to him. "my Lord, I want to save, and should. I myself also perish. "When they came to shore, all happened as the raven had said before, and it a magnificent chestnut horse sprang forward." well, "said the king," he shall carry me to my castle , "and was about to mount it when faithful John got before him, jumped quickly on it, drew the pistol out of the holster, and shot the horse down because the other servants called the king who had the faithful John, not good." How shameful, the beautiful to kill animals that have carried the King to his palace! "But the king said:" Be silent and let him go, it's my getreuester John, who knows what it is good "They went into the castle, and the hall there stood a dish, and the bridal garment lay in and saw otherwise, as if it were made of gold and silver. the young king went towards it and wanted to take, but John pushed him away, grabbed it with gloves on, carried it quickly to the fire and let it burn. started the other attendants to grumble again and said, "Look, now he is even burning the King's bridal garment." But the young king said: "who knows what it is good, let him go, it's my getreuester John!" now the wedding was celebrated. the dance began, and the bride also took part in, as hard faithful John watchful and looked into her face. Suddenly blanched them and fell dead to the ground. as he ran hastily to her, lifted her up and carried her into a chamber as he laid her down, and knelt and sucked the three drops of blood from her right breast and she spat out. Immediately she breathed again and recovered herself, but the young king had seen it with and did not know why it had done Faithful John, was angry and cried, "Throw him in jail!" Next morning Faithful John was condemned, and led to the gallows, and when he stood up and should be addressed, he said: "Everyone who has to die before his end may talk again, should I have the right too?" - "Yes," replied the King, "it shall be for the privilege!". As faithful John said, "I am unjustly condemned, and you've always been loyal, and told how he heard on the sea, the conversation of the ravens and how to save his master, all this should have done since exclaimed. the king, "Oh, my most faithful John Grace! Take him down! ' But as Faithful John spoke the last word he had spoken, fall lifeless and was a Stein.Darüber now wore the king and the queen great suffering, and the king said: "Oh, what have I great loyalty rewarded so bad" and let the stone figure and placed in his bedroom beside his bed. Every time he looked at it he wept and said, "Oh, could I make you alive again, my getreuester John!" It was a time around, the Queen bore twins, two sons who grew fast and were her delight. Once when the Queen was at church and sat the two children playing beside their father, he saw again the stone figure full of sorrow, sighed and said, "Oh, can I make you alive again, 'my getreuester John!" Then the stone began to speak and said, "Yes, you can make me resist to life, if you want to call what is dearest to 'as the king called:" All I have in the world, I will give to you "! the stone continued: ". If you are with your own hand two children your head will cut off, and sprinkle me with their blood, so I get the life back" the king was startled, listened as he that he must kill his dearest children, but he thought of the great loyalty and that faithful John had died for him, drew his sword and cut off with his own hand the children's heads. and had painted when he with their blood the stone, life returned, and the faithful John stood once more safe and healthy before him, he said to the king. "your truth shall not go unrewarded," and took the heads of the children, she sat up and rubbed the wounds with their blood, which they became whole again immediately, jumped around and played continued as if nothing had happened to them. Now the king was full of joy, and when he saw the Queen, he hid Faithful John and the two children in a large closet. When she entered, he said to her: "Have you been praying in the church?" - "Yes," she answered, "but I have constantly been thinking of Faithful John, that he has become so unhappy with us." And he said, "Dear wife, we can give him his life but it cost us our two little sons, whom we must sacrifice.." The queen turned pale and frightened in the heart, but she said, "It's us owe him because of his great loyalty." That he rejoiced that she thought as he had thought, and went and closed the cupboard, the children and the faithful John got out and said, "God be praised, he is redeemed, and our little sons again we have! " and told her how everything had happened. Because together they lived in bliss ever after.
The drummer	1834	400	German	One evening was a young drummers all alone on the field and came to a lake, as he looked at the shore are three pieces of white linen. "What fine linen," he said, and put one in his pocket. He went home, thought no more of his find and went to bed. When he was going to sleep, it was to him as if someone's name. He listened and heard a faint voice saying to him, "Trommeler, Trommeler, wake up" He could, as it was dark night, no one can see, but it seemed to him that a figure was hovering about his bed and down. "What do you want?" asked he. "Give me my dress back," replied the voice, "that you took away from me yesterday at the lake." - "You shall have it back," said the drummer, "if you tell me who you are." - "Oh," replied the voice, "I am the daughter of a mighty king, but I have fallen into the power of a witch, and am shut up on the glass-mountain Every day I have to bathe with my two sisters in the lake, but without my dress. I can not fly back again. My sisters have gone, but I had to stay behind. I ask you to give me back my dress. " - "Be calm, poor child," said the drummer, "I want it give it back to you." He took it out of his pocket and handed it to her in the dark out. They recorded it in haste and did away with it. "Stop a moment," he said, "maybe I can help you." - "Help you give me only when you step on the glass mountain, and freeing me from the power of the witch But the Glasberg you do not come, and if you're also quite close to it you could not ascend.." - "What I want, I can," said the drummer, "I am sorry for you, and I am afraid of nothing, but I do not know the path that leads to the glass mountain.." - "The road goes through the great forest, where the man-eaters live," she said, "the more I can not tell you." Then he heard her fortschwirrte.Bei daybreak the made the drummer on his drum, and went without fear straight into it through the forest. When he had gone for a while and no giant saw, he thought, "I must waken up the sluggards," hung in front of the drum and struck a vortex that the birds out of the trees flew with shouts. Before long, a giant rose in the air, which had been lying in the grass and slept, and was the size of a fir. "You wretch," cried he, "what are you drumming here for, and wakening me out of the best night's sleep?" - "I am drumming," he replied, "because many thousands come after me, let them know the way." - "What do they want in my forest?" asked the giant. "They want to make you a full end and the forest of such a monster as you are clean." - "Oh," said the giant, "I come to you as dead ants." - "Do you think you could accomplish anything against them?" said the drummer, "if you bend down to grab one, he will jump away and hides, but as you lie down and sleeping, they will come forth from every thicket, and creep up on you. Everyone has a hammer of steel put on the belt so that they beat you a skull. " The giant grew peevish and thought: If I deal with the crafty folk, it might turn out badly for me. Wolves and bears I can strangle, but before the earthworms I can not protect myself. "Listen, little fellow," he said, "go back again, I promise you that I will leave you and your comrades in the future in peace, and do you have a wish for, tell me, I will give you a little too pleased to do." - "You have long legs," said the drummer, "and can run faster than me, my contract to the glass mountain, and I will give my family a sign to retreat, and they will leave you alone this time." - "Come here, worm," said the giant, "sit on my shoulder, I will carry you where you ask." The giant lifted him up, and the drummer started up to your heart's content to swirl on the drum. The giant thought, This will be the sign that the other people are to go back. After a while, a second giant was standing by the road who took the drummer from the first and put it in his buttonhole. The drummer took the as a bowl was large, be kept in mind and looked quite funny about the button. Then they came to a third, who took him out of the buttonhole and set him on the rim of his hat; Then the drummer walked up and down, looking out over the trees out, and when he perceived a mountain in the blue distance, he thought, This is certainly the glass mountain, and he was. The giant only a few steps, they had reached the foot of the mountain where the giant put him. The drummer demanded he should carry him to the top of the glass mountain, but the giant shook his head, muttered something in his beard, and went into the woods zurück.Nun was the poor drummer front of the mountain, which was as high as if three mountains were piled on each other, and yet so smooth as a mirror, and knew no advice to get up it. He began to climb, but in vain, for he always slipped back. Who now would be a bird, he thought, but what was the good wishes, it grew on him no wings. Whilst he was standing thus, not knowing to help, he saw, not far from two men who violently quarreling with each other. He went up to her and saw that they were disputing about a saddle which was lying on the ground in front of them, and wanted to have each of them. "Why are you fools," he said, "to quarrel about a saddle, you have not a horse." - "The saddle is worth that fighting about," answered one of the men, "who sits on it, and wishes himself in any place, even if it at the end of the world that has arrived at the moment, as he has expressed the wish Der. saddle belongs to us in common turn to ride on it, as in me, but the other does not want to leave. " - "I will soon decide the dispute," said the drummer, a distance went wide and stuck a white rod in the ground. Then he came back and said, "Now run to the goal, whoever gets there first, shall ride first." They both sat down to a trot, but they were hardly a few steps away, so the drummer swung himself on the saddle, wished himself on the glass mountain, and before one could turn round, he was there. On the hill above was a plain, there stood an old stone house; and before the house was a large fish pond, but behind it was a dark forest. People and animals he did not see, it was all quiet, only the wind rustling in the trees, and the clouds moved by quite close above his head away. He went to the door and knocked. When he had knocked the third time, an old man with a brown face and red eyes the door; She had spectacles on her long nose, and looked sharply at him, then asked her what would be his desire. "Intake, food and a bed," said the drummer. "That you shall have," said the old woman, "if you wanna do it three works." - "Why not?" he replied, "I fear no work, and if it is still so hard." The old woman let him in, and gave him some food and a good bed. In the morning when he had slept, took a thimble from her wrinkled finger, gave it to the drummer, and said: "Now go to work and scoop the pond outside of this thimble, but before the night falls, you need be finished, and all the fish that are in the water must be selected according to their type and size and placed side by side. " - "This is a strange work," said the drummer, but went to the pond and began to draw. He scooped up all morning, but what can you with a thimble with a big water, and if one draws one thousand years? When it was noon, he thought: "It's all for nothing, and does not matter whether I work or not," stopped and sat down. As a girl out of the house was gone, he presented a basket of food, and said, "You are sitting there so sad, what ails you?" He looked at it and saw that it was beautiful. "Oh," he said, "I can not fulfill the first work, as it will be with the others I went out to look for a princess who is to live here, but I have not found her,? I want to continue." - "Stay here," the girl said, ".. I will help you out of your trouble You're tired, put your head in my lap and go to sleep, when you wake up again, so the work is done." The drummer left the not to be told twice. Once his eyes were shut, she turned a wishing-ring and said "Water Fishes, come out." Once the water rose like a white mist in the air and pulled away with the other clouds, and clucking the fish jumped ashore and lay down next to each other, everyone awoke to its size and type. When the drummer, he saw with astonishment that everything was done. But the girl said. "One is not from the fish by his peers, but solely if the old comes tonight and see that everything is done, what she calls, she will ask: What is this fish alone then? throw the fish in her face, and say: He shall be for you, old witch. "In the evening the old woman came and did as she asked as he threw the fish in her face. She acted as if she did not notice it, and was silent, but she looked at him with malicious eyes. The next morning spoke her: "Yesterday you had it too easy, I have to give you harder work. Today you have the whole forest cut down, the wood into logs split and put in fathoms, and in the evening everything has to be done. "She gave him an ax, a mallet, and two wedges. But the ax was made of lead, the club and the wedges were. When he began to cut sheet metal, then the ax turned back, and the mallet and wedges together. he knew not how to help, but at noon the girl came back with his dinner and comforted him. "put your head in my lap, "she said," and sleep, when you wake up, so the work is done. "she turned her wishing-ring, in an instant the whole forest with crashing collapsed, the wood split from itself, and lay down in fathoms . together; it was as if unseen giants were carrying the work when he woke up, the girl said: "you see, the wood is geklaftert and placed; Only one road remains, but if the old woman comes this evening and asks what the branch should, so give her a blow with it, saying one shall be for thee, thou witch "The old man came". You see, " she said, "how easy the work was; Tomorrow morning you shall all the wood: - "" For thee, thou witch, "he said and gave her a blow with it, but she pretended not to feel it, laughed scornfully and said," but for whom the road is still there? bunch up, burn it, and burn it. "He stood with daybreak and began the wood fetch, but how can one man together a whole forest? the work made no progress. but the girl did not leave him in the not, it noon brought him his food, and ate as he is, he put his head in my lap and fell asleep. When he awoke, the entire pile of wood burning in one enormous flame, which stretched its tongues out into the sky. "Listen to me on, "said the girl," when the witch comes, they will apply to you all sorts of things you do without fear, requiring them, they can not hurt you, but you are afraid, then grabs you and the fire consumes you. Last, if you have done everything, seize her with both hands and throw it in the middle of the embers "The girl went away, and the old woman came creeping". Who! I'm freezing, "she said," but that is a fire that burns; it warms the old bones to me, and does me good. But there is a millstone, which will not burn, to get me out. Did you already done, so you're free and can draw wherever you want. Only kicking in! "The drummer did not reflect long, jumped right into the flames, but they did nothing to him, not even the hair they could scorch him. He carried the log out and put it down. But as soon as the wood had the earth touched, it turned, and the beautiful girl stood before him that had helped him in trouble, and by the silken and shining golden garments which she wore, he knew well that it was the king's daughter. But the old woman laughed venomously and said, "You think you have it, but you have not yet." Just wanted to go for the girl and to move away, he grabbed the old woman with both hands, lifted it into the air and threw them to the flames in throat, closed over her when they were happy that they consume a witch sollten.Die king's daughter looked the drummer, and looked as if it was a beautiful youth and remembered that he had put his life because , re to redeem them, eights her his hand and said, "You have ventured everything for me, but I will do for you everything. Do you promise, you shall be my husband thy faithfulness. To not want for riches, we shall have enough with what the witch has gathered together here. "She led him to the house, where there were chests and boxes, which were filled with their treasures. They left gold and silver, and took only . the gems you did not want to stay on the Glasberg longer, as he said to her, "Sit by me on my saddle, then we will fly down like birds." - "not like the old saddle me," she said, "I .. only need to turn on my wish ring, so we are at home "-" Well, "answered the drummer," then wish us in front of the city gate "in no time they were there, but the drummer said," I want only my go parents and give them message to wait for me here on the field, I will be back soon. "-" Ah, "said the princess," I beg you, take care of yourself, kiss your parents when you arrive onto its right cheek, because otherwise you will forget everything, and I stay here alone and rely on de m field back. "-" How can I forget you, "he said and promised her hand, right again soon. When he entered his father's house, no one knew who he was, he had changed, for the three days he had spent on the Glasberg, had been three long years. Since he made himself known, and his parents fell him with joy around his neck, and he was moved in his heart that he kissed her on both cheeks and did not think of the words of the girl. But when he had given them the kiss on the right cheek, he disappeared every thought of the princess. He emptied out his pockets, and laid handfuls of the largest jewels on the table. The parents did not know what to do with the wealth. Then the father built a magnificent castle, gardens, woods and meadows as if a prince should live in it. And when it was finished, the mother said: "I have a girl chosen for you, in three days the wedding should be." The son was happy with everything parents wollten.Die poor princess has long stood in front of the town waiting for the return of the young man. When evening came, they said, "he kissed his parents on the right cheek and certainly has forgotten me." Her heart was full of sorrow, she wanted in a lonely cottage in the wood and did not return to the court their father back. Every evening she went into the city and went to his house; he often saw her, but he did not know her more. At length she heard the people saying: "wedding will take place tomorrow." She said, "I will try if I can win his heart." was as the first wedding ceremonies, she turned her wishing-ring and said, "A dress as bright as the sun." Instantly the dress lay before her, it was as bright as if it were woven of real sunbeams. When all the guests had gathered, they entered the hall. Everyone was amazed at the beautiful dress, the bride most, and as pretty dresses their greatest desire was, they went to the stranger and asked if they wanted to sell it to her. "Not for money," she replied, "but if I may pass the first night outside the door, where the groom is asleep, so I will give it." The bride could not overcome her desire and consented, but she mixed the groom a nightcap in his night with wine, he which fell into a deep sleep. had become as now everything still, so the King's daughter crouched in front of the door of the bedroom, opened it just a little, and cried: "Drummer, drummer, listen to me, Hast thou forgotten me you have on the Glasberg not with me sat? I have from the witch does not preserve your life? Have you not given me troth to? drummer, drummer, listen to me. " But it was all in vain, the drummer did not awake, and when morning dawned, the king's daughter without having achieved anything had to go away again. On the second evening she turned her wishing-ring and said, "A dress as silvery as the moon." When she with the dress, which was tender like the moonlight, appeared at the feast, she attracted back the desire of the bride and gave it to her for allowing a second night at the door of the bedroom to be allowed. Then she called in nocturnal silence? "Drummer, drummer, listen to me, Hast thou forgotten me Have not you been sitting on the Glasberg with me I have from the witch does not preserve your life Did you me loyalty not? given hand? drummer, drummer, listen to me. " But the drummer, stupefied with the sleeping-draft, could not be aroused. Sadly next morning she went back to her silviculture. But the people in the house had heard the lamentation of the stranger girl and told the groom thereof; They said also to him that it would not have been able to hear anything about it because they had poured him a nightcap in the wine. On the third evening, the King's daughter turned her wishing-ring and said, "A dress glittering like the stars." When she showed herself therein at the feast, was the bride about the splendor of the dress, which far surpassed the others, quite beside himself, saying, "I should and must have it." The girl was there, like the others, for permission to spend the night at the door of the groom. The groom but drank the wine did not, which was handed to him before going to bed, but poured it behind the bed. had become, and as everything in the house still, he heard a soft voice that called him: "Drummer, drummer, listen to me, Hast thou forgotten me Have not you been sitting on the Glasberg with me I have before? witch does not preserve your life? Have you not given me troth to? drummer, drummer, listen to me. " Suddenly, his memory returned. "Oh," he exclaimed, "how can I have acted so treacherously, but the kiss that I have my parents in the joy of my heart on the right cheek, where the fault is it that has stunned me." He jumped up, the princess took her hand and led her to his parents' bed. "This is my true bride," said he, "if I marry the other, I'm doing great wrong." The parents, when they heard how everything had happened, gave their consent. Since the lights were lit again in the hall, drums and trumpets were brought, friends and relatives invited to come back, and the true wedding was celebrated with great joy. The first bride received the beautiful dresses as a compensation, and seemed satisfied.
The bird Dam	4024	301	German	Once there was a king who had twelve daughters, and of which he held so much that he never let them out of sight; but every day at noon, when the king was sleeping, the princesses walked. At one time, the king again kept his midday slumber, and the princesses were, as usual, went for a walk, it was that they did not return, but failed to materialize. As great concern and sorrow over all the land; but in the betrübtesten Allen was the king. He sent messengers throughout all his kingdom, and in many foreign countries and had them chasing them and nachläuten with all the bells all over the country; but the princesses were gone and stayed away so that no one knew where they were thrown up or flown. As one might then understand well that they had to be kidnapped by some trolls. thereof the rumor soon spread from city to city, from country to country, and finally it came also to a king who lived far, far away in a land and had twelve sons. heard tell when the sons of the twelve princesses, she asked her father for permission to travel to the princesses visit. but the old king would initially know nothing of it; because he feared that he would never see the children; but the prince fell at his feet and begged him until he finally gave in and let her travel. He fitted out a ship for them and put the helm over the same knight Röd, who was well versed to water. For a long time now they sailed around and searched in all the countries where they came from, according to the princesses; but they found no trace of them. It now lacked only a little days, they had sailed for seven years. Then one day a violent storm and such a storm arose that they believed they would never come ashore again, and all had to work on and on, so that no sleep came to her eyes as long as the bad weather continued. But on the third day the storm abated, and it was suddenly very quiet. All were now so tired from work and the bad weather that they fell asleep at once; only the youngest prince had no rest and could not sleep. While he now back on deck and walked, the ship drifted to an island and on the island a little dog ran on the shore and barked and whined against the ship as if it would go up. The king's son whistled and lured the dog itself; but it could not come and barked and whined all the more to him. Prince däuchte, it would be a sin to let the dog die there, which, he believed, was from a ship which would have perished in the storm; but he did not know how to help him because he is not believed able to stay the boat alone; because all the others were asleep, and he did not like to wake up because the dog it. But the weather was so clear and so quiet; because he thought because, you've got it but try and see if you can not save the little creatures, and he set out to expose the boat, and it was thus easier than he had thought. He rowed ashore and walked up to the dog; But as often as he wanted to grab it, it jumped to the side and so attracted the prince always continue until it, before he himself was aware of it was in a big beautiful castle. Since the dog suddenly turned into a beautiful princess. On the bench but was a man so big and so ugly that the prince was shocked about it. "You need not afraid to be," said the man; - but the prince was still more shocked when he heard his voice - "I know very well what you want: they are your twelve princes who seek the lost twelve previous princesses. I know very well where they are: they are my Lord; there they sit, each in her chair and lice him because he has twelve heads. Now you're about sailing for seven years, but you will still need to sail seven years, before you find them. As for you, so you could like to stay here and get my daughter; But you only have to kill my master, because he is very strict against us, so that we are his long weary; and if he is dead, I will reigned in his stead. Attempts but now, if Thou hast power to swing the sword, "the troll said. The king's son wanted to take a rusty sword that hung on the wall, but he could not budge it. "So you have to you a sip from this bottle take," said the troll. When the prince had done, he could take the sword from the wall, and when he took another sip, he could pick it up; and when he finally took another sip, he could swing it with such ease, as if 'it were his own. "Now if you come back on board," said the Troll Prince, "so you have to the sword in your bunk hide, so the Knights Röd not get to see it. Although he is not able to swing it, but he will hate you and seek you for life. Of seven years are up, to three days, "he added," then it will just go back to the way now; it is then a massive storm with gale and hail over you, and when that is over, all will be tired and lie in their bunks; But you must then take the sword and row ashore; then you will reach to a castle, where nothing but wolves, bears and lions stand as sentinels; But you need you not to be afraid of them, for they are all you crawl feet. Once you have come out in the castle, you can see the robber in a beautifully decorated room to sit; but he has twelve heads, and the princesses sitting each on her chair and lice him, and as you can imagine that they do not like such work out well. After that you must you hurry up and get out of it to a head after the other, before he wakes up; because this happens, it eats you alive on. The king's son, "now took the sword back on board and did not forget what the troll had told him. The others were still all and slept; but he hid the sword in his bunk, so that neither the knight Röd, nor any one else of them remarked. Now, it again began to blow; because the prince woke the others and said it is unacceptable that they lay longer there and slept as they would now get such a good wind. None of them had noticed that he had been away. - Time passed slowly, and the prince always thought of the adventure he should be, but doubted the happy ending. Now when up to three days were the seven years for it all happened as the troll prince had told him. There was a violent storm which held three days long, and when that was over, were all tired from the strenuous work and went to sleep in their bunks. The youngest prince but rowed ashore, and the guards were crawling at his feet, so he came to the castle. the king was sitting in one of the rooms and slept like the troll prince had told him and the twelve princesses sat in her chair each and every läusten her head. The prince waved to the princesses that they should be removed; But they pointed to the trolls and waved him back, he should quickly go away; But the prince gave them to understand through facial expressions and gestures that he wanted to free them; finally they realized because his mind and went away quietly one another after. Now the prince jumped quickly added and slashed the troll king the twelve heads off, so that the blood flowed like a great river. was killed when the Troll, the Prince rowed back to the ship and hid the sword. It däuchte him that he had now done enough, and he could not do it alone out of the lock's body, he wanted the others to help him. He therefore woke up and said it was a shame that they should lie there and sleep, while he found the princess and she would be exempt from the trolls. As the others laughed at him and said he would have slept just as well, as all of them, and it would have only dreamed that he would be such a hero; for if any man should be the princesses free, so it would be far more likely that one of them would have done as he. But the prince told them how everything had happened, and drove as if to land and first blood Bach saw and after that the castle and the trolls and the twelve heads and the princesses, they saw clearly that he spoke the truth, and he now helped the heads and the whole body into the sea throw. All were now cheerful and in good spirits; But no one was happier than the princesses who had now no longer necessary, all day to sit over there and lice trolls. Of all the gold and silver and the precious unitH that was found in the castle, they took so much with when the ship could carry. Then all went on board the Prince with, together with the princesses. And when they were come out for some distance into the sea, said the princesses that they had in the joy forget their golden crowns, which would lie in a cupboard in the castle, and they wanted to have along but gladly. Now, since no one wanted from the remnant pick them, the youngest King's son said, "Did I ventured been so frequent, so I can probably get the golden crowns, if you only deign the sails and wait so long, ye until I come back. "Yes, they did, they would condescend the sails and wait until he came back. But when the prince was so far from the boat from that they could not see him, the knight Röd who likes himself is chief, said his and wanted to have the youngest princess, it could do no good, that she there BE REDUCED still and on it waited; because they might think that he would not return at home; they knew, moreover, he said that the king had given him (the Knight Röd) the authority to sail when and where he wanted, and now they should say that it was he who would have freed the princesses, and if someone else said then he should lose life. The prince did not dare to do otherwise, as the knight Röd had appointed them, and she sailed on. Inmittlerweile rowed the youngest prince on shore and walked to the palace, where he immediately found the cabinet with the golden crowns; and he struggled so long, until he succeeded the same to create the boat. And when he was now come out into the sea, he could never see the ship. He looked around in all directions; but of the ship was seen no trace; because he realized as well how it had happened. could nachzurudern you do not help, and he therefore had to turn around and row back to land. He was afraid though, spend the night alone in the castle, but it was after all no other advice. He therefore took courage, locked all the doors and gates and put in a room where a bed stood up canned, sleep. But anxious and fearful he was, and he was there more than it began after a while to crack the top of the roof and in the walls and crashing as if the whole castle was ready to burst. Suddenly there was a rustling beside his bed down like a whole load of hay. But soon after, he heard a voice calling to him that he should not be afraid "The bird Dam is here where you can not, because it helps you," said the voice, and then she said. "If you tomorrow wake up, you have to immediately go to Stabur and get four tons rocking for me for breakfast; I must first have the body, because otherwise I can nothing do for you. "- awoke when the prince the next morning, he saw near his bed a terribly large bird that had a spring in the neck that was as big as a semi-mature fir. The king's son was now on Stabur and took four tons distaff for the bird Dam. When he had his breakfast to the body, he said to the prince that he should hang the cabinet with the golden crowns on one side around the neck and as much gold and silver assume that there aufwöge the cupboard him now, and it to him the other side hanging around his neck, and then he should put him on the back and keep only fixed well to the neck spring. When the prince had done, it was in a roaring away through the air, and it was not long before they were on the ship. The prince wanted to on board to bring to the sword as the troll had told him that the others should not see; but the bird Dam said to him, that is unacceptable; "The knight Röd it will not get to see," he said, "but are you coming on board, he seeks you for life, for he will like to have the youngest princess; But for you to quietly be, because she puts every night having a drawn sword in front of him to bed. "- Finally and at last they arrived at the troll prince, and the king's son has now been so well received that it did not have to say is. The troll prince did not know what he should shew it all for good, because he killed his master and had made him king. He would have liked to give the prince his daughter and half the kingdom to it; but who was now so in love once in the youngest of the princesses that he thought only of her and insisted away again. But the troll asked him to be patient for a while and said that the others were very close to sail seven years before they came back home. From the princess of Troll The same thing that the bird had said Dam said, "For," he said, "You can be very quiet; because it always creates a drawn sword in front of him to bed. And if you do not want to believe me, you can go on board when sailing here over and you convince yourself and myself then at the same time bring back the sword; . For I must have it back quite "- as now after seven years, the others over sailed there, it was before again been a violent storm; and as the prince came on board, they were all asleep total of, and each of the princesses slept with her prince, only the youngest princess slept alone with a naked sword in front of him in bed, and on the floor beside the bed slept the Knights Röd. The king's son then took the sword and rowed back to shore without Someone had noticed that he had been on board. - The Prince, however, was constantly restless and wanted to always continue; and when at last the seven years were over, and came within three weeks, the troll king said to him: "Now you can put yourself to travel to get ready, because you once but do not want to stay with us. I will lend you an iron boat that goes by itself on the water, if you say only:> boat, go forward <In the boats is an iron clamp, and the clamp Thou shalt a little lift in the air, if you that! ship grade see in front of you; then they get such a driving wind that they forget to look for you. If you then come alongside the ship, You shall again lift the clamp; then there is such a storm that they get to do something different well as auszugucken for you. And if you're now come past them, You shall love the clamp for the third time in the air lift; But you must him repeatedly resign careful, because otherwise it will be such a whirlwind, to both you perish from the Others in it. Once you have come after the land, you need you not to bother about the boat, but pushing then just flipped over it into the sea, saying, ':> boat, go back home,' "- When the prince now left, got he as much gold and silver and other valuables and clothes and linen with which the princess had sewn during the long time he spent on the island for him, so that he was much richer than any of his brothers. No sooner had he now sat in the boat and said, "boat, go forward" as the boat went away!. And when he saw the ship just before him, he picked up the clamp a little in the air; because they got such a driving wind, that they forgot to look after it. When he came out next to the ship, he lifted the clamp once in the air, and there was such a storm, and such weather that the white foam around standing around the ship, and the waves Hinsch peeping over the top, so that they got to do something different than auszugucken after him. And when he was now passed them, he lifted the clamp for the third time, and since they were so abundant to do that they had no time to look for him. He was far, far earlier on shore when the ship; and when he had done all his things out of the boat, he returned it to, pushed it out to sea, saying: "boat, go home again," and as the boat went back fort.Der prince now dressed as a sailor - if the Troll King had advised him, or whether it was his own invention that I must leave unsaid - and went to a hovel to an old woman to whom he said he was a poor sailor, who on was a ship that had gone down, and he was the only one of the whole team, which would have saved himself, and then he asked her to want to accommodate him, together with the things he salvaged with him. "Oh, God help me," the woman said: "I can give no one hostel. You look well, such as it is here; I did not even beds, which I can be themselves, much less for Andre. "Yes, that would not matter, said the sailor if he had just a roof over your head, then it would be to him no matter how he would. A shelter she could not because he denied if he so wished fürlieb take it, as they would have it. - In the evening, the sailor brought his stuff in the cabin, and immediately began the old woman who wanted to have something new to tell, to ask what the one he would be where he was probably from, where he's been, and where did he go wants what it would be for things that he had what business he traveled with him, and if he had heard of the twelve princesses Nothing that would have gone against many loving years, and the like, so that it would be too tedious to tell everything. but the sailor said, if he were so bad and had such a headache from the appalling weather which had ruled since that he could reflect on any matter right; they want to let him rest only a few days until he is from the heavy work he had during the bad weather, something would have recovered, then they should afterwards already experienced everything. The next day the woman began to ask again and auszuforschen him; But the sailor had such a headache from the bad weather that he could remember no matter right; but he did so by about a word fall, as if he knew something most of the princesses. Immediately the old woman ran with this news on to all the gossip women round about, and now came the run one after another and asked for the princesses whether the sailor would have seen her if she would come soon, if they already had on the trip u.s.w. But the sailor still had a headache from the bad weather, so that he could not give up all decision; but so Much he told you that when the princesses not shipwreck had suffered would in the violent storm, then perhaps a fortnight, or perhaps a little earlier, arrive; But he could, he added, not say with certainty whether they were still alive; he had seen them, but they could well be later perished in the nasty weather. Once one ran from the gossip women to the king's castle and told there would be in the cottage in and the woman a sailor who had seen the princess and had said they would probably maybe a little earlier, arrive for a fortnight, or. When the king heard this, he immediately sent to the sailor and let him say that he should come to him and tell him the thing itself. The sailor said, "I do not have those clothes, and do not see like that I can go to the king," The messenger but said he should only come the king wanted and needed him speak, no matter that he should now so. or look like; because it would have been no one there, the message of the Princesses could bring. As for the sailor finally went to the palace and went to the king; who asked him if it were true that he had seen the princesses. "Yes, that's true," the sailor said, "but I do not know if they are still alive; because when I saw her, it was such a storm that we suffered shipwreck. . But if they are not then gone down, they may well for a fortnight, or perhaps a little earlier, come, "When the king heard this, he was almost beside himself with joy; and when it was now the time for the princesses, as the sailor had said should come, the king drew them in full state opposed to the beach - and great the joy was all over the country, when at last the ship with the princesses and the prince and the knights Röd arrived. The eleven eldest princesses were cheerful and in good spirits; but the most recent, which should have the Knights Röd, who said that it was he who freed the princesses and trolls had killed, was always sad and crying incessantly. The king wanted to not-being, and therefore he asked them why they were not also so lively and cheerful, like the other princesses; they would have, he said, to be no cause saddened, as they would now be exempt from the trolls and should have a man as a husband, as the knight is Röd. But she could say nothing; as the knight Röd had indeed threatened when someone would tell how everything really happened, then he wanted him killed bringen.Als now sewed the princesses one day her bridal finery, suddenly stepped Someone up in a big sailor's jacket and with a Tabuletkasten asked his back to them, and if they wanted to buy from him any jewelry to her wedding, he would, he said, extremely Seline and precious things of gold and silver. - Yes, this could well be possible. They saw the wares, and she looked at him; because it wanted bedünken, they should him and some know of the things that he had. "The so much magnificent jewelry has" finally said the youngest princess, "also could have something that would be appropriate even more magnificent and for us" - "That would be possible," said the shopkeeper.. But the others, they tuschten and said they would but remember which of the Knights Röd had threatened them. - Some time after that, sitting as the princesses one day outside the window, the prince returned to his great sailor jacket and carried on his back the closet with the golden crowns. When he entered the palace hall, he opened the closet, and now that the princesses each with its golden crown again recognized, said the youngest: "I seemeth, it's cheap and right that He who has set us free, the reward get that belongs to it, and that's not the knight Röd but he who our golden crowns brought - has set us free "then the king's son threw off the sailors jacket and stood as far handsome than all the others. and then the king immediately bring killed the knight Röd. Now the joy was especially great in the royal palace; and each prince took his princess and held her wedding, so that they had to tell each other in twelve kingdoms it.
The griffin	1579	610	German	There was once a king, where he reigned and what he's made to feel, I do not know more. He has had no son, but an only daughter who was always sick, and no doctor could cure. Since the king was prophesied that his daughter should eat herself well on apples. Since he left advertising through his land: who brings his daughter apples that she could eat herself well, which could have a wife and be on top of that king. This became known to a farmer who had three sons. He said the oldest, "Go to the store and take a basketful of those beautiful apples with red cheeks and carry them to the court; perhaps the king's daughter can eat healthy off and allowed to marry and become king." The lad did so, and took the road under his feet. When he had gone for a while, he met a little iron man, which asked him what he had in his basket. Ulrich - that was his name - then said, "frog legs." The little man said, "well, so shall it be, and remain," and has gone on. Length Uele arrived at the palace and had to sign in and said he had when they ate apples that would cure the daughter of it. This pleased the king very much, and he let the Ulrich to come. But - alas! - revealed when he, so were instead apples in the basket frog legs, which were still kicking. In the king was very angry and had him out of the castle to hunt. As he arrived home, he told his father what had happened to him. Then the father sent the next oldest son, who was called Samuel; but fared the same as the Ulrich. He also met the little man that asked him what he was carrying in the basket. And Samuel said, "hog bristles," and the iron man said. "Well, so should it be, and remain" When he was in front of the Royal Palace and said he brought apples with which the King's daughter can eat healthy, so the guards would not let him and said it happened before one who would have fooled. Samuel insisted seriously the fact that he had certainly apples, they should just let him in. Finally they believed him and brought him to the king. But when he uncovered the basket, he had stopped only pig bristles there. Furthermore, the king was angry so terrible that he let whip Samuel from the lock. Once home, he told how it fared war.Da was the youngest boy who was always called Stupid Hans, and asked his father if he could also go with apples. "Yes," said the father, "you were the right guy to do so. If the clever ones can not, what do you want then align?" The boy does not let up: "Yes, Father, I will go." - "Get me away, you stupid guy, you have to wait until you're clever," said to the father, and turned his back. Hans, however, pulls him back to the lab coat, "Father, I want to go!" - "Well, fair enough, so go you'll probably come back again," was the father grumpy replied. But the boy was very happy and made a leap into the air. "Yes, now do not do like a fool: you will always be stupid from one day to another," said the father again. but that made the Hans nothing, and he settled in his joy did not interfere. Because it but already approached the night, so he thought he would wait until morning, he did not come today but more to the court. At night in bed he could not sleep, and when he did doze, he dreamed of beautiful maidens, of palaces, gold and silver and all kinds of more such things. In the morning, in the morning, he went his way, and immediately afterwards he met a little grumpy man in his iron clothes and asked him what he was carrying in his basket. The Hans gave him the answer he was carrying apples with which the King's daughter was to eat. "Well," said the little man, "so shall it be, and remain." But at the court they would not let Hans well, because it had been there two and would have said they were bringing apples've got a frog legs, the other quills it had. Hans, however, did not let loose and said he had certainly no frogs' legs, but the most beautiful apples that were growing in the kingdom. As he spoke so openly, thought the goalkeeper, who can not lie and let him in and he was right, because covering than the Hans his basket in the King presence, golden yellow apples in it. The king was very happy and had the same bringing it to his daughter and then waited in anxious expectation until you bring him report what effect they had. But not long time passed, so someone took the report; But who is it been? His daughter herself was there! Once they had eaten of the apples, she was healthy jumped out of bed. What the king had had a joy, you can not describe. But now he did not want to give his daughter to Hans, and said he must first make a boat which would go quicker on dry land than on water. Hans took the condition and went home and told how he had fared. Then the father sent Uele into the wood to make such a boat. He worked diligently and whistled it. At noon, when the sun stood highest, came the little iron man and asked what he was doing. The Ulrich answered him: "a washtub." The iron man said, "Well, that should be what's and stay." On the evening of Ulrich said he had now made the boat, but when he wanted to sit inside and there were loud's washing troughs. The next day the Samuel went into the woods, but he fared just like the Ulrich. On the third day of the stupid Hans went. He managed quite busy that the whole forest echoed and whistled and sang quite funny to do so by his blows. Back came the iron man at noon, where it was heissesten, and asked what he was doing. "A boat which will go quicker on dry land than on the water," and when he was finished, he received the king's daughter to wife. "Well," said the little man, "to be one and remain so." In the evening, had gone down quite golden as the sun, which Hans had finished with all that belonged to his boat. He got into it and rowed the residence of the king of. But the boat went as swiftly as the wind. The king saw it from a distance, but Hans did not want to give his daughter and said he had to guard only a hundred rabbits - -and from early morning until late evening when one of them got away, he should not have his daughter. Hans was satisfied, and the very next day he went with his flock to pasture and adapted very well to that he ran away none. A short time later came a maid from the castle, and told Hans that he should give her quickly a rabbit, had come unexpectedly got company. Hans, however, was well aware what that meant, and said he would not give her the king could tomorrow come up his visit with jugged hare. The maid, however was not satisfied and began at the end of also to swear to. Then Hans said that if the king's daughter came herself, he would give her a hare. The maid told in the palace, and the daughter did go himself. Meanwhile, however, came again to Hans, the iron man and asked him what he was doing there. "Ha," said Hans, "I have a hundred rabbits beware that to me none of them ran, then I can marry the princess and become king." - "Well," said the little man, "because you've got a whistle, and if you run away, just whistle only, then he comes back." Now when the princess arrived, Hans gave her a hare into her apron. But as it was a hundred yards away, he took the pipe and whistled, and the hare jumped out of her apron and - have not you seen it? - returned to the fold. When evening came, the rabbit shepherd whistled again and saw that all were there; and then drove them to the castle. The king was very surprised that Hans was able to watch over a hundred hares without one was running out. but he wanted his daughter still does not give, and said he had to bring him only a feather from the tail of the griffin. As Hans set off and walked straight forwards. In the evening he came to a castle, he asked for a place to sleep, because at that time there were no inns; The lord of the castle with great joy and asked him where he wanted. Hans then gave the answer: "To the Griffin." - "So, the bird Hm Griffin, they always say that knows everything, and I have lost the key of an iron money box Can ye be as good and ask him where he was." - "Yes, indeed," said Hans, "that will I do so." In the morning, in the morning he has moved on and came the move to another castle, where he stayed overnight again. As there heard the people that he was going to the Griffin, they said, in the house of the daughter was ill, and they had already tried every means, but none have helped so far. He should be so good as to ask the Griffin what the daughter could make healthy again. Hans said that he would like to do, and went on. Since he came to a lake, and instead of a ferry there was a big, big man who had to carry everybody across. The man asked Hans where his journey might go. "To the Griffin," Hans said. "Well, if you come to it," said that the man, "so it also asks why I wear all the people on the water needs." Then Hans said, "Yes, my God, yes, I will do so." Then the man took him on his shoulder and carried him over. Finally Hans came to the house of the Griffin, but it was only his wife at home and Griffin himself not. Since he asked the woman what he wanted. Since you told Hans everything that he should get a feather from the tail of the Griffin, and then they had lost the key to the money box in a castle, and he should ask the Griffin where the key was. Then in another castle the daughter was ill, and he should know what that would cure her. was then not far from here, a lake and a man there who had to carry over the people, and he would also like to know why this man had to carry everybody across. Then the woman said, "Yes look, my good friend, it can not speak a Christian with the griffin, he eats them all, but if you like, so you can watch down under his bed, and at night, when it quite tightly asleep, can you reach out and pull a feather out of his tail; and because of the things that will you know, I want to ask him yourself "the Hans was satisfied and slept under the bed.. In the evening, the Griffin came home. And as he entered the room, he said: "Wife, I smell a Christian here tastes like a human!" - "Yes," said the woman because, "it was today one there, but he has gone again"; and since the Griffin said no more. Middle of the night when the Griffin was snoring loudly, Hans reached out and snatched a pen from the tail. Then the bird suddenly startled grip and said, "Woman, I smell a human, and it's me than someone've dragged by the tail!" The woman said: "You dreamed certainly, and I told you so today I said, there was a man there, but he's gone again, but he has told me all sorts of things you had lost the key to the cash box in a castle.. and could not find him anymore. " - "Oh, the fools," said the Griffin, "the key lies in a wooden house behind the door under a pile of wood." - "And then he also said, in a castle was a daughter sick, and they knew no way to keep them healthy going." - "Oh, the fools," said the Griffin, "under the basement stairs has made a nest of her hair a toad, and when she gets back her hair again, so it is healthy." - "And then he also said it was, which must also carry all the people in one place, a lake and a man there." - "Oh, the fool," said the Griffin, "if he reins out a middle only once, he would have to carry over no more." The next morning was in the morning the Griffin and went away. Then Hans came out from under the bed and had a nice spring; also he had heard what the bird had said gripping account of the key and the daughter and her husband. The woman from Griffin then told him all over again, that he might not forget it, and then he went home again. He first came to the man on the water, who asked him what the Griffin had said. Then Hans told him to him only carry over, he wanted it then over to him on the other side, say. As the man carried him over. When he was over there, he said the Hans, he was once a midst put into the river, he would have to carry over no more. Then the man was hugely delighted, and told Hans that he wanted him to thank back again, and back again. Then Hans said he wanted to save him the trouble he was quite satisfied with it and moved on. Since he came to the castle where the daughter was ill, she took on her shoulders, because she could not walk, carried her down the cellar stairs and took the toads nest from beneath the lowest step and gave it into her hands. The suddenly jumped down from the shoulder, up the stairs and was quite well again. Now the father and the mother had a great pleasure and gave Hans gold and silver, and what he always wanted to have, they gave him. And when he got to the other castle, he went straight into the wooden house, and right behind the door under a pile of wood he found the key he brought to the Lord at once. He was not looking forward slightly and gave Hans as a reward much of the gold that was in the box, and all kinds of things else, such as cows and sheep, and Geissen.Wie Hans came to the king with all his things with the money and gold and silver and the cows, sheep and goats, the King asked him where he got it all just. Then Hans said that the Griffin will give an as much as you wanted. Then the king thought it might be that too need, and made his way to the Griffin. And when he came to the water, because he was the first who came to the Hans, and the man placed it right in the water and walked away. And the king drowned. Hans, however, married the daughter and became king.
The wild man	3370	563	German	Once upon a time in Maregliano a brave woman named Masella, in addition to six unmarried daughters who were long as the hop poles, had a simple-minded so clumsy son that he was even the snow too hard, to make a snowball from it, and he the true Gimpel seemed all Gimpel therefore, also passed not a day where the mother did not say to him; "What are you doing in our house, damn rascal? Pack you, you Klotz; Marching, you brush, away with you, you do mischief; get out of my eyes, you Bearskin. For you are replacing me in the cradle and held a pretty Kindchens, Dolly, Täubchens me such a simpleton is such a Fool, has been put into it, how are you? "But with all these speeches Masella brought nothing into being. because he was doing to one ear and out the other. Now when she saw that no hope existed that made Anton (like son named because) some time or something, she'd seized one morning; after his head, without soap, had washed properly, an able stick and began to knock out so his doublet for sheet music. When Anton work through quite unexpectedly, roll up and saw walking, he pulled out as soon as he was able to escape her, and ran as far and as long as he against sunset to the hour when we started in the store of the moon to light lights, arrived at the foot of a mountain which was so high that he collided with the sky. Here he saw sitting a wild man on the stump of a poplar next to a cave of pumice. O help me, how ugly the saw from! He was a tiny tot and no bigger than a dwarf; but he had a head thicker than an Indian pumpkin, a leafy forehead, grown together eyebrows, rolled eyes, a flat nose with two nostrils, which seemed two sewers, a mouth as big as a wine press, from which two tusks protruded, the went down to his toes, a shaggy chest, arms as a yarn is wound, legs like a bow buckle and feet as flat as that of a goose; In a word, he seemed a bugbear, a devil, an ugly grimace face and a real specter that even a Roland had put in fear, an Achilles take your courage and may deter a begging brother. Anton, however, who came not so easy before some in fear, bowed and said to him: "God greet you, sir; how are you, what makes you? Can I serve you with what? How far is it to the place where I have to go "As soon as the wild man heard these absurd speech, he began to laugh, and because he liked this strange saint, he asked him:" Are you in my service ? take? "to which Anton replied:" What will ye the month "-" Serve me only fair, "the wild man replied" then we'll deal with each other, and you will lead a merry life with me, "when?. trading was closed in this way, Anton entered the service of the wild man, where there was food, the abundance and was not far away with work, so that was obese in less than four days Anton as a Turk, round as a ton, brave like a rooster, red as a lobster, green as garlic, as lean as a whale and a word so big and fat that he could not see out of sight. And they were gone less than two years when he was the good bite contrary and he got a great lust to make once again a ride home, and as he thought of the home, he almost ran away on the spot. The wild man who looked into his heart and saw him on the nose, the restlessness of his butt on by Anton turned back and forth, as if he had been sitting with the backside on pins and needles; Therefore, he called him aside and said to him: "Dear Anton, I know that you have great desire to see your people, and because I love you so sincerely love, as myself, I am content that you to them again travellest and your desire befriedigest. So take this donkey that you will spare the hardships with walking, but look at you before that you never say to him, 'arre cacaurre <; . Because with the soul of my grandfather, it would not hurt you sorry, "Anton took the long-eared bat, hanging without even only adieu to say his legs over the same and began to loszutraben thereon; he was not yet come hundred steps forward as he already descended from the horror and immediately said, 'arre cacaurre <; and no sooner had he opened his mouth, and already long-eared started, pearls, rubies, emeralds, sapphires and diamonds, all the size of the walnuts to give from behind by himself. Anton locked its jaws wide, wonderful evacuation, the magnificent finish and the precious diarrhea Donkey One stared at and filled with great heart's content his knapsack with gems full. He then began again in an efficient trot ride and came finally to an inn, where he, as soon as he dismounted, told the hosts above all, "Hurtig, I bind that ass to the crib and showered him properly; beware but to say to him, 'arre cacaurre' because it wants to do you sorry; and lift up me these little things carefully here. "As the host, who knew his craft belonging and a cunning, sly, clever rascal was, quite suddenly heard this speech and the gems saw that shone like the sun, caught him to see the curiosity of what those words meant. Having thus Anton to eat well and as much as he wanted, had been drinking, he stuck it between a sack and a blanket, ran as soon as he saw him close his eyes and heard snoring in the deepest bass, to the stable and said, to the donkey:> arre cacaurre, 'whereupon he undertook for the ordinary operation by the enema these words by it past him to the rear of gold nugget and jewel heap. Hardly the host took this delicious evacuation, so he decided to replace the donkey and play so that yokels Anton a trick to deceive him, to lead, to cheat, to beluchsen to bounce to beguile, dupe to lead and such a fool Hans, Schöps, brush, Gimpel the fool as that which had run into his hands, wipe his eyes properly. When it was therefore Anton to time when Aurora comes to the window of the East all red with shame to the chamber pot of her old marriage cripple pour, awakened eyes rubbed his hands, is stretched for half an hour and stretched and a shock times had yawned like a Zwiegespräches and burped, he called the host, and said to him: "Come, comrade; no credit, long friendship; we are friends, our bags enemies; drum makes me the bill, and I will pay. "So they add up as together as much bread, so much for wine, for soup, fifteen for meat, five for stable money, ten for the night's lodging and breakfast and beer money what Anton skewers enumerates, takes the wrong donkey along with his cross bag of pumice instead of the precious jewels in reception and rushes headlong on a residence of his mother. But before he sat still a foot into the house, he was beginning to cry out of his voice like a tooth Crusher: "Come quickly brought, Mother, come quickly; because we are rich now; make tablecloths cope, broad sheets, put blankets on the ground; for thou shalt treasures to see. "The mother, overjoyed, that opens a large box in which the equipment of their marriageable daughters was quite pulls fine linens that you would blow can, tablecloths, that smelled even after washing, and blankets that cover one up over the nose, out and spreads them all neatly on the ground. Then shall put the donkey on it and Anton begins to be> arre cacaurre <to sing; but you arre cacaurre just always; because the donkey cared just as much about these words as to the sound of the lute. Nevertheless, Anton repeated these words still three or four times, but since everything was spoken in the wind, he took an able stick and began to work on the poor beast, tanned and flailed and drummed it in such a way by that the poor dread the back door jumped up and flew through it a yellow cakes on the white towels came. As the poor Masella overrun the donkey in this way and instead of a stream of riches a while, however, rich in her poor home, but such a power saw gush that he the same could have quite polluting, she took a cudgel, and without being Anton time was also to show nor his pumice stones, they fed him with such a beating soup that he hurriedly again went back to the wild man on the way. As soon as he got there more trot than in step, he received from the wild man who has everything and therefore knew by his magic that Anton had his innkeeper can outwit an efficient thrashing by his master him here an unintelligent, silly, silly, silly idler, a straw head; called a dolt, a sheep's nose, a Stoffel, a negotiated made fools a Erzgimpel, a Hans Tepp, which for a jewel-making asses a beast had tie, which gave an overabundance of pomeranzenfarbigem curd cheese from him. However, Anton swallowed this bitter pill and swore that he never, no, never from a living being would again turn a nose and let fooled. No sooner was but another year over, as it was plagued again the same desire and he see again almost with longing, his family would be passed. The wild man who was ill-favored, but beautiful in heart, gave him permission to travel, and also gave him a pretty napkin by adding: "Bring this to your mother, look at you but before that you do not back such a cattle 'do you and do you to, napkin <;'re doing it and how with the donkey, and before you do not anlangst at home, do not tell because if you about it happens something bad, it's your loss; . Now go with God and come again soon "Anton so went back on the road, but not far from the cave he put immediately the dish cloth on the ground and said:" Do you, and do you to, Napkin, "to which this be opened immediately, revealing within them as much pomp and splendor and jewelry, as you can not believe. When Anton perceived this, he said quickly: "Do you too, napkin," and immediately hid again it all in. Anton moved then back on to the same inn and told the host: "There, I lift up this napkin and should say so, 'Do you and do you to, Napkin'" The host, who was a sly rogue, replied to this: "be without worry," he was able to eat, he drank so long until he was dazed, and then killed him briskly to bed; then he took the napkin and said, "Do yourself, Napkin" which because even once opened and as many valuables showed that the host in astonishment all was beside himself. He therefore sought another, these similar napkin out that, when he got up in the morning, really anhängte Anton. This now reached proficient on losstiefelnd in his mother's house and called immediately from: "This time, my faith, we shall certainly our poverty chase the devil; this time certainly the rags, the Danish and all the frippery of the house throwing "at the same time he spread his napkin on the ground and began to say:" Do yourself, Napkin "But he would repeat these words until the next morning. can and would have his time lost it, because he brought availeth nothing, not even the least. Then he saw that it was not him, as desired, he said to the mother: "Get's the cuckoo, the host has attached me again this curd; But just wait, rogue, you shall me bezählen, it would be better for you, you never're born, better, you'd been run over as a child. . I want the dearest thing I have to lose if I do not cut it at the next stop off in his inn to a pulp "As the mother of these new donkey String heard, they glowed with anger and said," That you but brächest the neck or you neck abstürztest, you misfortune son go to hell; for you are abhorrent to me like a spider, I can not look at you without me nauseous, and I always get the spasm if you come between my feet. Make an end and you let seem that this house is on fire, as I shake off my clothes and look at you not as my son. "Poor Anton, who saw the flash and did not want to wait for the Thunder, bowed his head , pulled out, as if he had stolen something, and came headlong rennend in which wild man on. As soon he saw him so sad and arrive dejected, he had a new thunderstorm over him endure, saying: "I do not know what prevents me from infecting you a lantern, you glutton, Furzpeter, blockhead that no-good scoundrel, Plappermühle, what you have in the body and also keep even young pods with you can Plaudermatz that you ausspeiest like a court trumpet exclaim all publicly; if you had kept your mouth at the inn, so you would not happen to those things which befall; because you have your tongue like a millstone used, you'll grind you the happiness that you had become of my hands given "Anton stood there like a hard-nosed poodle and listened quietly and patiently to this music. but when he quietly spent other three years in the service of the wild man and so little thought of his home had as to being Graf, he was yet again an attack of fever, and again he put it into his head that his family once visit. He asked why the Wild Man for permission, which because even to the annoying dolt get rid of, let him go and gave him a very beautifully crafted floor with the words: "Take this stick in memory of me, beware but to say ' Get up, spanking, 'or' lie down, beating '; otherwise I do not envy you what would happen, "Anton took the floor and said," Be without worry, I have screwed the grindstone of mind and knows very well how much two times two is;. I'm not a child anymore; . Because who wants to make Anton something that has to get up early "-" self praise, "the wild man," said than done easily; what I see, I believe; if you're not deaf, so you have me understand, and who can be counseled to also help. "Now, while the wild man went still talking, Anton was already on his way to his mother, but he had no half mile behind him as he already said, "Get up, spanking" However, this seemed like ordinary words, but like a spell;. because the same as would have been possessed by an evil spirit of the floor, just he also began suddenly to edit such back the unfortunate Anton that the blows rained down like pouring and did not expect the other. When the poor fellow so zerbleut and durchgegerbt saw, he said quickly: "Lie down, strike up a beating," to which at once desisted of beatings on his back Antons, and this, wiser at his expense, exclaimed: "Now I know what I have to do, and my faith, it should not be undone; nor is the not to bed the night is still endure today bad. "So saying, he arrives at the usual tavern, where he is received with the greatest kindness of the world. Hardly arrived, he said to the host: "Here take this stick and raises it to me good at; But beware that you do not about say, 'Get up, spanking "; because if it gets you sick, understands me well, so you do not complain about the Anton; I can then not help it and wash me in advance of any wrongdoing in. "The host, full of the greatest joy of this third lucky catch, Anton leaves deep in the bowl access and even deeper look into the glass, and after he put him to bed, he runs with his wife, whom he summoned to the beautiful festival, says to the floor. "Get up, beatings" This because begins at once to to punish the rear of the host and his better half, and tick here tack since, it drives like flash back and forth, so that they themselves were running so pitiful and miserable trimmed seeing always wake up with the beatings behind, Anton and begged him for mercy. As this is now perceived that the matter went as you wish and the macaroni in cheese and cabbage looked in bacon, he said: "There's not going to help; ye now must once comfortable to be beaten to death; . Unless, that you again give me my things, "the host of punches almost crushed cried once made:" Take everything I've just deliver him myself from that flail, "and to ensure to Anton, he really left everything fetch what he had abgeluchst him earlier. When Anton saw his share again at his mercy, he said: "Lie down, beatings," and he heard at once and sank. Anton now took the donkey and the other things and thus went to his mother and once there he made with his napkin a very successful attempt and the rear frame of the donkey a dress rehearsal had hold, he was quite warm from the time, married his sisters, his mother made for rich woman and so testified to the truth of the proverb: fools and children is in the sky
The Wolf and the Fox	697	41	German	The wolf had the fox with him, and whatsoever the wolf wished, that the fox had to do because he was the weaker, and he would gladly have been rid of the Lord. It happened that they both went through the forest, the wolf said, "Red-creating me something to eat, or I'll eat yourself away. ' Then the fox answered, "I know a farm where a couple of young lambs, you're inclined, we will fetch one. ' The wolf was right, they went, and the fox stole the little lamb, it brought the wolf, and went away. Since it ate the wolf, but was not content, but the other did well, and went to fetch it. But because he did it so clumsily, it was the mother of the little lamb heard and began to scream and came running up to the farmers to bIäen frantically. There they found the wolf and beat him so mercilessly that he limping and howling arrived at the fox. 'You have given me beautiful,' he said, 'I wanted to fetch the other lamb, and the country folks surprised me, and hit me soft.' The fox replied, "Why are you so a Nimmersatt.'Am next day they went back into the field, and the greedy wolf once more," Red, I created something to eat, or I'll eat yourself away. ' Then the fox answered, "I know a farmhouse, the wife is baking pancakes to-night, we want to take us away. ' So they went, and the fox slipped round the house, looked and sniffed as long tracked down until it where the dish was, and then pulled down six pancakes and carried them to the wolf. 'Because you have to eat,' he said to him and went his way. The wolf swallowed down the pancakes in an instant and said, "they taste for more, 'went and tore the whole dish down that it broke in pieces. This made such a great noise that the woman came out, and when she saw the wolf she called the people who rushed in and beat him what sticks would hold that he with two lame legs, and howling loudly for fox in the forest. 'What have you misled me !, he exclaimed, "the peasants caught me, and tanned my skin.' But the fox replied, "Why are you so a Nimmersatt.'Am third day, when they were together outside and the wolf could only limp along painfully, he again said," Red-creating me something to eat, or I'll eat yourself away. ' The fox answered, "I know a man who has been killing, and the salted meat is lying in a barrel in the cellar, we will get that. ' The wolf 'but I will go with the same for you to help me if I can not leave.' "I am willing," said the fox, and showed him the ropes and ways in which they finally reached the cellar. There was meat in abundance, and the wolf attacked it instantly and thought, until I leave off! Time. ' The fox liked it also good, looked around everywhere, but often ran to the hole through which they had come, and tried if his body was to slip through narrow enough yet. The wolf said, "Dear fox, tell me why are you running back and forth and jumping in and out? ' 'But, I need to see if no one comes, "replied the crafty,' friss just too much. ' Then the wolf said, "I shall not leave, as until the barrel is empty. ' In the meantime the farmer who had heard the noise of the fox leaps into the cellar. The fox, as he saw it, was out with a set to the hole: the wolf wanted to go, but he had eaten so thick that he was no longer able, but stuck. Then came the farmer with a club and killed him. But the fox jumped into the woods and was glad that he was of the old glutton going on.
The wolf and man	687	157	German	The fox once told the wolf of the strength of man, no animal could withstand him, and they would have to use cunning to get in front of him. Then the wolf answered, "If I would see a man for once, I would set on him. ' 'I can help you, "said the fox,' Just come tomorrow morning to me, I will show a you. ' The wolf turned out at an early stage, and the fox took him out on the way went the hunter every day. First came an old discharged soldier. 'Is that a man?' asked the wolf. "No," answered the fox, 'that's been one.' Afterwards came a little boy who was going to school. 'Is that a man?' 'No, that will be only one.' Finally, the hunter, the double-barreled shotgun on his back, and hanger on the side came. Said the fox to wolf, "Look, there comes a man in whom you have to go, but I will continue to make in my cave. ' The wolf then rushed on the man, the hunter when he saw him, said, "it's a shame that I have not loaded with a bullet," aimed, and fired his small shot in the face. The wolf pulled a face, but he did not let himself be frightened, and attacked because he was the hunter the second charge. The wolf concealed the pain and rushed on the huntsman, but since it pulled out his bright hanger, and left and right gave him a few bats that he ran back over and over bleeding, howling to the fox. 'Well, brother wolf, "said the fox,' as you were finished with the people? ' "Ah," replied the wolf, "I never imagined the strength of man to be, until he took a stick from his shoulder and blew into it, because now something has got the face which tickled me terribly after he blew once in the floor as it to me flew around the nose like lightning and hail, and as I was quite close, he drew a white rib out of his side, and he beat me so that I was all but left lying dead. ' 'Do you see, "said the fox,' what are you a braggart: you throw the hatchet so far that dus can not get back. '
The wolf and the stork	6739	76	German	Always the wolf eats with gier'ger haste. A wolf has so overreached himself At a picnic that he almost killed It had come: in his throat he stuck a piece of bone, he could not cry anymore; who comes to his happiness to go just the stork of the way. He waves; only, and even can be called a doctor to see him at work for a while - the seam. He pulls from the bones. called plan for gelungne Kur His fee he has. "What? Fee? "- offset to the hour The Wolf" You spaßest well, my friend? Is not much that you saved healthy and healing the neck from my throat? Go, ungrateful, your way! Do not ever come back to me in the enclosure! "
The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids	46	123	German	There was once an old goat who had seven little goats young, and loved her as a mother her children loves. One day she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food, she called all seven to her and said: "Dear children, I want out into the forest, be on your guard against the wolf when he comes in, he eats you with skin and hair. The villain often disguises himself, but by his rough voice and his black feet you will know him soon. " The little goats said, "Dear mother, we will take heed forward, you can not worry go away." Since bleated the old and started confidently on the Weg.Es not long before someone knocked on the front door and shouted: "Open, dear children, your mother is here and has brought something each of you!" But the little goats heard the rough voice that it was the wolf. "We will not open," they "do not you are our mother, who has a soft, pleasant voice, but but your voice is rough; you are the wolf." Cried, Then the wolf went away to a shopkeeper and bought a large piece of chalk; He ate it up to make his voice soft. Then he came back, knocked on the front door and shouted: "Open the door, dear children, your mother is here and has brought something each of you" But the wolf had laid his black paws inside the window, the children saw and shouted: "We will not open, our mother has not black feet like you, you're the Wolf" Then the wolf ran to a baker and said, "I have pushed myself to the foot, rub some dough over." When the baker had plastered his feet, he ran to the miller and said: "I scattered white meal over my feet." The miller thought, the wolf must be cheating, and refused; but the wolf said, "If you do not, I'll eat you!" Then the miller was afraid, and made his paw white. Yes, the Menschen.Nun are the villain went for a third time to the front door, knocked, and said: "Open the door, children, your dear mother has come home, and has brought each of you something from the forest" The little goats cried, "First show us your paws that we may know that you are really our mother." Then the wolf put his paws against the window, and when they saw that it was white, they believed it was all true what he said, and opened the door. But who should come in but the wolf. The little goats were terrified and wanted to hide. One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth under the sink, the seventh in the clock-case. But the wolf found them all, and gave short shrift one after the other he swallowed them down his throat; just the latest in the watch case he did not find. When the wolf had his lust fined, he toddled away, lay down outside on a green field under a tree and began to schlafen.Nicht Soon afterwards the old goat out of the forest came home again. Oh, she had to see there! The front door was standing wide open, table, chairs, and benches were overturned, washing dishes broken, quilt and pillows were pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be found. She called one after the other by name, but nobody answered. Finally, when she called the youngest, since a soft voice cried: "Dear Mother, I am in the clock-case." She took it out, and it told her that the wolf had come and the others all had eaten. Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children! At last she went in her grief out, and the youngest kid ran with her. When she came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him from all sides and saw that in his gorged belly something was moving and struggling. Oh, God, she thought, should be my poor children whom he has swallowed down for his supper, still alive? Since the little goats had to run home and fetch scissors, needle and thread. Then she cut the wolf their bellies, and no sooner had she taken a cut, so even a little goats stuck his head out, and as she continued to cut, one after another all jumped six of out and were all still alive, and had not even damage suffered because the monster had swallowed them down whole in the yaw. That was a pleasure! They embraced their dear mother, and jumped like Schneider, holding the wedding. But the old woman said, "Now go and look for big stones, and we want to fill the belly of the wicked animal while it is still asleep." When the seven little kids hauled in a hurry the stones thither and put it to him in the abdomen, as much as they could bring in. And the mother sewed him in all speed again that he did not notice and did not even regte.Als the wolf at last sleep, he got to his feet, and because he aroused the stones in the stomach so very thirsty, he wanted go and drink at a fountain. But as he began to walk and move back and forth, the stones in his stomach knocked each other and rattled. Then he called, "What rumbles and pumpeltIn my stomach around I thought it would be six Geisselein, but are louder's Wackerstein?." And when he came to the well and stooped over the water and wanted to drink because it attracted the heavy stones into it, and he had to drown miserably. When the seven little goats saw it they came up running and shouting: "The wolf is dead, the wolf is dead!" and danced around with joy around the well with their mother.
The wonderful musician	76	151	German	There was once a wonderful musician, who went through a forest all alone, thinking back and forth. And when nothing was left for his thoughts, he said to himself: "I will be here in the forest find time, I will fetch hither a good companion." Then he took his fiddle from his back, and played so that it echoed through the trees. It was not long before a wolf came trotting through the thicket. "Ah, a wolf is coming! After I have no desire," said the musician. But the wolf came nearer and said to him: "Oh, dear musician, thou dost fiddle so beautiful I want to learn!". - "It is soon learned," the musician replied, "just do all that I call you, you have to." - "Oh, musician," said the wolf, "I will obey you like a pupil to his master." The musician told him to call, and when they had gone part of the way together, they came to an old oak tree, which was hollow inside and torn in the middle. "Look," said the musician, "do you want to learn to fiddle, the front feet put into this gap." The wolf obeyed, but the musician quickly picked up a stone and wedged his two paws with a blow so hard that he lie there like a prisoner had. "Wait there until I come back," said the musician, and went his Weges.Über talked a while he again to himself, "I will be here in the forest find time, I will fetch hither another companion," and took his fiddle and again played into the forest. Before long a fox came creeping through the trees. "Ah, a fox comes," said the musician, "for which I have no desire." The fox came up to him and said, "Oh, dear musician, thou dost fiddle so beautiful I want to learn!". - "It is soon learned," said the musician, "you just have to do all that I bid you." - "Oh, musician," then said the fox, "I will obey you like a pupil to his master." - "Follow me," said the musician, and when they had gone part of the way, they came to a footpath, stood on both sides of tall shrubs. So the fiddler stood still, turned from one side of a hazelnut tree down to earth, and put his foot on the head, then he turned off the other side as a sapling down and said, "Come, little fox, if you wanna learn something, so I shall your left front paw. " The fox obeyed, and the musician fastened his paw to the left bough. "Little Vixen," he said, "now reach me right." And he tied it to the right bough. And had looked as if he, whether the nodes of were firm enough, he let go, and the bushes sprang into the air and jumped up the little fox that was floating in the air and kicked. "Wait there until I come back," said the musician, and went his Weges.Wiederum he said to himself, "Time is beginning to me here in the forest, I will fetch hither another companion," and took his fiddle, and the sound echoed through the forest. Then a little hare came running by. "Ah, a hare is coming!" said the musician, "I did not want to have." - "Ah, dear musician," said the hare, "thou dost fiddle so beautiful that I want to learn." - "It is soon learned," said the musician, "you just have to do all that I bid you." - "Oh, musician," replied the little hare, "I will obey you like a pupil to his master." They went a little way until they came to an open space in the forest, where stood an aspen tree. The musician tied a long string round the bunny's neck, which he fastened the other end to the tree. "Munter, Bunny, now I jump twenty times round the tree!" cried the musician, and the little hare obeyed. And as it was running around twenty times, then the string twenty times wrapped around the trunk, and the little hare was caught, and it might pull and tug as it wanted, it cut only the thread into the soft neck. "Wait there until I come back," said the musician, and went, however on.The Wolf had pushed and pulled and bitten at the stone, worked and until he cleared his paws and had pulled out of the column. Full of anger and rage he hurried after the musician ago and wanted to tear him. When the fox saw him running, he began to lament, and cried with all his might, "Brother wolf, come to my help, the musician has betrayed me!" The wolf drew down the little tree, bit the cord in half and made the fox free, who went with him and wanted to take part in the game man revenge. They found the tied-up hare, whom likewise they delivered, and then they all sought the enemy together auf.Der Spielmann had again sounded his fiddle on his way, and this time he had been happier. The sound reached the ears of a poor wood-cutter, who instantly, whether he liked it or not, gave up his work and came with his hatchet under his arm to listen to the music. "But at last comes the right companion," said the musician, "for a man sought me and no wild animals." And he began and played so beautifully and delightfully that the poor man stood there as if bewitched, and his heart leaped with joy. And as he stood, the wolf, the fox and the hare came up, and he was well aware that they had some evil design. As he raised his glittering ax and placed himself before the musician, as if to say: "If you want him, beware, who has to do it with me." As the beasts were terrified and ran back into the forest; but the musician played the man out of gratitude, and then moved on.
The wren	1639	221	German	In the old days every sound still had meaning and significance. When the smith's hammer resounded, it cried, "! Strike away Strike away" If the planer Carpenter snarled, he said, "häst Dor Dor dor häst!" to chatter started the wheels of the mill, so it said, "Help, for God's help, God !," and the miller was a cheat and let the mill, it spoke high German, and first asked slowly, "Who is ? since who's there ?, "she answered quickly," the miller the miller !, "and at last quite:" He steals bravely, steals bravely from the eighth three Sechter "At this time the birds also had their own language. that every one understood; now it only sounds like chirping, screeching, and whistling, and to some like music without words. It came into the bird's mind, they would no longer be without a ruler, and choose one of themselves to be their king. Only one of them, the plover, was opposed; He had lived, and he wanted to die free, and anxiously flying hither and thither, he cried: "Where bliew ick ick Where bliew" He withdrew into a solitary and unfrequented marsh, and has now been found again under seinesgleichen.Die birds wanted to about the matter to discuss, on a beautiful May morning they all came together from forests and fields, eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, how can I name them all? Even the cuckoo came and because he was always good to hear earlier the hoopoe, his clerk, who called so a few days; even a tiny bird that had no name, mingled with the crowd. The chicken that had happened to hear anything about the whole thing, marveled at the great meeting. "Wat, wat, wat is the is to do?" cackled it, but the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said: "Luter riek Lüd !," told her what they had on hand. It was decided, however, that the king should be, who could fly the highest. A tree-frog which was sitting in the bushes, cried when he heard this warning: "Natt, no, no Natt, no, no !," because he thought it would be so many tears to be shed. but the crow said, "Quark ok !," it should all was peaceful abgehen.Es now decided they wanted the same on this fine morning rise, so no one could say afterwards: "I would have flown much higher, but the evening came, I could not. " At a given signal, therefore, the whole crowd rose into the air. The dust that rose from the field on, it was a tremendous fluttering and whirring and beating of wings, and it looked as if a black cloud was rising. The little birds but were soon back, could not, and fell back to earth. The larger birds held out longer, but none could equal the eagle, who mounted so high that he had the sun have picked the eyes. And looked as if that the others do not go up to him could, he thought: What do you want to fly even higher, you're the king, and began to stoop again. The birds beneath him at once cried to him equal to: "You have to be our King, no one has flown higher than you." "Except me," screamed the little fellow without a name, who had crept into the breast feathers of the eagle. And since he was not tired, he rose and rose as high that he could God in his chair to see sitting. When he had gone as far as he folded his wings together, fell down and called down with clear and penetrating voice: "! I am King I am King" "You our King" cried the birds angrily. "By trick and cunning you brought it there." So they made another condition, which should be King who could go down lowest in the ground. How the goose did flap with its broad chest back to the land! How quickly the cock scratched a hole! The duck came off the worst, she leapt into a ditch, but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a neighboring pond, crying: "Cheating, cheating Cheating, cheating!" The little bird without a name but was looking for a mouse hole, slipped down and cried with his small voice: "! I am King I am King" "You our King" cried the birds still more angrily. "Do you think your cunning shall prevail?" They decided to keep him a prisoner in the hole and starve. The owl was placed as sentinel they should not to let the rascal, so dear to her life would be. When it was evening and found the birds from the effort when flying great fatigue, so they went with wife and child to bed. The owl alone remained with the mouse hole and looked with her big eyes fixed hinein.Indessen she had become tired and thought: An eye you can emulate well, you will still watch with the other, and the little miscreant shall not come out of his hole out. So she shut one eye and with the other looked straight at the mouse hole. The little guy looked head out and wanted wegwitschen, but the owl came forward immediately, and he pulled his head back. Then the owl opened the one eye again, and the other, intending to alternate so all night. But when she next shut one eye, she forgot to open the other, and as soon as the two eyes were, they fell asleep. The little fellow soon observed that, and slipped weg.Von time of the owl itself must not be seen during the day, otherwise the other birds chase her and pluck her feathers. They only fly during the night, but hates and pursues mice because they make such ugly holes. The little bird can not be happy to see it because he fears he was doing at the collar, if he is caught. He slips into the hedges, and if he is quite sure he gets well at times: "I am King !," and therefore call him the other birds in mockery Zaunkönig.Niemand but was happy as the lark that they are not the wren to obey needed. As the sun can look, it rises into the air and cries: "Oh, how beautiful that is beautiful that is Beautiful Beautiful Oh, how beautiful!!!"
The Wren and the Bear	970	222	German	In summertime once the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest, and the bear heard so beautiful a bird singing and said, "Brother wolf, what kind of a bird that sings so well? ' 'It is the king of birds, "said the wolf," before we have to tend;' but it was the wren. 'If this is, "said the bear," I should very much like his royal palace see, come, take me thither.' 'That's not what you mean, "said the wolf," you have to wait until the Queen comes.' Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with had food in its beak, and the Lord King also wanted to etch, and their young. The bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him by the sleeve and said, 'no, you have to wait for Mr. and Mrs. Queen again are gone.' So they took the hole in eight, which was the nest, and trotted away. but the bear had no rest, wanted to see the royal palace, and went after a short while before again. The King and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw five or six young ones lying in it. 'Is that the royal palace !, cried the bear,' it is a wretched palace! you are not King children, you are disreputable children. ' As the heard the young wrens, they were frightfully angry, and shouted 'no, we are not, our parents are honest people; Bear to be identified with you. ' The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went down in their dens. But the young wrens cry and scream away, and when their parents again brought food they said 'we touch no one fly, and we should die of hunger, until you have only clear whether we are respectable children or not, the bear has been here and has insulted us. ' Then the old King said, "are nu r quiet, to be identified. ' He at once flew with the Queen to the bear's cave, and called in, "Old Growler, why hast thou insulted my children? the you should get sick, we want to make a bloody war. ' So the bear war was announced, and all four-footed animals were summoned, ox, donkey, cattle, deer, and what the earth contained. But the wren summoned everything that flies in the air; not the birds alone big and small, but also the mosquitoes, hornets, bees and flies herbei.Als now had the time came for the war to begin, the wren sent out spies, who would be the commanding general of the enemy. The mosquito was the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled, and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the watchword was issued. There stood the bear, called the fox before him and said, "Fox, you be the cunning of all animals, thou shalt general and lead us. ' 'Well,' said the fox, 'but what signal shall we agree upon?' No one knew it. As the fox said, "I have a fine long bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers; When I lift my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you have to march darauflos: but I let it hang down, run away as fast what you can '. When the gnat had heard she flew away again, and revealed the Wren everything haarklein.Als daybreak, where the battle was to begin, hu, there came the four legged creatures, dashing along with Gebraus that the earth trembled; Wren with his army also came through the air, therefore, the purring, screamed and raved that an anxious and fearful was; and they went there from both sides together. But the wren sent down the hornet, it should be the fox put under the tail, and sting with all his might. When the fox felt the first sting, he started so that he drew up one leg, but ers endured and still kept his tail in the air; at the second sting, he had him for a moment let down: the third but he could not hold more , screamed and put his tail between his legs. As the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to run, each to his cave and had the birds battle gewonnen.Da flew the Lord King and Queen home to their children and cried, "Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart's content, we have won the war. ' But the young wrens said, 'yet we do not eat the bear must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honorable children.' Since the wren flew to the mouth of the bear and called 'growler, you should go and do apologize to the nest to my children and say that they are respectable children, otherwise you will be trampled the ribs in his body.' Since the bear crept into the greatest fear away and did apologize. Now the young wrens were satisfied, and sat together, ate and drank and made merry until late at night.
The Emperor's New Clothes	2058	1620	German	Many years ago lived an emperor, who thought so incredibly much of new clothes that he spent all his money for it to be cleaned to right. He did not care about his soldiers, did not care about the theater and did not like to go into the forest, except to show off his new clothes. He had a coat for every hour of the day, and as one would say of a king, he is in the Council, so one could said, "The Emperor is in the wardrobe" In the great city in which he lived, it was very alert ago. Every day many strangers came on, and one day came two swindlers who pretended to Weber, saying that they knew how to weave the most beautiful stuff that one could imagine. The colors and patterns are not only exceptionally beautiful, but the clothes made of their material possessed the wonderful property that they were invisible to everyone who was unfit for his office or was unforgivable stupid. 'That must be wonderful cloth, "thought the Emperor; if I had those I could find out which men in my kingdom are not suited to the office, they have, I could distinguish the clever from the stupid! Yes, the stuff must immediately be woven for me! ' He was much earnest money to the swindlers, that they should start their work. They set up two looms, acted as if they were working, but they had not the least on the looms. They asked for the finest silk and the most precious gold, but that they put into their own pockets, and worked at the empty looms till late into the night. 'Now I want to know how far they are with the cloth, " thought the emperor, but it was rather uneasy feel if he thought that no one who is stupid or bad am good at his office could not see it. Although he believed that he had nothing to fear for himself, but he wanted to only send another to see how matters stood. All people in the whole town knew what a remarkable quality the stuff possessed, and all were eager to see how bad or stupid their neighbor was. 'I want my honest old minister to the weavers Send "thought the emperor, he can judge best how the stuff looks, for he is intelligent, and nobody understands his office better than he!' Now the good old minister went into the hall where the two swindlers sat and worked at the empty looms. 'God save us!' thought on the old minister opened his eyes. 'I can not see anything!' But he did not say. Both swindlers requested him to come closer and asked if there were not a pretty pattern and beautiful colors. Then she pointed to the empty chair, and the poor old minister went on to rip open his eyes, but he could see nothing, for there was nothing there. 'God,' he thought, should I be stupid? That I have never believed, and that nobody must know it! Should I not fit for my office? No, it does not go to me to tell me I could not see the cloth! ' "Well, do not say anything about it?" asked one of the weavers. "Oh, it's cute, very excellent," replied the old minister looking through his glasses. "This pattern and these colors - Yes, I will tell the Emperor that it is very like that!" "Now, that's our pleasure" both said Weber, and described to him the colors by name and explained the curious pattern. The old minister listened well to so that he could say the same thing when he come back to the emperor, and so he did. Now the scammers demanded more money, more silk and gold for weaving. They put everything into their own pockets, came near the loom no thread, but they continued to work as usual at the empty looms. The Emperor sent soon another honest man out to see how it was with the weaving and whether the cloth was nearly finished; but he was doing just like the first, he looked and looked; but because besides the loom there was nothing he could not see. "Is not that a particularly beautiful piece of stuff?" asked the two swindlers, showing and explaining the magnificent pattern that was not there. 'I am not stupid, "thought the man; so it's my good office to which I am not fit! It is very strange, but that one must not let it be! ' So he praised the stuff he did not see, and expressed his joy at the beautiful colors and the fine pattern. "Yes, it is very excellent," he said to the emperor. All people in the city spoke of the wonderful tools. The emperor wanted to see while it was still on the loom it yourself. With a number of courtiers, under which the two old statesmen who had that been there before, he went to the two clever swindlers, who now worked with all their might, but without fiber or thread. "Yes, is not that magnificent?" said the two statesmen. "Want to see Your Majesty, what pattern, what colors?" and then they pointed to the empty loom, for they believed that the others probably could see the cloth. 'What!' thought the Emperor; I see nothing! That is terrible! I'm stupid? Am I unfit to be emperor? That would be the most horrible thing I could meet. ' "Oh, it's very pretty," he said; "It has our most gracious approval" and he nodded and looked at the empty loom; he did not say that he could not see anything. The whole entourage that he had with him looked and looked, but it did not get more than others out all the, but they said, like the emperor, "Oh, that's pretty!" and they advised him to wear the new magnificent clothes for the first time at the great procession which was to take place. "It's gorgeous, cute, excellent!" it went from mouth to mouth, and it seemed everyone thoroughly pleased. The Emperor gave each of the swindlers to hang it in the buttonhole, and the title Hofweber. The whole night before the morning on which the festival was to take place were the cheats on and burned more than sixteen candles, so they could be quite easily observed in their work. People could see that they were busy to finish the emperor's new clothes. They pretended to take the cloth from the loom, they cut into the air with big scissors, and sewed with needles without thread, and said at last: "See, now the clothes are ready" The emperor and all his barons came himself, and both swindlers raised one arm in the air, just as if they were holding something, and said, "Look, here are the trousers, here's the dress, here is the coat!" and so on. "It's as light as a cobweb; one would imagine one had nothing on the body, but that's just the beauty of it!" "Yes!" said all the courtiers, but they could see nothing, for there was nothing there. "Your Imperial Majesty store liking your clothes," said the swindlers, "we will give you the new suit before the large mirror!" The Emperor put his clothes off, and the fraudsters introduced themselves, as if they put him each piece of new clothes that should be finished sewing, and the emperor looked at himself in the mirror. "Oh, how well they dress, how well they fit!" they all said. "What pattern, what colors! That is a magnificent suit!" - "Outside they stand with the canopy to be worn over your majesty!" announced the master of ceremonies. "Look, I'm ready!" the Emperor said. "Sitting is not good?" and then turned again to the mirror; because it should seem as if he rather admired his garments. The chamberlains who had the right to carry the train, stretched their hands against the floor, as if they lifted up a train, they went and acted as if they were holding something in the air; they did not dare to let it be noted that they could not see anything. The emperor marched under the beautiful canopy, and said all people on the street and in the windows, "How are the emperor's new clothes incomparably Which Train he has the garment How well it fits him!" Nobody wished to be noted that he saw nothing; because then he would have been unfit for his office or would have been very stupid. Never emperor's clothes were more admired like this. "But he has nothing on!" finally said a little child. "Listen to the voice of innocence!" said the father; and one whispered to another what the child had said. "But he has nothing on!" cried at last the whole people. The impression upon the emperor, for it seemed to him to be right, but he thought to himself: 'Now I have to endure.' And the chamberlains walked and carried the train that was not there.
The Old Woman in the Wood	1169	442	German	There once drove a poor servant girl with his rule through a great forest, and when they were in the midst, robbers came out of the thicket, and murdered all they found wen. All perished together except the girl who had jumped into the fear out of the car and had hidden behind a tree. How were the robbers with their booty, she came out and saw the great disaster. Then she began to weep bitterly and said, "What am I miserable girl now, I do not know out of the forest, no human being lives in it, so I must certainly starve." It walked around, looking for a way, but could not find one. When it was evening she sat down under a tree, gave herself to God and wanted to sit there to stay and not go away, let happen whatever wollte.Als it but had been sitting there for a while, a white dove came flying to her with a little golden key in its mouth. The little key put it into his hand and said, "See, there is the big tree it a little lock, it opens with the tiny key, so you will find food enough, and suffer no more hunger." Then she went to the tree and closed it, and found milk in a little dish, and white bread to break into it, that it could eat her fill. When it was satisfied, she said: "Now is the time when the chickens home go to roost, I am so tired I can find me but lay in my bed." As the dove came back flying and brought another golden key in its mouth and said: "Closing that tree there, and you will find a bed." Since closed it up and found a beautiful white bed; there prayed God, to protect her during the night, lay down and fell asleep. In the morning the dove came for the third time, and again brought a little key, and said, "Open that tree there, you'll find clothes," and how it unlocked, she found garments beset with gold and precious stones, as glorious as any King daughter. So she lived there for some time, and the dove came every day and took care of everything that was needed, and it was a quiet, good Leben.Einmal but the dove came and said, "Will you do something for my sake?" "From heart happy, "said the girl. Since the little dove, "I will lead you to a small hut, and go inside it, the kitchen is an old woman sitting and> good day to say 'But give her no means no response, it may begin what she wants. but go to her right hand on, there is a door, which open, so you'll be in a room come when a lot of rings of all kinds is on the table, among which are magnificent with shining stones, which let but are, and seek a simple out of also including needs, and bring it here to me, so you can quickly "the girl went to the little house, and came to the door. sat there saying, an old woman who made big eyes as she saw her, and: "Good day, my child." but it did not answer and walked toward the door. "Whither?" called her and took her by the gown, and wanted to hold on, "this is my house, since no one is allowed in there if I do not have it." But the girl was silent, got away from her and went straight into the room. Now there lay on the table an oversized set of rings, which gleamed and glittered before his eyes; She turned them over and looked for the plain, but could not finden.Wie it so sought him, she saw the old woman and how she and therefore had sneaked a birdcage in his hand and continued wanted. Since it went up to her and took the cage out of hand, and as it picked it up and looked inside, a bird sitting in it who had the plain ring in its beak. Since it took the ring, and ran quite joyously home with it, and thought the white dove would come and get the ring, but it did not. Since it leaned against a tree to wait for the dove, and how it was so, it was as if the tree was soft and pliant, and was its branches down. And suddenly the branches twined around it and were two arms, and when she looked around, the tree was a handsome man, who included and warmly kissed and said: "You have delivered me from the power of the old, is an evil witch. she had turned me into a tree, and every day a few hours I was a white dove, and so long as she possessed the ring I could not regain my human form. " There were his servants and his horses from the magic-free, which they had turned into trees, and stood beside him. As they continued to his kingdom, for he was a king's son, and they got married and lived happily.
The ant and the grasshopper	8333	280A	German	Winter pulled the ant from an angle grain that they introduced in the summer and therefore remained at Leben.Da asked the cricket that felt the hunger, but give her some of the food that they then asked those lebe.Es "What were doing last summer you" "I was not idle, had always continued to sing" your grain locked the other there laughing "that dance in the winter when you flute test in the summer" Yes better is it to you?..! to think what to judge necessary and not on pleasures and revelry to mind
The ash cat	3354	510A	German	As the statues were those present because in hearing the tale from fleas and declared all the king blockhead for a big ass, because he overthrew his own flesh and blood, and the succession of his state to such a trifle in such great danger. After they had all but inhibited their speech current, let Antonella to her run in the following way. In the sea of ​​malice envy is often arrived very bad, and drown rather than another to see he throws himself either in water or fails because of a cliff; as it was with some girl that I am going you erzählen.Es was in fact once a prince, which his wife had lost by the death of his daughter loved but so herzinniglich that he would only see with their eyes. For this he made her a governess who taught her all kinds of games and antics and their demonstrated so much affection that one can not say it with words. But since her father married again and took a devilish shrew for a wife, so this cursed woman began her stepdaughter to be warmly gram and to make her so sour faces wry faces and grim eyes that the poor child fright all was beside himself and always bitterly complained to her governess about the poor treatment that befell her by her step-mother and said, "Oh, my goodness, would you have can not be my mother that you love me always with so many compliments and caresses load them, "so often now she repeated these words until the governess same took to heart and, blinded by the devil, once said to her: ,, If you want to follow my simple-minded advice, I will be your mother and love you . as my eyeball "She wants to go to continue, remembered as Lucretia (for that was the Princess):" Forgive me if I interrupt you, but I know that you love me, so hush, not a word more, but my teaching only the means, how to help me write you, and I will sign. "-" Well then, "said the governess," Give probably eight and do ears, and your wish will be fulfilled, you will not even know how! If Dad goes out, tell the mother, you desire one of the old clothes to have that are located in the back room in the big box, so you that which you wear, protect canst. And when they would like to see wrapped in nothing but rags and tatters you, they will immediately open the box and say:> holding the lid <but you hit him while foraging is unexpectedly to and break her in this way the Neck. If only until this is done, as you know very well that your father's sake you that Blue would move mountains if he could; therefore him know if he caresses you, that he will marry me; because then rejoice, you always should the mistress of my life. "As soon as Lucretia heard this, it seemed every hour to last a thousand years before informing the Council of the governess fully into effect what they after the corresponding period of mourning to the stepmother in to penetrate the father began that he still wants to marry the governess. At first, now the prince joked about, but the daughter shot so long with the objectives over until they finally hit it; because he gave recently to the entreaties of Lucretia by and held at his marriage with Carmosina (that was the name governess) a large Hochzeitsfest.Während but the young people at the dance was and Lucretia accidentally stood on a balcony, a dove came flown in, sat down on a wall and said to her, "If you have for something desire should, it'll only Feentaube on the island of Sardinia to know; because then you will get it soon. "Five to six days now overwhelmed the new stepmother Lucretia with caresses, by putting the same in tables at the best place, who granted her the best bits and put on the best clothes gab.Kaum but was the first time over, forgotten and banished it altogether any gratitude for the received service (woe to anyone who has a bad master!), began that kept them hidden until then, their daughters are removing, and brought it with her husband so far that he loved winning the stepdaughters and his own child completely disregard sat so that Lucretia, more and more neglected and deeper sinking, silk at the end of the state rooms to the kitchen, from the canopy to the kitchen, from the and golden splendor robes to the abrasive wiping and came from the scepter to spit and not only the state, but also the name changed because it no longer ashes Lucretia, but cat was called. Now it happened once that the prince, her father, traveling in state affairs to Sardinia had and, Calamita, Sciorella, Diamante, Colommina and Cascarella were called by the stepdaughters which Imperia asked each individually what he should bring back for them from traveling ; after which one is fine clothes wished the other beautiful headdress, the third make-up, the fourth game work to pass the time, in short, the one that the other that. Most recently, he said, almost as a mockery to his daughter: "And what you plan to stick because have" to which she replied: "Nothing other than that you grüßest the Feentaube of me and her saying that they should me send something and that, if thou forget this, you can not move from the spot you mayest. Do not forget what I tell you; because how will you do so are you will go. "The Prince went out from his business was doing in Sardinia, bought everything, meaning a stepdaughters had wished for, but Lucretia he forgot entirely. Once he had embarked, however, and wanted to go to sea, you could bring the vehicle in any way from the port, so that it seemed as if it was retained by a suction fish. The patron of the ship, which almost fell into despair, lay down quite exhausted sleep and saw in a dream a fairy who said to him: "Do you also know why the ship is not out of the harbor? Because the prince, whom you his daughter have on board, broke his promise and all others, just not reminded of his own blood. "So soon awoke the saint and told his dream to the prince, who quite ashamed of the breach of the promise that he made, repaired to the Feengrotte and aligning the greeting his daughter, added, you want her but to send something that suddenly emerged a beautiful maiden out of the cave, which told him that she his daughter for the friendly remembrance, in which this she thought, well thank you and please, she should just to please her always happy and be merry. At the same time she gave him a bunch of dates, a hoe, a small bucket, all of gold, with a silk towel by noticed that one would be to Behacken and the other took baster of Zweiges.Der Prince this, very surprised at the gift of the fairy farewell, returned home, and after he handed out the desired things under the stepdaughters, he gave his daughter the least the Fairy gifts. This was for joy beside himself, planted the bunch of dates into a beautiful flower pot, used and behackte him and dried him with the silken towel morning and evening, so that he had grown up after four days up to the level of a woman and a fairy from the same emerged which Lucretia said, "What do you wish you," whereupon they replied that they like sometimes you want to go without the knowledge of her sisters out of the house?. "So come then," the fairy, "replied each time you hold this desire to the pot and say,> O date tree, you golden gift that always I umgrabe with golden spade, with water bucket of golden silk labe.Mit towel had dried, now you get dressed ausund me putz out. <But if you undress you want to change the last verse and say, '. Drawing therefore me but now ausund you putz out "Once the next feast day appeared and the daughters of the former governess had run out, quite spruced up, all shimmering and flickering, all ribbons and robes and befalbelte margins while flowers and scents perfumed the air, and thousands of things they still embraced, Lucretia hurried to the pot, and after which it pronounced by the fairy learned words, she suddenly saw himself as embellished a queen and sitting on a Zelter, the twelve pretty, petite pages followed what they just went to where her sisters had gone, where this lovely Täubchens formally mouth watered at the sight of beauty with desire to look like them. As chance would have it now but so that that country was in the same company just the king, who enchanted by the extraordinary beauty of Lucretia at first glance, a familiar servant auftrug that he should watch him learn more about this strange maiden something more can, who they would indeed be and where she came from. The servant went to her immediately, although now at the foot of; Lucretia, however, who saw the scout, threw a handful of gold coins, which they had to give from the date tree for that purpose, behind. That once lit the lamp on and forgot to follow the palfrey to better fill their hands with gold foxes, joined what Lucretia in all speed to her house and there, like the Fairy taught them undressed. Soon after their Witches of sisters came home and told her to annoy them by the thousand pretty things they gesehen.Inzwischen the servant to the king returned and told him how it had happened with the florins, whereupon he got into a violent rage, reviled the servant that he left unfulfilled wish of his master by a few ragged threesome sake, and sharply told him not that he should indeed be the next festivals out of their way to find out who those beautiful maiden and where would that rare bird to its nest habe.Das appeared next festival, and the sisters, leaving the fullest state the house, let Lucretia at the hearth back, but they immediately ran to the date tree, and after saying the conscious words came from the same suddenly a number of maids, one with a mirror, the other with a bottle gourd water, a third with a cautery, a fourth with a Sch minktöpfchen, a fifth with a comb, a sixth with needles, a seventh with the clothes and yet another to the chest and necklaces, and after they had Lucretia decorated so bright that they shone like the sun, they put them in a sechsspännige a body, which was accompanied by footmen and pages in full livery. Having now in the same place where she had been on the previous festivals, arrived, they enlarged the amazement in the heart of the sisters and the fire in the breast of the king. Once they had gone go back and noticed that the servants of the king her pursued, threw, to avoid being spied on from this, a handful of pearls and precious stones behind him, which did not stop to despise those good man for so that it remained to aufzuklauben her and Lucretia time won to get unnoticed back home and to undress in the usual way. After a long, long time until the servant to the king returned, which snapped at him as follows: "As I live, if you do not give me this maiden identify, so you get a rough beating and as many kicks in the butt as you have hairs in your beard. "the next festival appeared, the sisters went out again, and Lucretia stood before the date tree, which she was to repeat the spell dressed in the most splendid and then in a golden chariot brought to so many Diener surrounded, that the whole elevator locked the one on public walks, resembled by bailiffs surrounded joy girl. Having now brought the usual envy at her sisters, she went away again, accompanied by the servants of the king, as annähte at their car with double twist. When she saw that he always came after her, she shouted, "Drive on, coachman," it chased after which the car with such rapidity and their haste was so great that it accounted for a slipper, and indeed one of the cutest, you ever saw. now that the servant could not reach the then flying car, he picked up the slipper from the ground and brought him to the king, as he also told him what had happened to him. The king took the slipper in her hand and said, "If the foundations is as beautiful as is only to look the house? O beautiful chandelier on which the light was that ignites me; o tripod of the lovely boiler where boiling life; O thou beautiful cork attached to the fishing line Cupid, with whom he has caught my soul, look, here I embrace you and press you to my heart, and if I can not reach the tree, yet I pray to the roots, if I can not have the knob, I still kiss the pedestal! Until now you were the jail of a white foot, now you are the fetters of an unhappy heart; you erhöhtest to an inch and half the tyranny of my life, and you too, by as much as the joy of growing my life, as long as I you own and keep. "After he said this, he called his secretary, was a trumpeter come and then" Tataratà " a public notice endure that all women in the country should arrive at some festivals and banquet, which he put into his head to hold. When, therefore, appeared certain day, you o, my heavens, what a Geschmause and cheering there was, where did only all the pies and cakes, where the roast and meat dumplings, where the macaroons and sweets? Because they were present in such a large amount that a complete army would thus dine können.Sobald women now had all arrived, noble and low, rich and poor, old and young, beautiful and ugly and all in the best finery, and you had feasted only efficient, tried the king of each of the invitees, without even pass one, the slipper in to see what he so passe good and well that he participated in the shape of the slipper what he sought to vermöchte recognize; But he found no matching foot and was despairing verge. Nevertheless, he commanded silence, saying, "Come back tomorrow and eat with me a soup; but I also ask that you let a single females at home and be who they wanted, "Then said to him the Prince". I still have a daughter, but she always behind the herd, and nor is it so entirely to all delicacy of form and manners that they do not deserve to eat at your table. "-" all right, "the king said," just they should come before all others, because I want it "and now. left them, and on the following day, all found a turn, and at the same time with the daughters Carmosina came Lucretia. Hardly this was seen by the king, it seemed to him that which he sought at once; But he kept his feelings for now back yet. but after the Jawed activities of those present come to an end, the samples were re-hired with the slipper, and not when the latter approached Lucretia foot as it is equal, drove the iron, which drives off the magnet by itself at the foot of this heart-shaped leaf Cupid. No sooner perceived the king, so he hurried off to her to make her out of his arms a press, asking them to settle under the canopy and gave it then the crown on his head, after which all present to her as before began to make their queen, curtsies and obeisances. When her sisters saw this they most nearly with anger, and since they were not inclined to view this heartbreak longer with, they sneaked secretly and silently home by they had to admit reluctantly that: In even great folly lives who goes against the stars.
the bear	3383	510B	German	The whole story Popas made the women of his voice, laughing and especially where it was found that they possessed cunning enough to outwit a fox himself, they were bursting close to it. In fact, even the women at each hair have their head lists hundreds, as strung the shells; because the falsity of her mother, the lie her nurse, the flattery of her teacher, the adjustment of her counselor and the fraud her companion, making them turn the men back and forth as they please. But let us return to Antonella, which was already full of desire to talk; and after a little thought, as if they could muster to pass her thoughts, she began Surely those wise man was right who said that one can not obey with a heart full of sugar a command fully bile. To find obedience of proper weight, you must grant bids from gehörigem measure; from commands that do not befit, springs resistance which does not yield; so it was the king of Rough Rock, who made his daughter unseemly applications and therefore forced to flee with danger of their honor and their lives. Because it was once a king of Rough Rock, his wife, the true mother of beauty, fell within the prime course of their years of horse health and life broke. However, before her life light went out, she called her husband, and said: "I know that you always loved me most heartily, that's why I also prove by deeds that to which my existence until now was based and where your love its peak find is by you promise never to marry you again, unless that you find a woman who is as beautiful as I; or I'll have a horrible curse back and even carry you to the other world the most terrible hatred for. "When the king, his wife was devoted beyond measure, these heard her last wish, he began to cry, and was a time not produce the slightest word; Finally, however, he stopped whining and said to her: "Before I meet handle your will, I may plague the niggles and prepare me worse than it has ever trimmed another! do not believe but yes, my dear dreamer to like reverie, as if I could turn my heart to another woman who had dressed in the new rock of my love since I first of all you and you will take my affection to you the last rags. " but while the king said this, the poor woman rolled her eyes and stretched all four of himself, so that he, her life trickled seeing now let his eyes run over again and in this way started to beat the chest and aufzujammern loud, that the whole court came running, with the poor cried out those good souls on and on the name, the fate which they robbed him, cursed and by ausraufte his beard, the stars sneered that sent him this misfortune. But since he after proverbs: do "pain at the elbow and pain to the woman, although very painful, but soon pass away" and in accordance with that other: "The one last on the site, the other wanted to" act in the soft bed, was the night hardly appeared on the parade ground of the sky in order to keep abreast of the bats screening when he already began to consider the matter more closely and said to himself: "My wife is dead, and I am an unhappy widower without the slightest hope someone else to see in front of me as the unfortunate daughter she has left me. Nevertheless, I have to do any step and invent something to get a son; but how do I start it? How do I find the beauty of my late wife respective wife? If any other looks in comparison to her as a witch, so I advise a thing to do. Where should I look for another with the lantern, where about call after another in the streets, when nature only Nardella - God rest her soul - spawned and then broke the mold? Woe is me, in which she has thrown me a maze! What the heck was the promise she took me? - But how? Yet I have not seen the wolf and flee know? First we want to search for and then see how things are! Should it really be possible that no other donkey in the stable would be as Nardella? Is it possible that for me the world was locked alone? Should have occurred to women or perhaps entirely perished even their seeds perhaps a famine, a lack? "Saying this, he immediately ordered by the bailiff a public outcry and command endure that all the women of the world to test their beauty at his court should arrive, he take the most beautiful wife and wanted to give her a kingdom as a dowry. Once had now thereof, the rumor spread everywhere, was not a single woman in the world who would not have come to try their luck, so that not remained the ugliest witch who had not gathered; because if you humanly touching the point of beauty, so there is no monster that did not hold up for a miracle, not a monster, zurückträte; each formed what one, each one wants to be more than the other, and when the mirror tells them the truth, they accuse the glass that it blind, and the mercury that it was wrongly placed. When the city had been filled with women in this way, the king put them in the ranks and began to go through between them, as does the Grand Turk when he enters the seraglio to the best Genoese select grindstone and then it to whet his Damascus blade. By now finds so up and down, like a monkey never rest, went back and forth and soon, now that gazed from head to toe and looked, it seemed a krummstirnig, another langnäsig, a third breitmäulig, a fourth dicklippig, a fifth long as a Hopfenstange, a sixth short too thin a seventh too thick, an eighth as a kid, the Spaniard he did not like because of their jaundiced color, Neapolitan told him not because of their watschligen Ganges to the German seemed to him too cold and icy, the Frenchwoman too frivolous and flighty, the Venetian, with its bright yellow hair like a distaff full of flax; In a word, he sent an account of one, the other because of other cause with a long nose on, and when he saw that behind so many beautiful faces in the end, nothing had stuck, but he was determined to be lust to breastfeed, he set to his own daughter, saying: "what I'm looking in the distance, what I have nearby? Does not seem to have emerged with her mother from a mold Preziosa? I have made this beautiful face in my house, looking for it everywhere in the world around. "As soon, however, he had the daughter of its intention so she went mad and angry on him that it is impossible to say how much ; whereupon the king angrily exclaimed: "this voice high-pitched tone down or halt prefer all your mouth and be ready tonight to tie the matrimonial bond with me; or I'll rip your ears, at least from. "When Preziosa heard this decision, she retired to her room and lamented there bitterly her sad fate, and they all had no hair on her head. While they now so broke out in the most violent actions, by chance an old woman came to her, which sometimes used by Preziosa a charity to receive and now, as they are considered encountered the Princess more on that in this world, and from her the cause of her distress heard , said to her: "Take courage, my daughter, and do not despair, because for every evil is a herb, not only for the death. Now I listen carefully. Since your father, who is actually a donkey tonight a stallion will be quite so this Spänchen take in your mouth, then you will turn you right into a bear; do you then immediately out of the dust, because it will not get you dare hold back, and hit the road to the forest, the sky woselbst since the day on which you were born, you have kept your happiness. When did but in your natural shape that will always remain you, seem willing, remove the Spänchen from the mouth, then you will immediately get them back. "Preziosa embraced the old woman on the warmest, left her an apron full of flour, ham and bacon give and then dismissed them. As soon as the sun like a bankrupt whore began to change their quarters, the king had the musicians come, was then a great feast organizing, which he invited all his noble vassals, and after they had danced four to five hours, they sat down to the board, after which the king traveled with a full belly to bed. But when he then called out to his daughter, brought about bringing the bill because he wanted to balance the love account, they took the Spänchen in his mouth, turned into a terrible mother bear and went to her father, who, quite shocked at this miracle in the blankets enveloped, not daring hervorzustecken his head again until the next morning. Meanwhile Preziosa left the palace and made his way to the forest, where the shadow of darkness consulted each other as they could cause the midday sun any termination of their power. There is now Preziosa king of fast water held in the pleasant company of other animals so long until the son in that region came, who had died at the sight of that bear almost with fear; as soon as he but zoom crawl like a dog tied up, snuggle up to him and looked quite friendly wag his tail, he took courage again, and as he flattered her and told her: "Lie down, kusch you, gently gently, like like, quiet quiet, pst pst, kitty, kitty, "he took her home, where he ordered his servants to maintain it as himself, and had her brought to a garden next to the royal Palace it to them, every time he lust had to be able to see from the window. And when once assumed all occupants and the prince was left alone, he went to look at the bear, the window and noticed how Preziosa, which had taken the Spänchen from the mouth to make her hair, her golden braids combed so that it all came at the sight of this unusual beauty in astonishment beside herself, then plunged down the stairs and ran into the garden, while Preziosa, perceiving quickly again stuck his intention to chip in her mouth and took her bear form again. But as soon as the prince arrived down and not found what he had seen from above, he felt this fatal prank so much to heart that he sank into a great sadness and fell after four days in a serious illness, and he cried incessantly . "Dear bear, love bear" By now his mother heard these sounds Jammer, she thought the bear had somehow ill-treated him and ordered therefore to kill them; the servants, however, were very fond of the tame animal that even abgewann the stones along the way Love had, and do feel sorry for him, instead of him off, they carried it into the woods while they told the queen that she her life light had blown out. No sooner had this but have heard of the prince, he behaved like foolish jumped sick as he was, hewn out of bed and wanted the servants into small pieces; after, however, they learn the true course of things, he swung half dead on a horse and was looking for so long back and forth until he found the bear, which he led them back home, took her to his room and to her said: "Oh, you beautiful morsel for a king to you wrapped in this coat, you O love light that you are included in this rough lantern, why should all these mysterious creatures, by which I only ever more down and in the end completely on the dog has to come? I'm dying of Glutverlangen and longing for your beauty, and the proof of which you may see clearly, because I have already taken such is cooked wine by two-thirds, I only consists of skin and bones, and the fever has double twisting me sewn to the veins. so consider but the curtain of this stinking fur up and let me look at this spectacle of your beauty; but take, take yes but the leaves of this basket away and grant me the sight of your beautiful fruit; pick up this envelope and permit my eyes to feast at the splendor of your miracle! Who but locked so smooth creature in a woven from hair prison? Who in a shrine made of leather closed such a beautiful treasure? Let me behold the miracle of your stimuli and take as a reward all my love back; because only your Bärenfett, the most expensive being can heal the contraction of the nerves, which I am suffering. "But after the prince had spoken in vain long back and forth, and saw that all his words were lost, he stretched out on the bed again and was seized by such a violent attack of illness that the doctors asked him a very bad prognostic and the mother who no greater good on earth had as him, sat next to his bed and said, "How, my son, you is this sorrow? What a sadness has taken you there? You're young, loved, posh, rich; what you missing? Say, for the bashful beggar remains empty pocket. If you want a woman, you choose just because I effecting the engagement; take you only because I pay. Do not you see that your illness makes me sick? You beats the pulse of the fever in the blood, my heart by a pain in the brain. Since I have no other support of my age have as you, so serene yourself, to cheer my heart, and not rush the whole kingdom in action, this house in shame and your mother in the deepest grief. "When the Prince these words heard, he replied: "Nothing else can give me relief than the sight of the bear; if you wanna see me therefore healthy, so they let me stay in the room and no other I maintain, no other my bed making and cooking for me than them; for without doubt I will be healthy from joy in one, two, three. "Although it is now considered the mother of absurd that the bear should make the cook and servant of her son, and feared that this had lost his mind, let they still make him satisfy, at hand: the bear, which immediately after drawn near the bed of the prince picked up the paw and the patient felt the pulse, so that the queen began to smile, and thought she was going well with him soon nose scratch. But as soon as the prince to the bear said, "Do not you want to cook for me and give me food, and I maintain my little Petzchen," she nodded her head, as if they accept the request. So the mother was bring to light even a fire in the fireplace in the hospital room and water bury to a boil, and then the bear grabbed a chicken, plucked it sent and gutted, put some on the spit, and another on the grate a few chickens fried such that the noble prince, the date of the sugar itself had tasted bitter, licking his fingers after this dishes. Having now eaten, they gave him a drink also, and that the queen she also kissed with so much grace on the forehead, and then the bear after the prince had stood up to ask about the wisdom of the doctors to the test quickly made the bed, then ran into the garden, plucked a napkin full of roses and lemon blossoms and sprinkled it on the pillow so that the Queen cried out, the bear would be worth as a treasure more and that her son right and again right would have to be her so very fond of. All these beautiful services but only poured more oil on the fire of the Prince, and if he had previously lotweise consumed, he broke away now pound on, so he said to the mother: "Dearest wife's mother, if I'm not one of these bear can give a kiss, then escapes my breath "; whereupon the mother who gave him quite faint, said to the bear, "Kiss him only him kiss my beautiful little animals, because otherwise I die, my poor son," By this now approached and the prince, it closes tightly to his chest! , mouth pressed to mouth, could not get enough of kissing her, fell, I do not know how, Preziosa the Spänchen from the mouth, so that the prince saw at once the most beautiful creature in the world in his arms, which he now with the Love pliers arms clasped as he exclaimed: "you're caught, Schelmin, and now does not escape me again without my will" at these words Preziosa added the color of shame for the painting of natural beauty to and said. "I am indeed in your power, but I beg you to spare my honor; Incidentally, do with me what you want. "And when asked the queen, who would be this beautiful maiden and what they would have brought to such a wild life, Preziosa told her in turn the whole story of their suffering, the queen what she as a virtuous, respectable girls praised and said to the son that she would have no objection if he marry her so that it stuck to her on the spot the wedding ring on her finger, the mother gave both her blessing and then this beautiful marriage with great feasts and illuminations celebrated, but Preziosa met the validity of the dictum: How do you do, so you worth God.
The two brothers	3399	613	German	The prince and his wife were very happy about the happy turn, taken the Minec'Aniellos fate, and blessed the mice thousands of times by which the poor man again got the stone, sorcerers, however, it carried a quark and even broke their necks. but once Cecca had entered the race course of the speech, all pushed the lock of silence before the door of words, what those started so to say: There are against the attacks of fate no better entrenchment as a virtue, an antidote to accidents, a support in dangers and a port in tribulations is rescued us from the fire, protected in storms, free of pain, comfort in sorrow, stand by us in afflictions, and after the death holds the funeral oration, as it did in the story, which I already hovering on the tip of your tongue will be seen. Once there was a father with two sons, named Marcuccio and Parmiero which, in terms to complete his account with nature and to tear the bill of life, she called to his bedside and therefore to them, saying, "My beloved sons, it can not be long until the captors of time to break the door of my year to make against the law regulations of our country in the assets of my life because of my debt to the earth the seizure; so I must of you who I love more than myself, not divorced, without you leave some useful lessons, so that through vessels with the Polarstern good advice this sea of ​​trouble and may you run into a safe harbor. know opens so your ears, because if what I give you, nothing seems to be, then you must but that it is a treasure that you do not steal the thieves, a house not overturn the earthquake, and a possession that can not eat away the moths. First of all and above all, so fear Allah; because everything comes from up there, and who leaves this path that is neither advised nor to help. Do not pray out of laziness, by their heranwachset like pigs in muck puddle; Labor is not a shame you have to move, as much as you can, and if you also work for others, but filling his own stomach. Be frugal with what you have, who saves there, deserves; a penny and even a penny finally make a dollar; Who picks up there is; what do you have that you are; lift it up in the summer, then you have in winter; Friend 'and cousins ​​are good at the feast, but thrice woe to that empty house; who has malt, can brew, and who has money can build; who does not have dough, is a donkey, a sheep, has no peace in the waking and sleep; therefore never, you stretched further than the ceiling is long; because only so far as the money goes, so far does one; all you have to crack so far leads the jaws, but a small kitchen makes a big house. not Schwatzet too much, because the tongue has not a leg, but many strikes one's back; hear, see and be silent, if you want to live in peace; see and hear, without speaking, no one expects you to a crime; eat little and say little better preserved than complain; because who wants much say will complain often. satisfied are with little; because better is the bread that takes a long time than the cake, which soon comes to an end; a little better with a glad heart than still so much suffering and pain; Who the meat can not have drink the broth; Who does not la'n other Fraun to himself, should ha'n on suitable wife g'nug; better an ugly stain than a pretty hole; who can not have the roast, gnawing on bones. Go always with such order that are better than you, and it should cost you something; because tell me with whom you deal, and I'll tell you who you are; who mingles with bran, shall be eaten by the pigs; who goes to sleep with dogs, get up with fleas; the picaresque give from yours and let him go; because bad company brings man to the gallows. - Only be mindful, then acting; because it is too late to shut the farmer if the bird flown away, or cover up the well, if the child is fallen; until done and thought, man has already brought great suffering, and to running does not help to be fast. Flee quarrels and disputes and make not set foot on every stone, that ye enter not; who skips too many ditches, crashes into it at the end; a horse that deflects, gets more than it is; who gives a blow gets ten again; the pitcher goes often to the well until it breaks, and to the gallows to hang not only the thieves. Do not be arrogant; because pride comes before the fall; bend over and you bind the shoe; Arrogance testifies to ignorance; the good alchemist runs the distillate through the ashes to make it lose the haze, and the intellectual part should always remember that the proud thoughts are also to ashes at the end so it does not fulfill the conceit with haze. Do not worry about things that concern you nothing; because who crawls through the chimney, gets black, and who willfully goes in danger of coming to it. Stay away from the nobles; because the love of the High is the morning red, the evening dead, so gather out rather privies as though that you serve at court, where all services barren, all plans failed and all hopes are empty, where you sweat unpitied, running without rest, goes without light to bed, sleep without rest and eat without relish. Beware of High who languish, and most farmers who ascended, in desperate beggars and false servants before ignorant princes and corrupt judges, before jealous wives and happiness mushrooms, before vain men and women who wear the trousers, in still waters and smoky fireplaces, from evil neighbors, spoiled children and envious people. Finally I give you to consider well: Art Makes favor, who grits in Nischel, his mind sharpened on the whetstone of experience who holds stiff ears, by helping everywhere; because how's drives, how it works. A thousand other things I would have to say to you, but death is me already by the throat, and respiratory goes by me. "And as he said this, he had to uplift barely force his hand to bless his sons what he immediately moved the sails of life and pulled in to port, drown the world in which all suffering. And when the father was executed eliminated in this way, be Marcuccio dug his words deep into my heart and began to study at school diligently to attend the academies, to stay away from dissolute students and just talking of useful things, so that he before one was aware of it, the most learned man in the country was. But since even the poverty is the continuous Filzlaus of virtue and the water Fortuna itself keeps the anointed with the oil Minerva's people, the poor Marcuccio was always despised and in great poverty, always with an empty bag and an empty stomach, so that he it was usually enough to feed more books dust, and, full of desire to swallow something more substantial, it was tired to get on the books of advice and yet nowhere to find help, to bother with treatises and his stomach but never something to to announce deal with. His brother Parmiero however, had soon begun to drink throughout the whole day on the flotteste to play and to loiter in pubs without any fear of God or man; But despite all that, he was big and fat and in one way or another, his purse was always peppered so that Marcuccio, this seeing deep remorse felt about the fact that he had missed the right path by his father's advice, since his grammar never a gram of meat, the cornucopia of wisdom let him always black and emptied only bitter hardship on him, and he indeed knew at all jurisprudence what is right, but not know how to quite anißt himself Parmiero whereas by the ankles meat alluded to the bone and through games by hand dough in the bag. At last, however, Marcuccio could resist the urge of necessity no longer and went to his brother by asking him that since he once sat happiness in her lap, he would remember but that they are both from a flesh and blood and a the womb would be sprung. Parmiero but who had become hartleibig by the gold tincture, replied to this: "You who prevailed studies on the advice of your father and have always accused me of the game and the funny companies, go only to your dusty books and leave me to my misfortune; from me you did not even expect to bread the salt, because I will be acidic enough the few triple that I have and you are old and sensible enough to buy you what you need; everyone has to take care of God but for all of us. If you have no money, steal go; will not you hungry, you also do not have to hang, and you have to drink like so drinking water should it also stink. "And after he told him these and similar words, he turned his back. As Marcuccio found himself treated as hard-hearted by his own brother, he fell into such despair that he decided, went gold of the soul through the vagina waters of death from the dross of the body to clean up high for a tremendous mountain that, wanted to explore as a spy for the earth, what up there in the air was going, or rather all mountains with a turban clouds lifted himself as sultan of the sky in order to aufzustecken the moon about it. Now that Marcuccio, between rocks and heights, on a very narrow path, as best he could, climbing up the mountain, the summit had ascended and saw the deep abyss in front of him, so he turned the fountain of his eyes on the tap and then wanted after much whining itself headlong tumble down into the depths, as a beautiful woman in a green dress and with a laurel wreath in gold-spun hair grabbed him by the arm, and said thus to him: "What are you doing, unhappy? Where you let yourself break from despair? Are you that friend of virtue that has burned so much oil and sacrificed so much sleep, to indulge in the studies? Are you the one who has to let his fame as a rapid galley fly through the world worked, as long as a galley slave? And now you lose your job and you bedienst not the weapons that you have forged in the smithy of the studies against adversity and hostile fate? Do not you know that virtue is a remedy against the poison of poverty, a snuff against the common cold of envy, a cure for the disease of old age? Do not you know that virtue is a compass to navigate safely in the storms of tribulations, a wind torch with which one night of suffering his. Path finds a permanent building that can withstand the earthquake disasters? Remember Regrettably, consider what you're doing, and do not turn my back can lend that you courage in danger, strength in trouble, patience in despair. Know that heaven has to be climbed on this mountain, where virtue is domiciled sent you so hard, so that they themselves, you accuse with great injustice you in bad faith snatch that blinded you. So open your eyes, take heart, change your mind, and you see that virtue is always good, always has value and always brings help, take here this scrap of paper with a powder and get thee into the Kingdom of Breitenfeld where the daughter of the king is close to death because they can not find funds for their disease; give her this powder in a fresh egg; it is by their evil that has sucked her all life so far as a billeting, send a Delogierungsdekret immediately, but you will get such a big reward that you yourself create poverty at bay and from then on without the help of any other people your earnings . accordance living will "Marcuccio, who looked at the speaker at the nose of who she was, threw himself at her feet and begged her forgiveness for the folly that he wanted to commit, saying:" the ceiling is me about the eyes fallen, and I accept your total being, that you are the virtue whose teachings praised by everyone, but they are followed by only a few, the virtue that it can be attached lie to elevate the mind, sharpen the mind, to help purify reason, commendable efforts and to give wings to fly up to the highest heaven; I tell you now and regret deeply that I conferred by collecting weapon had so badly served me, as I you also vow from that moment to me in such a way providing certainty through your antidote that I henceforth also the strongest poison of temptation nothing to harm. "By Marcuccio you now wanted to kiss the feet at these words, she vanished from his eyes and let him refreshed and strengthened back as a sick poor, which, when the attack is over, a cardiac tonic is given. He rose then down the mountain and went to Breitenfeld. Once in the palace of the king, he informed that he would cure the princess of her illness it soon. The king received him with great joy and all sorts of honors and led him into the room of his daughter, where Marcuccio the poor girl was lying and so emaciated on a Gurtbett and emaciated that they looked just skin and bones at her; the eyes were in sunk so low that one to see its stars, Galileo's telescope were needed; her nose was so acute that she had as a suppository can serve, her cheeks were so sunken like those of a skeleton. The lower lip hung it on the chin down, his chest was flat as a board, and the arms were like the gnawed thigh bone of a Lämmchens; In a word, they offered a pitiful sight so that they seemed to drink to the cup of suffering the pity. As Marcuccio saw this picture of misery before him, he had tears in his eyes, by how much the frailty of human nature is subjected to the attacks of the year, the changes of the body, the storms of life at the same time gave. However, he asked for a very fresh egg soon, it was a few moments the fire set, then poured the powder into it and gave it to the princess almost by force, whereupon he covered her with four times the ceiling. The night had not yet been run into the harbor and dropped anchor when the patient called her servants to be giving them new bedding since the one on which they lay was wet through with sweat; and after they have been homemade dried and their camp again, they also called for something refreshing, a desire that had not occurred to her during the seven years of her illness through the mouth. Therefore we took the best hope gave her a refreshing drink, and by recovered every hour more and more and their appetite increased every day, not a week had passed when she saw herself on the most perfect recovered and left the sickbed. therefore the king revered as the god Marcuccio pharmacology, it not only made to the Lord a great barony, but raised it for the first advice of his court and married him to the richest woman in the country. Meanwhile Parmiero got rid of everything again, which he had owned; for play money as won, melted away like that, and the luck of a player more volatile than anything else; such that he, himself poor, unhappy seeing made the decision to go so far as to be by changing his residence and change his fate or his name would spread from the master roll of life. So he went on his way and reached after six months of wandering faint and weary in Breitenfeld an that he was no longer able to keep on his feet, and he also had not a spot where he could lie down his head, it also hunger more violent tormented and the clothes fell off in tatters from the body, he fell into such despair that he took out of town in a dilapidated home his garters of spun cotton, they tied together, made it a corresponding loop, this attached to a beam and then, on a heap of stones, which he made himself, rising, let himself fall. but now wanted his skill that the beams rotted and was worm-eaten and the jolt that was located in the middle broke apart, therefore, although the lively hanged his ribs dress for the underlying stones so bad that he long the case a few days felt, but at the same time also fell, while the bar broke up, a number of gold chains, necklaces and rings that had been hidden in the hollow of the wood on the ground, among other things, a bag of cordovan with quite a lot of dollars in it. So once Parmiero saw that he had skipped through a gallows jump the ditch of poverty, it would be like, so now almost died before despair with joy; because now it depended on once again the sky is full of violins, and as he had gathered this gift of happiness quickly from the earth, it posthaste ran into a tavern to his spirits, to refresh the recently the disappearance as close been back. But thieves two days previously had stolen this gold things the same host, went to eat at the Parmiero now, and she tucked well-known bar in that them to make it through and squander to bring out and; as therefore Parmiero his stomach was filled properly and pulled out the bag, to pay, became the recognized by the host immediately, so that this soon some bailiff customers of his house, summon and Parmiero was fine lead neatly in front of the judge. There, the prisoner was further searched, the corpus delicti found in his possession and he condemned after a short trial as transferred to grace the tripod and perform an air dance. And when the unfortunate Parmiero looked into this ink, noting that should be followed by the feast of a hempen collar and to the test with a rotten beams, the main idea with the crossbar of a new boom to the preliminary celebration of a woolen garter, he began with the chattering teeth and cry out that he was innocent and occupations against that judgment. While he so went howling and screaming through the streets that there was no justice that the poor are not heard and the judgments would like at random and that because he did not silvered hands the judge put anything to the writer, the assessors not lubricated and the procurator not filled the bag, he should add to the tripod or his own two feet now, he happened to meet his brother, who had come before him as assessor of the royal Council and Chief Justice the criminal to hear what he would have to say, and after having heard the case, said to him: "Calm down, my friend; for thou knowest not what a happiness awaits you and that you, who have found a necklace of three spans on the first try, you will find another three shoe in this second certainly. You go back and always leave it to you not be sorry; because the gallows is your own brother, and where others lose their lives, you fill you the bag "Then Parmiero sounded raise in this way, he said to the judge:". I have come before you, to gain justice not taunt to let me; My hands are clean of the offense of which you accuse me, and I am an honest man, though her me look so torn and ragged; because the cowl does not make the monk; and just because I did not listen to the advice of my father Marchionno and my brother Marcuccio, now I get an iron collar and am about under the feet of the executioner to the three-stringed violin, a fourth to add. "When Marcuccio his and his father heard mention names so stirred in him fraternal blood, and by long and accurate looked, seemed Parmiero him as if he recognized him until he finally fully discovered the brother in him and shame and love, relationship and honor, looked seized by justice and compassion; he was ashamed namely, to discover themselves as brother of a gallows bird, it pained him to see his flesh and blood in such a situation, the brotherly love drove him irresistibly to give the thing a different turn, and the honor he returned so that it does not need one to be ashamed of longorum fingerorum accused before the king as a brother; Justice demanded that the injured law was given satisfaction and compassion urged him that he was saving his biological brother would be preferential unit. While he was now so with its consideration in the balance and with his decision in uncertainty, suddenly a bailiff at full speed, so that he hung out his tongue to the neck, and exclaimed: "Hallo, holla, just one with the execution !? "-" What's wrong? "asked Marcuccio what those answered," Fortunately for these poor devils is something wonderful has happened; because two thieves who wanted a certain sum of money and other valuables, which they had hidden in the bar of an old house bring out, and they no longer vorfanden so that everyone thought of them, the other've played him this trick, are located come to blows, have wounded each other mortally, and then upon arrival of the judge everything known so that these, as the innocence of this poor man is in this way come to light, I did send, in order to prevent the execution and him from death . to save because it is free from all blame "Hardly heard this Parmiero, he was the only just had the fear of being a cubit longer, higher by a margin; Marcuccio but who saw brought his brother back into favor, the mask threw off, made himself known to him, saying, "If you have now learned, dear brother, plunge into that destruction vices and play, so now see also how lucky and the blessings gives us the virtue. But now come readily to my house and enjoy with me the fruits of virtue that you was so contrary; for I have the contempt that you proved me completely forgotten and will include up from now with all the love of a brother. "So saying, he embraced Parmiero and brought him to his house where he to toe newly clothed him immediately from head and let him recognize irrefutable way that all other wind and virtue alone makes people happy.
The two cakes	3404	403	German	Surely the prince and his wife had said that history Antonella's all up to that told by far more than would meet, they would not want to avoid it, to discourage Ciulla that once lodged the lance her tongue and in the following way in the middle of the ring of pleasure both met: I always heard that he who does good, receives good; because even the bell of Manfredonia says, "absorbing dotte" (that is, give me, give I to you), and that those who do not put the bait of kindness on the hook of love, never catches the fish of retribution. If you want to know now the application thereof, so take heed of the following story, and then you shall tell me if the miser or Bountiful is better off. Once there were two biological sisters, named Luceta and Troccola, the two daughters had that Marziella and Puccia were called. Marziella was so beautiful of face as heartily as the contrary heart and face Puccias as proof of the rule could "ugly grimace, devilish heart," serve. However resembled the daughter just only their parents; because her mother Troccola was a harpy, inside and out a monster. Now it happened once that Luceta wanted to blanch some parsnips in order to make ready with a green broth, and therefore to her daughter said, "Love Marziella, go to the well, my child, and fetch me a jug of water" - "DC. dear mother, 'said Marziella; "But if you're good to me, so I give a little cake; for I will consume him at the well with a mouthful of very fresh water. "-" Very much, my daughter, "said Luceta, took out a basket that hung on the wall, a beautiful cake (for she had baked earlier of bread a day ) and gave him Marziella, which soon went with the pitcher on the protected by a bead head after the fountain that as sold in a fairground on a bench of marble in the music of the falling water nostrums to quench your thirst. By but just stuffed her pitcher, was an old woman who showed up on the stage of a large hump the tragedy of the time and was about to bite at the sight of the beautiful cake in the Marziella, said to her: "Give me a piece of your cake, my beautiful daughter, the sky it will reward you a thousand times, "what Marziella that was so generous as a queen, said to her." there you have it all, my brave woman, and only sorry . that it is not made of sugar and almonds, because then I would equally like to give it to you from my heart, "When the old friendliness Marzi Ellas saw she exclaimed:" A thousand thanks, my dear child, and may heaven up for that reward goodness, you did me plenty; for I implore all the stars that you may be forever happy and content, so that when you breathe, you roses and jasmine from the mouth come when you kämmst you, you always fall beads and shells from the head, and if you foot may spring up posit on the ground, lilies and violets. "Marziella thanked her many times and returned to the house, the mother woselbst dress for her meal and then both paid the natural debt to the body. And when the day was over, and the next morning the sun on the market of Himmelsgefilde spread the fetched from the Orient goods of light, looked Marziella by combing his hair, a shower of beads and shells in her lap fall, so that she summoned her mother with great joy and then the treasures grabbed her in a box. Luceta then went away to a large part to sell it at a known pawnbroker, by which time Troccola her sister came to visit, and there she found Marziella full zeal and bustle in the beads so they asked her how, when and where they would have gotten the same. Marziella therefore that was still very inexperienced and perhaps did not know the saying: not so much sums "Eat as the stomach, give also so much not like you have; do not even all that thou canst remember and probably only what you say, "told the aunt everything in great detail. This was now not mind waiting for her sister, but every hour, had returned to her home, seemed to her a thousand years; then immediately gave her daughter a cake and sent her with a pitcher of water on the fountain, woselbst this indeed the same old encountered, but asked her for a piece of cake, replied with morose and envious mien: "I have nothing to do than to give you cake? Am I a donkey, that I should let you get some of that mine? Yeah, just wait, I'm even the immediate future. "And as she said this, she plastered in four bites the whole cake and the elderly continue leaving nothing but a big appetite, so that this, the last bite engulfed me and at the same time with the cakes also their hopes buried seeing full wrath Puccia said, "go just getting out because I implore the heavens, when you breathe, you, like the mule dripping a doctor foam from the mouth when you kämmst you, you the lice fall in heaps from the head, and where you also your foot sits, like come forth ferns and spurge. "but after Puccia was eingeschöpft the water and returned home, he could not wait to comb her mother, and by relying a pure napkin spread across the lap, put her head on her daughter and began to comb them; But lo and behold! Instead of beads and shells fell a bunch of lice down so many that they had brought the Alchemist feat, to bring about even the mercury to a halt while but otherwise kill these animals. Seeing this Troccola felt apart from the snow of envy even the fire of anger in the chest and spat through the nose and mouth of smoke and flame. Now it came to pass after some time that the brother Marzi Ellas, called Ciommo, who was at the court of the King of Chiunzo, one day when one of the beauty of various women spoke voluntarily came forward and said that all the beauties looking bone from the gutters could when his sister shows itself as it except the beauty of her body, which formed the accompaniment to the eternal melody of her beautiful soul, even in hair, mouth and feet would have a she is granted by a fairy wonderful property. heard when the king these eulogies, he said to Ciommo, he should let his sister come to the court, because if he would find the way her brother praised, he would marry her. That this favorable opportunity to be making and his own happiness did not want to lose Ciommo, immediately sent a courier to his mother reported her everything and begged her to be the fastest with Marziella to him to come to the court and that is manifesting itself Fortunately, not to let slip out of his hands. However, since Luceta was just sick, so she ordered the wolf as the guardian of the Lamb and asked her sister that she still wants to show his favor her to accompany Marziella out of and reason to the court of Chiunzo. Troccola who saw that their cause was quite as desired, promised her sister, Marziella quite safely bring her brother, then ascended with it and Puccia a ship, and when they were on the sea in the middle, she fell while crews slept Marziella into the water, where it was to drink about over full, seized by a beautiful siren and carried away. had been as now Troccola in Chiunzo arrived and Puccia of Ciommo received as if they would have been Marziella because it this because of the long time he not seen her, no longer knew, he took them immediately to the king; but after it ordered to comb them, began rain down the zucchini, and when he then precisely looked, he saw that they had been given because of the effort on the journey more than usual breathing, at the mouth of a lather that she looked like a washtub with laundry, and he, too, by looking to the ground, noticed a meadow full of stinking herbs, the sight of him aroused disgust. therefore he chased Puccia and her mother continued, and he ordered Ciommo fully annoyance to herd the geese his court. This was in despair, not realizing what had happened to him, and usually let the geese after being driven them into the field, running around on the sea shore, as they wanted while he lay down in a straw hut and until the evening time when he had to return home, lamented his fate. By now but so are the geese on the bank back and waddled came every Marziella up out of the water, fed up with cakes and gave them rose water to drink so that the geese were so fat like sheep and almost did not see from the eyes could and always when they arrived in the evening in a small garden, which was located under the windows of the king, they began to sing: Pire, pire, pire, though is very beautiful, the sun with the moon, but is better by far, who cares for us. When the king every night this goose music heard, he Ciommo call and wanted to know where, how and with which he feed his geese, what Ciommo replied: "I give them nothing to eat than the fresh grass of the field," The King. but that does not quite satisfied this response, he once sent a faithful servant for so he should be careful while Ciommo drives the geese. This is now followed him and saw how he entered the straw hut and the geese gave himself up themselves, whereupon they went to the seashore and had hardly arrived there, emerged as Marziella out of the sea, so beautiful that even Venus, the mother of the blind Cupid, as that poet says, "no other alms wants than tears," not so nice rising from the waves. After the servant now seen all he hurried, beside himself with wonderment to the king and told him, a beautiful spectacle which he on stage at the seashore seen, so that excited by the words of the Servant of curiosity of the king in this also the desire aroused to enjoy the beautiful sight. So when the morning the rooster, a demagogue same, all the birds stirred up to arm the people against the night, and Ciommo had gone with the geese at the usual place, the king went to him without even a moment from him the losing eyes, and saw, as soon as the geese without Ciommo, which fell in the straw hut, had reached the sea as Marziella emerged from the waves, then first to eat the geese a basket of sweets and drink a bowl of rose water was, then but sat down on a stone and her hair began to comb, from which immediately beads and shells fell down in heaps, while their was a cloud of flowers from the mouth at the same time and under her feet, a Turkish carpet of lilies and violets formed , this is hardly noticed the king, so he immediately Ciommo summon and asked him, pointing to Marziella if he knew that beautiful maiden. Ciommo now recognized on the spot his sister, hurried off to them, to hug them, and heard in the presence of the king, as treacherous traded Troccola her and wanted as forcing the envy of this monster that beautiful love fire to go out in the water of the sea , Indescribably great was the joy of the king of the acquired possession of this beautiful jewel, and turning to her brother, he said that he would have so much praised rightly, that it more than three times as much would find when Ciommo tells him, and because he would keep therefore Marziella for more than worthy to be his wife if she would be pleased to receive the scepter of his kingdom to. »Wool heaven that me this good fortune would '' replied Marziella," and that I should serve as maid of your crown! Seest thou not that golden chain that I wear at the foot and keeps me the siren tied so that they me when I draw too much fresh air and hesitate too long on the bank, withdrawing her into the sea and me so holding in gold slavery? "-" What is to be done, "the king replied" to free yourself from the clutches of the siren? "-" Nothing else, "Marziella said," but that this chain by honing with a smooth file and is then taken away from me. "-" So I expect tomorrow morning, "said the King," I will come with everything you need and then take you to my palace, where you be my right eye, the innermost of my heart and the life of my soul shalt. "Having then given by a handshake, the deposit of their love, she returned to the water, but the king back into the fire, in such a fire that he never for a moment had passed the whole day alone. Even when the night black as an Ethiopian appeared to perform with the stars a quadrille, he käute with the jaws of memory the beauty Marzi Ellas again by thinking of her feet on the miracle of her hair, the miracle of her mouth and the artificial tissue, the gold of her gorgeous features the touchstone of consideration striking out, he found that it was of the finest quality content. However, he also abused the night that they paused as long to stop the star embroidery, and confounded the sun, that they do not appear with the light carriage to his home to delight by the possession of the desired good and his chambers with a gold mine, the pearls and a pearl oyster, the flowers brought forth to enrich. As he was but so tossed about in an agony seas, to the thinking that was in real seas, finally appeared the pioneers of the sun, which paved the ways in which they should be accompanied draw with the armies of the rays, and after the king dressed themselves he went with Ciommo to the coast, where he Marziella already encountered and hand the chain from the foot of the beloved object losfeilte with the carried-file, although he also himself another much stronger, forged to the heart. He took her then without hesitation on the croup, who sat his heart so tight already in the saddle, and immediately set off for the royal palace, where he awaits his arrangement of all the beautiful women of the country and Marziella with every possible honors received by them as a mistress. Then, when the king celebrated his wedding with big festivities in which many barrels were set on fire as a summer fire, he ordered at the same time, the same Troccola than putting bad ton, so that they atone in a so for the experienced to Marziella betrayal. Then he let fetch Luceta and awarded her and Ciommo an income from which they could live like princes, while Puccia, chased out of the country, always wander as a beggar and the fact that she had not a piece of cake seek to sow, a steady shortage had to endure of bread, because it is the will of heaven that: Who has no pity, find no compassion.
The two hikers	1019	613	German	Mountains and valleys do not meet, but the children of men do, good and evil. So once a shoemaker and a tailor came along on the journey. The tailor was a handsome guy and was always merry and happy. He saw the shoemaker from the other side approach, and as he observed by his bag what he did for a trade, he called him a little mocking song to "near me the seam, I prefer the wire, match the right and left him with bad luck me Knock the fixed purpose. "the shoemaker but no fun could stand, he pulled a face as if he had drunk vinegar, and made a movement to seize the tailor by the collar. The little guy started but to laugh, handed him his flask and said, "It is not mean any harm, even drinking and swallow the bile down." The shoemaker took a sip, and the storm on his face began to twist itself. He gave Schneider the bottle back and said, ".? I spoke civilly to you, they say well after much drinking, but not by very thirsty Shall we travel together" - "Mir's right," answered the tailor, "if you like just to go to a big city where there is no lack of work." - "Just where I want to," said the shoemaker, "in a small nest is nothing to earn, and in the land of the people like to go barefoot." So they walked together, and always set one foot before the other like a weasel in Schnee.Zeit had enough, but little to bite and to break them both. When they came to a city, so they went around and greeted the craft, and because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and had such pretty red cheeks, so he gave everyone likes, and if luck was good, so he gave the masters daughter under the door even a kiss on the way. When he met again with the cobbler, he had more and more in his pack. The ill-tempered shoemaker made a wry face and said: "The greater the rascal the greater the happiness." But the tailor began to laugh and sing, and shared all he got with his comrades. now rang a few pennies in his pocket, so he let Apply suggested joy on the table that the glasses danced, and it was said to him "worthy light and easily lost." When they had traveled for some time, they came to a great forest through which the road to the royal city went. however, led two foot platforms through it, one of the seven days was long, the other only two days, but no one knew of them, which was the short one. They seated themselves beneath an oak tree and took counsel how they provide for themselves and for how many days they should take bread. The shoemaker said, "One must look before you go, I want to take bread for seven days." -. "What," said the tailor, "bread for seven days on the back haul as a beast of burden and not look around I stick to God and not trouble myself about anything, the money I have in my pocket, which is in summer as well as in winter, but the bread is dry in the hot time and on top of that moldy. My skirt is not longer than the ankle. Why should we not find the right way? bread for two days and so good. " therefore, bought every man his bread, then they tried their luck in the forest hinein.In the forest it was so quiet as a church. No wind stirred, no brook murmured, no bird sang, and through the leafy branches no sunbeam forced. The shoemaker did not speak, he pushed the heavy bread on his back that flowed down to him the sweat of his cross and gloomy face. but the tailor was quite merry, he jumped, whistled on a leaf, or sang a song, and thought, "God in heaven must be pleased that I'm so funny." Two days went on for continued, but did not end as the third day of the forest and the tailor had eaten his bread, so after all his heart sank down a yard deeper and deeper; However, he did not lose courage, but relied on God and on his luck. he laid the third day in the evening hungry under a tree and rose again next morning hungry again. So also passed the fourth day, and when the shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner, so the tailor was only a looker. he asked for a piece of bread, the other laughed mockingly and said, "You were always so funny because you can also even try, pointed do when you're bored, the morning sing too soon the birds, which pushes evening the hawk, "in short, he was without mercy. But on the fifth morning the poor tailor could not stand up more and bring out hardly a word for weakness; the cheeks were white and his eyes red. Then the shoemaker said to him: "I want you now give a piece of bread, but I want you gouge out your right eye." The unhappy tailor who still wished to save his life, could not help but: he wept once more with both eyes, and then held it out, and the cobbler, who had a heart of stone, jabbing his right with a sharp knife eye out. The tailor called to mind what else his mother had told him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry: "Eat what one can, and suffer what they must." When he had his dearly-bought bread, he went back to his feet, forgot his misery and comforted by the fact that he could see with one eye still enough. But on the sixth day, hunger made itself felt again and gnawed him almost to the heart on. He fell in the evening by a tree, and on the seventh morning he could not raise himself up for faintness, and death sat him in the neck. Then the shoemaker said, "I want to practice charity and once again give you bread for nothing you do not get it, I sting you for the other eye still pending." Since the Schneider knew his reckless life, prayed to God for forgiveness, and said: "Do what you need, I will suffer what I have, but remember that our Lord God does not always look, and comes that another hour, when the evil deed will be requited that you be committing to me and I have not deserved of you. I have shared in good days with you what I had. My trade is selling the kind that sting must down. If I no eyes more have, and can not sew, so I have to go begging. Let me just when I'm blind, not be here alone, or I must perish. " The shoemaker, the god had driven from his heart, took the knife and stabbed nor the left eye of him. Then he gave him to eat a piece of bread, handed him a stick and led him behind her.Als the sun was setting, they came out of the forest and above the forest on the field stood a gallows. Then the shoemaker guided the blind tailor, then let him be and went his way. Fatigue, pain and hunger of the unfortunate fell asleep and slept all night. As the day dawned, he woke up, but did not know where he was. At the gallows were two poor sinners, and on the head of each sat a crow. Then one of began to speak: "Brother, you wake up?" - "Yes, I wake up," replied the second. "Then I will tell you something," began the first again, "the dew that is now fallen night about us from the gallows, gives every one who washes himself with it his eyes again. If that knew the blind, like many could face again have who does not believe that this was possible. " When the tailor heard that, he took out his handkerchief, put it on the grass, and moistened as it with dew, he washed his eye sockets with it. Immediately was fulfilled what the hanged man had said, and a couple of healthy new eyes filled the caves. It was not long before the tailor saw the sun set behind the mountains rise up before him in the plane the great royal city was with her magnificent gates and hundred towers, and the golden balls and crosses that stood on the tips began to glow , He distinguished every leaf on the trees, saw the birds that flew by, and the gnats that danced in the air. He took a needle out of his pocket, and when he could thread it as good as he had ever done it, his heart danced for joy. He threw himself on his knees, thanking God for the grace of proven and said his morning prayer, he also did not forget to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging there like the clapper in the bell, and beat the wind together. Then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot to be avowed heartache and went first singing and whistling on.The what he met was a brown foal free flopping around in the field. He grabbed it by the mane, and wanted to spring and ride into the city. The foal, however, begged to freedom: "I'm too young," said he, "even a light tailor such as thou art would break my back in two let me go till I have grown strong, perhaps There comes a time when I. may be worth dirs. " - "Run off," said the tailor, "I see you're still a giddy." He gave him a touch with a switch on the back that it turned down for joy with the hind legs, leapt over hedges and ditches and in the field hineinjagte.Aber the tailor had eaten since yesterday nothing. "The sun," he said, "does not fill me though the eyes, but the bread his mouth. The first thing I encounter and is halfway edible, which has to serve." By a stork stepped seriously across the meadow therefore. "Stop, stop," cried the tailor, and seized him by the leg, "I do not know if you are enjoying, but my hunger me no great choice, do I have to cut off the head and roast you." - "Do not do that," replied the stork. "I am a sacred bird which inflicts no harm, and the great man brings benefits you let my life, so I can repay one occasion dirs." - "Well, be off, Cousin Longlegs," said the tailor. The stork rose and left the long legs hanging and flew away slowly. "What will become of it?" said the tailor to himself, "my hunger grows greater and my stomach is always empty. What I now gets in the way, which was lost." he saw come swimming by on a pond a couple of young ducks. "You come just called," he said, grabbing one of them, and wanted her to turn her neck. Since started an old duck which was hidden in the reeds, loudly yelling, swam with open beak brought and asked him earnestly to have mercy on her dear children. "Do not you think," she said, "would be like complaining your mother when you one carried off and you wanted to make a full end?" - "Just be quiet," said the good-tempered tailor, "thou shalt keep thy children," and put the prisoner back into Wasser.Als he returned, he stood in front of an old tree which was partly hollow, and saw the wild bees off and fly. "I find the reward of my good deed," said the tailor, "the honey will refresh me." But the queen came out, threatened him and said. "If you touch my people and destroy my nest, so you should drive our spines like ten thousand red-hot needles into the skin but you let us in peace and go your way, we will give thee one for it another time a service. "saw the little tailor that even here nothing was to begin. "Three bowls empty," he said, "and on the fourth anything, that's a bad meal." So he dragged himself with his famished stomach into the city, and it just rang for lunch, it was already cooked for him at the inn, and he could sit right at the table. When he was satisfied, he said: "Now I want to work." He went round the town, sought a master, and found a good shelter soon. But as he had learned his craft from the ground up, so it was not long before he became famous, and everyone wanted to have his new coat made by the little tailor. All day increased his reputation. "I can not get stuck in my art," he said, "and yet you go better every day." At last the king ordered him to his Hofschneider.Aber how it goes in the world: on the same day his former comrade the shoemaker also became court-shoemaker. When he perceived the tailor, and saw that he had two healthy eyes, so it pained conscience. "Before he takes revenge on me," he thought to himself, "I have to dig a pit for him." But he who digs a pit shall fall into it himself. At night when he had gone home and it had become dim, crept he said to the king, "Lord King, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has boasted that he will get the gold crown back again which in ancient times lost." - "That should be dear to me," said the king, let the tailor next morning to be demanding and ordered him to get the crown back, or to leave the city forever. "Oho," thought the tailor, "a rogue gives more than he has. If the surly King wants from me, what it can do no man, I will not wait until tomorrow, but like today wander out again to the city." So he packed his bundle, but when he was out of the gate, it did him but sorry that he gave up his fortune and should view the city in which it was passed to him so well, with his back. He came to the pond where he had made with the ducks acquaintance, sat there watching the old man, who he had left their young, shore, pluming herself with her beak. She recognized him instantly, and asked why he was hanging his head so. "You will not be surprised when you hear what I have encountered," replied the tailor, and told her his fate. "If that be all is," said the duck, "we can provide advice. The crown fell into the water and lies down on the ground, we will soon bring it up again for. Meantime just spread out your handkerchief to the shore." She dived down with her twelve young ones, and after five minutes she was up again and sat in the middle of the crown, which rested on their wings, and the twelve boys swimming round about and their beaks had placed underneath and contribute helped. They swam to shore and put the crown on the cloth. You can not imagine how magnificent the crown was when the sun shone on it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles. The tailor tied his handkerchief together by the four corners together and carried them to the king, who was full of joy, and the tailor a gold chain around his neck hing.Als the shoemaker saw that one stroke had failed, he contrived a second, went before the king and said, "Lord King, the tailor has again become so cocky, he misses is that all the royal castle, with all that is in it, loose or fast, to map inside and outside in wax." The king left for the tailor and ordered him all the royal castle, what about all in loose or fast, inside and outside copy in wax, and if he does not succeed in doing it, or it was missing only a nail on the wall so he should sit his life trapped underground. The tailor thought, "It's worse and worse, the No one can endure," threw his bundle on his back and walked away. When he came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head. The bees came flying out, and the queen asked him if he had a stiff neck because his head was so wrong. "Oh no," answered the tailor, "I pressed something else." And told what the King had required of him. The bees began to buzz at each other and growl, and the queen said, "Go home again, but come this time tomorrow, and bring a big towel with, so everything will go well." As he turned back, but the bees flew to the royal palace almost in the open window; crept into every corner, and inspected everything most carefully. Then she hurried back and modeled the palace in wax with such a speed that it was thought that it was growing before his eyes. By the evening all was ready, and when the tailor came next morning, the whole splendid building was there, and lacked no nail on the wall and no tiles on the roof; while it was tender and white as snow, and smelt sweet as honey. The tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to the king, but could not admire it enough, placed it in his largest hall and presented the tailor with a large stone house.The Schuster from not let up, walked over to a third the king, saying, "Lord King, the tailor has come to my attention that wants to jump on the courtyard no water, because he has boasted that it should midst rise in Hofmann high and bright as crystal." And the king left the Schneider fetch and said, "If not tomorrow jumps a jet of water in my yard, as you promised, the executioner should you do on the same farm to a head shorter." The poor tailor did not reflect long and hurried to the gate out, and because it would give him time to life, the tears rolled down his cheeks. By so full there was sadness, filling approached jumped, which he had once given the freedom and from a pretty Brauner had become. "The time has come," he said to him, "when I can repay you your good deed. I already know what's wrong, but you should be helped soon, just sitting on my back can carry two such as thou." The tailor took heart again, he jumped into one sentence, and the horse went full speed into the town, and right on the courtyard. It galloped three times around, quick as lightning, and the third time it fell down. But the moment it crashed horribly: a piece of earth jumped into the middle of the yard like a ball in the air and on the lock out, and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as man and horse, and the water was so pure as crystal, and the sunbeams began to dance on it. When the king saw that, he arose in amazement, and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of all people.But the happiness did not last long. The King had daughters in plenty, one more beautiful than the other, but no son. So the malicious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the king, saying:. "Lord King, the tailor can not up his arrogance He has now boasted that if he wanted to, he could leave the Lord King brought carry through the air to a son . " The king left the cutter call, saying, "If you let me have a son nine days, thou shalt my eldest daughter to wife." - "The reward is indeed great," thought the little tailor, "one would willingly do something for it, but the cherries grow too high for me when I climb for them, will break beneath me the road, and I fall down." He went home, seated himself cross-legged on his desk, and thought over what to do. "It's not," cried he at last, "I want to continue here, I can not live in peace." He tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate. When he got to the meadow, he saw his old friend the stork up there like a philosopher and went off, and sometimes stood still, took a frog into close consideration, and finally swallowed it. The stork came up and greeted him. "I see," he began, "you have your knapsack on his back, why do you leave town?" The tailor told him what the king had asked of him and he could not fulfill, and lamented his misfortune. "Let you about not losing any sleep," said the stork, "I want you out of necessity to help. For a long time I bring the wrapping children in the city, since I can even get a little prince from the well. Go home and behave keep quiet. in nine days from this time repair to the royal castle, I will come. " The little tailor went home, and was at the right time in the castle. Not long before the stork came flying and knocked on the window. The tailor opened it, and cousin Longlegs came carefully in, and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble floor; he had a child in its beak, the beautiful as an angel, and his hands reached for the Queen. He placed it on her lap, and she hugged and kissed it, and had joy beside himself. The stork took before he flew away again, down his bag from his shoulder and handed it to the Queen. There were little paper parcels with colored sweetmeats, and they were divided amongst the little princesses, but the eldest got nothing but got the merry tailor for a husband. "It is just as me," said the tailor, "as if I had won the big lot. But my mother was right, who always said those who trusted and only happiness in God can never fail." The shoemaker had to make shoes, danced in which the tailor on the wedding party, after which he was ordered to leave the city on getting him. The road to the forest led him to the gallows. Of anger, rage and the heat of the day tired, he threw himself down. When he closed his eyes and tried to sleep, the two crows fell from the heads of the hanged man with a loud scream down and pecked out his eyes. His madness he ran into the woods and must be perished in it, because no one has seen him or heard of him.
The enchanted doe	3377	303	German	Open-mouthed all sat there in hearing the so beautiful narrative Paola and expressed finally as meaning that the humble same the ball jumping to the higher, the more he is beaten against the ground, and the Bocke who come across more strongly, the further he goes back. Once, however, Thaddeus waved the Ciommetella that they would turn it so put her tongue in motion, Great is without a doubt the power of friendship as they us endure hardships and dangers willingly to the friend's sake, and possessions for a trinket , leaving the honor for a pipe dream and life deem worthless if you must sacrifice these things in the service of friendship, as we are taught the fable proves the story through numerous examples and I you'll now show in a story that my grandmother Semmonella (God rest her soul!) used to tell; if its just to get me to pay a little attention, close your mouth and pointed ears Wollet. Once there was a king of Lange Laube, named Giannone, which is a great desire cherished, to have children, so whatever while the gods begged that they want his wife to swell the belly yet, and thus would be granted them to him this joy, he was against the pilgrims so charitable that he most of his belongings distributed among them. However, since he saw that the thing itself dragged on and wanted no idea of ​​offspring come to light, so he locked his door all over the world iron firmly and chased anyone who approached as with arrow shots away. A long-bearded hermit now, who knew of this change of heart of the king nothing, or rather she knew and wanted to bring him from Nativity Giannone and asked him for shelter in his house, to which, however, the latter said with a dark and terrible face to him, "If you have expected so, then you have done your Postman; . The old days are gone, the eyes have been wiped me properly, and I'm not a fool, "But while it asked the old man for the cause of this change, the King continued: ,, Because I harbored a great desire children to get, I have anyone who humanly demanded of me, given and given and wasted my money and possessions; recently, however, I saw that it was all in vain, I have changed my procedure and adopted a new way. "-" If it's nothing, "said the old man," it was quite quiet, because before you know of that will . to chin up are your wife's belly "-" If thou canst the cause, "the king replied" I promise you half my kingdom "what that said," Heed what I say thee; if you want namely plants with satisfactory results, the heart take a sea dragon and let it from a pure maid to cook, which the body will swell also at the mere smell of this dish, then enter the heart when it is cooked to eat the queen, and you'll see that it will be soon so heavily pregnant, they like being in the ninth month. "-" How is that possible, "said the king?. "It seems to me, in truth, a little too hard to digest." - "Marvel not do so much," said the old man, "because if you read the mythology, you must know that when once Juno in the joined olenischen climes on a flower, its the body immediately swelled and she bore a son. "-" If that be so, "in turn, the king began," so such Drachenherz should immediately be brought in, and at the end I lose also nothing there. "He therefore sent on the spot hundred fishermen to the sea, well stocked with fish forks, string nets, throw nets, wading, pots, ropes and fishing, and drove them and fished so long back and forth until they caught a sea dragons, which she him out the heart ripped and brought about the king. This gave it a pretty maid of honor for cooking, which thus locked himself in a room and the heart had not been set as soon as the fire, and have a pitch-black smoke rose up, so that not only this pretty cook became pregnant, but all movables in home swelled and came in weeks after a few days, and that gave birth to the four-poster bed, a cradle, the box is a box, the chairs small armchairs, the table a little table and commode such a pretty cute Nachtstühlchen, that it could have kissed. But no sooner had the heart itself was cooked and tasted by the Queen, as she felt the body of her rounded, and after four days brought them and the damsels at the same time, each one pretty boy into the world, who saw two children so similar , that they are not able to distinguish from one another. This now grew up together in such a friendship that they could be separated in a moment from one another, and such was the affection they entertained each other that the Queen, as the son more love for the son of the maid as his mother seemed to feel, started some envy to feel, and did not know how she should take this speck out of your eyes. One day, wanted to go as the prince and his companion on the hunt, he left on a fireplace in his room to light a fire and began to melt lead and cast balls, but he lacked it at any machine, and he went away to fetch it. Meanwhile, the queen entered to see what the Son intend and by, found only Cannerolo the son of Hoffräuleins in the room so it was a thought to get him out of the world; therefore she beat him by bending down to the glowing spherical shape in the face and hit him over the eye such that it gave him a nasty hack. She was about to give him a second blow, when suddenly her son Alfons returned, so she acted as if she had just come to check on him, and after a few caresses forced distant. Cannerolo but which his hat was pushed over his forehead, Alfonso gave no notice of what had happened and also bit back really his pain, even though he felt violently tortured by the same. Once, however, the prince had stopped to make balls like a dung beetle, Cannerolo asked him for permission to leave. And when Alfonso asked in astonishment about this decision it the same for the reason, he said the following, "Do not Penetrate further into me, my dear Alfonso, let it sufficient for you to know that I have to separate myself from you; but heaven knows if, as I'm leaving you, who are my heart, my soul flees from the breast, the spirit separates from my body and the blood leaves my veins. However, since it now has to be so once, farewell and think of me. "After she now then embraces and many tears were shed, went Cannerolo look to his room, put a full armor there, strapped to a sword that for time when the heart was cooked, was born from another sword, pulled a horse out of the stable, and was just the foot put in the stirrup, when Alfonso came crying to him and asked him to him but at least if he really him wanted to leave, to leave some sign of his love, which could alleviate his pain over Cannerolos absence. At these words Cannerolo seized a dagger, threw it on the ground, and by suddenly a beautiful spring gushed forth, he said to the Prince: "This is the best souvenir I can leave you, for in the course of this source you will the running able to recognize my life. If you see them namely streaming light, know that my life is as bright and cheerful; when you see cloudy, so you think I endure suffering, and if you run dry can find (but that the sky did not!), so be sure that the oil is burned out my lamp and I have nature paid their toll . "so saying, he also took his sword, slash with the same deep into the earth, so that suddenly out sprang a blueberry bush, and said," as long as you see this shrub green, know that I too green like garlic; when you see him withered, so suppose that that it was not fare the best, and if he comes in quite so has made your Cannerolo on the stockings, and you can a requiem for him can sing. "After he said this , they embraced anew what Cannerolo to set out on the road and after many things that befell him that but it would be too long, retell such as quarreling with carters, disputes with landlords, assassination of tax collectors, dangerous roads , fear of robbers and the like, finally came to Dingsda, at the time when just a nice tournament held and the winner the king's daughter was promised as a prize. The tournament now Cannerolo also participated and proved himself as brave, that he raised all other knights who were to acquire fame at hand from different parts of the saddle and Fenizia, the daughter of the king, was given to the woman, on what occasion a great feast. After he had spent several months in peace and quiet, it took one day the unfortunate desire to go hunting, so the king, which he told the same thing to him said: "Beware, my dear son, that you the evil not be darkened, look at you before, open your eyes, friend, because in the surrounding woods is a devilish, wild man who every day changes shape and soon into a bear, now in a deer, sometimes in a donkey soon in this, soon transformed into and which fall into its claws, dragged by a thousand fold lists the poor in a cave and aufspeist. Consider, then, my son, what you're doing; for he who willfully goes in danger of coming in to. "Cannerolo but who did not know what fear was no heed to the advice of his father, and hardly the sun swept with the rice broom its rays the soot of the night progresses, so went he also has to stand up to the chase and came here in a forest where the shade under the canopy of the trees held gathered around their supremacy and to conspire against the sun. When the wild man saw him coming, he turned into a beautiful doe to which Cannerolo as soon as he saw her, Hunt began to make, and by fleeing from one place to another, she pulled him on and on, until finally it in the deepest jungle attracted the forest, they woselbst such a large amount of snow fall made that seemed to sink down the sky to the earth. Now, since Cannerolo just was at the cave of the wild man, he looked into her refuge, and quite stiff with cold, he took a few pieces of wood, he found a lighter pulled from his pocket and lit a big fire. While he was recovering at this and dried the clothes that doe appeared at the entrance of the cave and said, "Erlaubet yet, Sir Knight, that I get a little warm my me; for I am half dead from the cold, "to which Cannerolo full of natural friendliness said to her." Come in and be welcome "-" I'd like, "the doe replied" but I have that you then kill fear me. "-" Fear nothing, "said Cannerolo," come in on my word. "-" If you want me into coming, "said those" so pair the dogs so they do not bite me, and Lock up the horse, so . it is not rash to me, "now when Cannerolo coupled the dogs and the horse had tied up, the doe began again:" you have, however, now made me semi-safe, but if you do not also festbindest your sword, so I come to my soul does not in the cave "Cannerolo who wished to make the doe trustful, now tied his sword also determine how the farmers when they wear in the city Degen, tend to do for fear of the gendarmes. now that the wild man Cannerolo defenseless saw, he took his own shape again, fell on him, threw him to later devour him in a deep hole, which was under the cave, and covered it with a stone , But as soon as Alfons, visited what every morning and evening the blueberry bush and the source to see how it erginge his friends, those withered and it was cloudy, he thought at once that his heart brother would be in a sorry state, and fully desire to assist him, he ascended to ask even the mother's permission without the father is well armed and two accompanied bewitched dogs, a horse and went about in the world by so long soon then, soon turned there, until he came even after thingy that he found the alleged death Cannerolos due in deepest mourning; rather he was soon arrived at court, as well as all deceived by his resemblance to Cannerolo, held him for this and rushed to Fenizia to her behind bring the glad tidings, whereupon they immediately plunged down the stairs and, Alfons embracing, exclaimed: " where have you been for so long, therefore, my dearest, best man? "Alfons immediately suspected that Cannerolo would come here and gone out again, and decided therefore, sent to investigate to find out about the Princess, where Cannerolo could well be. And when he had heard that this subject is the cursing hunting sake of a very great danger, all the more so if he were about encounters even the wild man who so cruelly did with the people, so he came right at the end that there had stuck his friend. So he allowed himself to remember nothing, but went to bed, and while he pleaded not to touch one of Diana Done vow his wife that night, he put the drawn sword as a barrier between himself and Fenizia, impatiently the morning hour expecting in which the sun of heaven enters the gilded pills so he abführe the darkness. Hardly this, however, was published, he also jumped from the camp rose then by neither Fenizias prayers could restrain him nor the command of the king, on horseback and pulled the enchanted dogs accompanied to hunt where there just happened to like his friends , No sooner had he therefore came into the cave and saw the guns, the dogs and the horse are all tied up, he realized at once that here Cannerolo would have fallen into the net, and by the doe also asked him, he wants but his weapons, Dog and horse tie, so he rushed to the contrary on the animal go, so that they tore it to pieces immediately. While he was looking for any trace of his friend, he heard him groan under the cave; Therefore, he pushed the stone away, leaving both Cannerolo than all the others that the wild man was buried alive for fattening, come forth to light. Alfons and Cannerolo embraced to this with the greatest joy and then went home, Fenizia woselbst among the two other so-like friends her own husband at first could not figure out; soon, however Cannerolo off his hat and she saw the scar on his forehead, so they pressed him most heartily in her arms. Alfons now brought a month in that country under sheer pleasure and joy; But then he returned to his home and his homeland and took a letter, wrote the Cannerolo through him to his mother to come to him and should share in his good fortune, which she did so. But he himself wanted to know from that moment neither dog nor hunting anything more as he had come to know the truth of the proverb: He who will not hear must feel.
The Queen Bee	597	554	German	Two kings' sons once went on adventures, and fell into a wild, reckless way of living, they do not want to be home again came. The youngest, who was called Simpleton, set out to seek his brothers. But as he finally found, she mocked him that he wanted to beat the world with his simplicity, and they could not get through two and yet would be much klüger.Sie attracted all three together, and came to an anthill. oldest two wanted him stir and see creeping about like little ants in the siege and their eggs forttrügen, but simpleton said, "Let the animals in peace, I's not that it bothers" They went on and came to a lake, on which a great many ducks. The two brothers wanted to catch a couple and roast them, but Simpleton did not let on, saying, "Let the animals in peace, I's not that you kill them!" Finally they came to a bee's nest, it was so much honey that he ran out of the trunk. The two wanted to make a fire beneath the tree and the bees suffocate, so that they could take away the honey. but simpleton she stopped again and said, "Let the animals in peace, I do not sorry's that their burns" Finally came the three brothers in a castle, where stood in the stables louder stone horses, also was not a man to see, and they went through all the rooms until they all came before a door at the end, with three locks; but it was a little pane in the middle of the door, which they could see into the room. They saw a gray man, who was sitting at a table. She called to her, once, twice, but it did not stop. Finally they called for the third time; when he got up, opened the locks, and came out. but it did not speak, but led her to a richly spread table, and when they had eaten and had drunk, he took each in his own Schlafgemach.Am next morning came the little gray man to the oldest, waved, and guided him to a stone table, on which were written three tasks could be redeemed so the lock. The first was that in the forest, beneath the moss pearls of princess thousand were, in number; which had to be examined, and if even a single missing was before sunset so he who had sought to stone. The eldest went and searched all day, but when the day was over, he had only found one hundred It happened, as the sign said he was turned to stone. The following day the second brother undertook the adventure; But he was doing not much better than the oldest, he did not find more than two hundred pearls, and was turned to stone. Finally, the number who sought in the moss came to Simpleton; it was so hard to find the pearls, and went so slow. As he sat on a stone and cried. And as he thus sat, the ant-king, which he had once saved the life came with five thousand ants, and it did not last long, so the little animals had found all the pearls and but getragen.Die in a heap second task was, to get the key to the bedroom of the princess from the lake. When simpleton came to the lake, swam the ducks which he had saved, dived down and brought the key out of Tiefe.Die third task but was the hardest: Of the three sleeping daughters of the king should be the youngest and dearest to be sought out. but they resembled each other exactly, and differed by nothing more than that before they fell asleep, various sweets had eaten, the eldest a bit of sugar, the second a little syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey. As the queen bee came from the bees that had protected from the fire Simpleton, and tasted the lips of all three, at last she remained sitting on the mouth which had eaten honey, and thus the King's son recognized the Rechte.Da was the magic over, everything was delivered from sleep, and who was of stone, their right form again. Simpleton married the youngest and sweetest reigned after her father's death, and his two brothers received the two other sisters.
The Brautschau	1481	1452	German	It was a young shepherd who wanted to get married and knew three sisters, was it one as beautiful as the others that his election was heavy and he could not decide to give one of them the preference. Then he asked his mother for advice, saying, ". Invite all three, and set some cheese before, and watch how they eat it" The youth did the first, however, swallowed the cheese with the rind: the second cut in hurry the rind off the cheese, but because it was so quickly that she left much good it, and threw that away also the third peeled the bark off, not too much and not too little. The shepherd told all this to his mother, she said. "Take the third for your wife" This he did and lived happy and satisfied with it.
The Bremen Town Musicians	261	130	German	A man had a donkey, who has for many years had the sacks to the mill, but whose strength came to an end, he that was to work less capable. Then the Lord thought to get him out of the feed, but realized the donkey that no good wind was blowing, ran away and set out on the road to Bremen; there, he thought he could become a town musician. When he had gone a little way he found a hound lying on the road panting like that has gone tired of. "Well, what do you jappst so Packan?" asked the donkey. "Oh," did not tell the dog, "because I am old and every day going weaker, also on the hunt longer continue, can I have my master wanted to kill because've taken I run away, but how am I to earn my bread? " - "You know what?" said the donkey, "I am going to Bremen to become a town musician, go with and accept let yourself also as a musician. I play the lute and you can beat the drum." The dog was satisfied, and they went on. It was not long, so sat there a cat on the road and making a face like three rainy days. "Well, what has come in your way, old shaver?" said the donkey. "Who can be merry when one goes to the collar," answered the cat, "because I now turn to years, my teeth are set on edge, and I prefer to sit by the fire and spin than run about after mice, me my wanted to drown woman; I have still made me continue, but good advice is expensive: where should I go? " "Go with us to Bremen, you know you but on the night music, because you can become a town musician." - The cat thought well and went with. After that the three fugitives at a court came over, sat there screaming at the gate of the house Hahn and his might. "Your cries, through and through," said the donkey, "what did you do?" - "There have I prophesied good weather," said the cock, "because for Lady Day, where she washed the Christ the shirts and wants to dry them, but because come tomorrow Sunday guests, so the housewife has not a mercy and has the cook said she wanted to eat tomorrow in the soup, and there am I me tonight let's head cut off. Now I crowing, as long as I can. " - "Oh what, you redhead," said the donkey, "prefer us gone, we are going to Bremen, something better than death you'll find anywhere; you have a good voice, and if we make music together, so there must be a have style. " The rooster let himself proposal fallen, and they went all four together fort.Sie ​​but could not reach the city of Bremen in one day and evening they came to a forest where they were staying. The donkey and the dog lay down under a large tree, the cat and the cock set out in the branches, but the rooster flew up to the top where it was safest for him. Before he fell asleep he looked around once more to the four winds around since thought he saw in the distance a spark burn, and called to his companions, it would not have very far to be a house, because it seems a light. The donkey said: "We had better get up and go there, because the shelter here is bad." The dog said, "A few bones with some meat on it and do him good." So they made their way to the area where the light was, and saw shimmering light soon, and there was always bigger, until they came to a bright, lit den of thieves. The donkey, as the biggest, went to the window and looked in. "What you see, gray mold?" asked the rooster. "What I see?" answered the donkey, "a table covered with good food and drink, and robbers sitting at it and let's be comfortable." - "That would be something for us," said the cock. "Yes, yes, oh, we're there!" said the donkey. Then the animals took counsel together how they should go about it, drive out to the robbers and finally found a means. The donkey had to deal with the front feet on the window make the dog jump on the donkey's back, the cat on the dog, and lastly the cock was to fly up and the cat sat on the head. When that was done, they started on a sign at a total of making their music: the donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat meowed and the rooster crowed. Then rushed in through the window into the room that shattering the glass. The robbers fled at the dreadful cry in the air, they thought it as a ghost was coming in, and fled into the forest in the greatest fear. Now the four companions sat down at the table, made free with the, what was left, and ate by Herzenslust.Wie the four minstrels were finished, they put out the light and looked for a place to sleep, each according to its nature and convenience. The donkey lay down on the manure, the dog behind the door, the cat on the hearth near the warm ashes, the rooster sat on the tap beams, and because they were tired from their long journey, they soon fell fast asleep. As it was past midnight, and the robbers saw from afar that no lights were more in the house, and everything appeared quiet, the captain said, "We could not have let intimidated," and told one to go and examine the house. The found everything quiet, went into the kitchen to strike a light, and as he looked at the glowing fiery eyes of the cat for live coals, he held a match to them that it should catch fire. But the cat, not fun, he jumped in the face, spitting and scratching. As frightened he mightily, ran to out the back door, but the dog, who lay there sprang up and bit passed him in the leg, and when he across the yard by the dunghill, the donkey gave him a smart kick with the back foot ; the rooster but who awakened by the noise from sleep and kicking had become cried down from the beam, "Kikeriki!" Then the robber ran as fast as he could back to his captain and said, "Oh, sitting in the house is a horrible witch, who spat on me and with her long fingers I scratched the face and by the door stands a man with a. diameter that and and stabbed me in the leg on the farm is a black monster, who beat with a wooden club me up on the roof, sits the judge, who called out.. 'Bring me the rascal here!' Since I made that I fortkam. " From now on, dared the robbers but not so well that they would not continue in the house, the four Bremen Musicians liked it back out.
The crumbs on the table	1808	2075	German	The Gockel once said to his little dogs, "Come quickly up into the room we want crumbs together peck on the table:. Our woman is expected to make visits" Then the little dogs said, "No, no, we can not Do you know the woman scolds else with us!" Since the Hahn says, "so she knows nothing of it, comes only she never gives us anything good!" Then the little dogs again said, "No, no, it's all over, we do not go up!" But let them have no peace until they finally come together and have read on the table in all their might. Since it is precisely the woman comes in and takes quickly a stick, chasing them away and goes hard into judgment with them. And how they are there before the house down so the little dogs say to the rooster: "Ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, ga, ga - we said!" Since the countryman laughed and just said, "Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha - I knew it!" Do händ se chönne goh.
The three brothers	1179	654	German	There was a man who had three sons, and nothing else in the world but the house in which he lived. Now everyone would have liked to have the house after his death, the father was but one so dear than the other, because he did not know how ers should start that he ty not too close; he wanted to sell the house nor was weils of his forefathers, else he might have divided the money among them. At last he remembered a piece of advice, and he said to his sons, "Go into the world and tried you, and everyone to learn a trade when you all come back, who makes the best masterpiece that should the house haben.'Das were the sons satisfied, and the oldest to be a blacksmith, the second a barber, are the third but a fencing master. They fixed a time when they wanted to get back together after house, and departed. It happened also that all found skilful masters, who taught them their trades. The blacksmith had the king's horses, and he thought 'now dirs can not fail, you get the house.' The barber shaved great masters and also said that the house would be. The fencing master got some blow, but gritted his teeth and had not grieved sichs, for he thought to himself, 'you are afraid of a blow, you get the house no more.' And when the time was over set, they came back together with her father: but they did not know how to find the best opportunity to show their art, sat down and consulted together. As they sat so came running across the field at once a hare. "Oh," said the barber, "comes just at the right," and took basin and soap, foaming until the bunny in the vicinity came, he lathered him in full course, and shaved him in full over a neck beard , and he did not cut him and hurt him in any hair. 'I like that,' said the father, 'if the others do not attack powerful, so the house is yours.' It did not last long, so a gentleman came in a coach, dashing along in full days' Now you shall see, Father, what I can, "said the blacksmith, jumped after the carriage, pulled the horse in driving out the four horseshoes off and hit him in the hunt four new again. 'You're a real man,' said the father, 'you do your things as good as your brother; I do not know who to give the house. ' Since the third 'Father, let me have my time,' spoke and because it started to rain, he drew his sword and waved it in cross strokes over his head that not a drop fell on him, and when the rain more was, and finally as strong as if you Göße with hollows from heaven, he swung his sword faster and stayed dry as if he were sitting in the bag. When his father saw this he was amazed and said, "you made the masterpiece, the house is dein.'Die His brothers were satisfied with the way it was agreed beforehand, and because they were so fond of each other, they all stayed three together in the house and drove her craft; and since they had almost finished learning and were sent so they earned a lot of money. They lived happily together in their age, and as a sick ward and died, grieved the other two so very pleased that they were also ill and soon died. Since they were because they were so clever and had been so fond of all three placed in the same grave.
The three lazy	1442	1950	German	A king had three sons, who were all loving like him, and he did not know which of them to appoint as king after his death. When the time came that he wanted to die, he summoned them to his bedside and said 'love children, I have thought about something with me, I will declare unto you who is the laziest of you to be king after me.' As the oldest 'father, then the kingdom belongs to me, because I'm lazy when I lie down to rest, and I find it a drop in the eye, so I like them not open it that I fall asleep. "Said The second said, "Father, the kingdom belongs to me, because I'm lazy when I'm sitting by the fire to warm me, so I let me rather burn the heels before I withdrew the legs. ' The third said, 'Father, the kingdom is mine, for I am so lazy, I should be hanged, and had the rope already around his neck, and one put a sharp knife in his hand, so that I might cut the rope so I allowed myself more hanged than before I raise my hand to knitting. ' Like father heard this, he said, "you made it farthest and shall be king. '
The three feathers	607	402	German	Once there was a king who had three sons, two of them were clever and wise, but the third did not speak much, and was simple, and was called the Simpleton. When the king thought was old and weak and at his end, he did not know who should inherit the kingdom of his sons after him. And he said to them: "Go ye out, and he who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be King after my death." And that there should be no dispute amongst them, he took them outside his castle, blew three feathers in the air, saying, "Like the fly, so shall ye draw." One feather flew to the east, the other to the west, but the third flew straight and did not fly far, but soon fell to the ground. And now one brother went to the right, the other to the left, and they mocked Simpleton, who in the third spring, where they had fallen, remain musste.Der Simpleton sat down and was sad. Then he suddenly noticed that besides the spring there was a trap door. He lifted her into the air, found a staircase and descended. Then he came to another door, knocked and heard somebody inside calling "green bridesmaid and small, Hopping hither, limping leg, Hutzel back and forth, see let swiftly, who out there would be." The door opened, and he saw a big fat toad (toad) sit and round about her a crowd of little toads. The fat toad asked what would be his desire. He replied: "I would like the prettiest and finest carpet." Then she called a young one and said "green bridesmaid and small, Hopping hither, Hurzelbeins pooch, Hutzel back and forth, I bring her the big box." The young toad brought the box, and the fat toad she made and gave Simpleton a carpet out of it, so beautiful and so fine as above on earth none could be woven. Then he thanked her and got back hinauf.Die other two but their youngest brother had thought so stupid that they believed he would find and bring nothing. "What should we give ourselves a great search effort," they said, took the first shepherds that they met, the coarse handkerchiefs from and carried them home to the King. At the same time Simpleton also came back and brought his beautiful carpet, and when the King of the saw, he marveled, saying, "If you are in the right after, belongs to the youngest the Kingdom." But the other two let their father have no peace, and said, impossible that Simpleton, who was missing in all things understanding, should be king, and asked him, he wants to make a new condition. Then the father said, "He shall inherit the kingdom, who brings me the most beautiful ring," led the three brothers out, and blew three feathers in the air, where they were to follow. The two eldest again went east and west, and Simpleton's feather flew straight and fell down near the door into the earth down. As he went down again to the fat toad, and told her that he needed the most beautiful ring. She left at once ordered her big box, and it gave him a ring, which sparkled with jewels, and was so beautiful that it would have no goldsmith on earth can make. The two eldest laughed at Simpleton for going to seek a golden ring, gave themselves no trouble, but knocked an old wagon ring nails and brought him to the king. but when Simpleton produced his golden ring, his father again said: "His is the kingdom." The two eldest did not let from tormenting the King until he made a third condition, and declared that the kingdom should have the home brought the most beautiful woman. The three springs He again blew into the air, and they flew as vorigemale.Da went Simpleton without further down to the fat toad, and said, "I am to take home the most beautiful woman." - "Well," answered the toad, "the most beautiful woman that is not at hand, but you're supposed to have!". She gave him a hollowed turnip yellow with six mice were harnessed. Then Simpleton said quite mournfully, "What should I do with it?" The toad answered, "Just include one of my little toads into it." Then he grabbed one at random out of the circle and put her into the yellow coach, but hardly sat them in it, so she turned into a beautiful young lady, the turnip into a coach, and the six mice into horses. As he kissed her, and drove the horses, and took her to the king. His brothers came to who had given themselves no trouble to look a beautiful woman, but took the first peasant women. When the king saw her, he said: "The youngest is the kingdom after my death." But the two eldest deafened the King's ears afresh with their clamor, "We ability not admit that Simpleton is king," and demanded that the should have the preference, whose wife could leap through a ring since the middle of the hall hung. They thought, "The peasant women can do that easily; they are strong enough, but the delicate maiden jump herself to death." The aged King agreed likewise to this. Since the two peasant women jumped, and jumped through the ring, but were so clumsy that they fell and broke in two their coarse arms and legs. And then the pretty young lady who had brought with him, and so sprang through as lightly as a deer, and all opposition had to cease. So he received the crown and reigned long in wisdom.
The three fairies	3397	403	German	The story Ciommetellas was considered one of the finest that had been heard before, so that all looked as Ghiacova with delight beside herself, so she began: If the command of the Prince and Princess do not equal continue cracks a winch and a magnet anzöge, I would make a full stop with my chatter by, I think it presumptuous to let the broken Brummeisen follow my mouth on the harp of words Ciommetellas; because our master it but so requires, and I will do my best to play to you a little bit, namely that her stepdaughter wanted to fall into the abyss of the punishment of a jealous woman and lifted her up to the stars. There once lived in the spots Marcianise a widow named Caradonia, could look at you as the true mother of envy, because they never saw happen to something agreeable a neighbor, that would not be stuck in her throat, never heard of the happiness of a friend what they had not seriously annoyed, and never neither man nor woman could see happy and satisfied without her zuschnürte the neck. This widow now had a daughter named Grannizia that was the essence of ugliness, the queen of monsters and ornamental of all changelings; she had a head full Nisse, matted hair, bald temples, an end bumpy, eyes as red as fire, a sick leaves, teeth as black as coal, a throat like a werewolf, a chin as sharp as a triangle, a neck as a raven, breasts like the meal bag, shoulders arched like a dome, arms like the drills, legs like the scimitar, feet like a monkey, it was, in a word, from head to toe a scarecrow, a disgusting grimace an abhorrent witch, but especially a true dwarf by a short, thick Tot; and yet it appeared to her mother, despite all these infirmities as beautiful as a doll. Now it came to pass that this widow remarried with a certain Micco Antonio, a wealthy native of Panecuocolo been which twice Schulze and advocate of this village and was highly regarded in all Panecuocolesen and highly respected. Also Micco had a daughter named Cecella which was considered the greatest miracle of beauty in the world; she had a attractive eye for charming, a rosebud mouth to the delight of a milk-white neck to get out, and was, in a word so lovely and graceful, so charming and trifling, so full of mischief, joke and play, so full Gekose and flattery that she stole the heart from his chest. But why so much words? It is enough if I say that it seemed as if painted with a brush and could not find it no blemish on her. So when Caradonia perceived that Cecella gutted against her daughter like a velvet cushion against a scrub mop, like a Venetian mirror compared to a sooty pot, like the fairy Morgana next to a witch, so she began to look Cecella askance and get heartily sick. She had therefore hardly taken in the home firm footing, burst open as the ulcer on her heart, and she could not bear the torture longer, they began to torture the unhappy girl in every possible way; because her own daughter she left in a jagged robe of Sarsch and a bodice of velvet, but accompanied the poor step-daughter in the worst rags and tatters of the whole house; the daughter she gave bread as white as snow, the step-daughter a piece of dried-up and moldy bread; the daughter she had all day hands idle in her lap lay the stepdaughter but still continued to work like a horse by her alone sweep the house, abrade the dishes, make the beds, do the laundry, feed the pigs, groom the donkey and the pots had to pour out that to save all the brave hardworking girl with no rest or peace, and without any trouble, like work done, just the evil stepmother to do their will. But it happened once her lucky star that when she went to throw the rubbish to a place where a large powerful mine was, you fell off the cage one day out of the house, and while she was pondering the ways in which they could fish out him from the enormous depth, she saw a black monster, from which you could not quite tell if it might be the original or a copy of the ugliest monsters. This was in fact a wild man who had hair, pitch black like pig bristles that reached down to his heels, a wrinkled forehead of each fold seemed made with the plow furrow, arched and bushy eyebrows, squinting and deep-sunken dripping, sticky eyes, two dirty shops under large roofs of rain lashes resembled a wry, drooling mouth as protruded from the case of a wild boar, a few tusks, a leafy chest with a hair forest, from which you can stuff a mattress would have; also still a high hump, a big belly, thin legs and crooked feet, so that another would have fallen with fear to faint; Cecella However, even though they saw such a horrible monster right to be plucked up courage and said. "Will you not, dear man, hand up my basket, which has been dropped me there, you shall also quite a rich woman get" what are the wild man replied. "Come down, my daughter, and you'll get it myself," and the brave girl climbed really by stopped at the tree roots and clinging to the rocks, down into the depths, they woselbst (you ! should not believe) three fairies found, one more beautiful than the other, the hair had invited of spun gold, faces as the full moon, eyes that spoke, a mouth with sweet music to sugar-sweet kisses, and - what can you continue to say - a delicate neck, a plump breast, a soft hand, a dainty foot, and, in a word, a grace, that they could call a framework gilded with pure beauty. This now proved Cecella so many flatteries and caresses, as they can hardly imagine, they took it by the hand and led her to a house that was hidden between hiding places and a crowned head could have served for habitation. When she but enter and had sat down on Turkish rugs and cushions of smooth velvet with tassels of spun or turned gold, the fairies of Cecella could comb your hair, and while they most carefully with a transparent comb made of buffalo horn, this business and carefully work done, they asked the fairies: "Dear daughter, what you find on the head?" to which she replied with fine style: "I think Nißchen and louse like pearls and shells," the fairies liked the politeness Cecellas beyond measure, and after. these excellent women scattered hair had slipped, they led Cecella with him around and showed her little by little all the glories of that magic palace; soon we saw shrines, carefully covered with chestnut and hornbeam, soon covered box with equine and decorated with pewter ornaments, soon tables made of walnut wood, so bright that you could see your reflection in it, soon chests with messingnen fittings, whose luster is blinded was soon poster beds with curtains grüngeblumtem fabric, leather armchairs soon and many other magnificent that any other would be a bit crazy at the sight with wonder; Cecella but the glories that looked palace with the greatest indifference, without in any way surprised about it or to gawk. When they were finally entered into a densely filled with the most precious robes Dressing room, the fairies showed their women skirts of Spanish brocade robes with hanging sleeves from the heaviest velvet and gold-trimmed hem, Throws Flor, staffed by melting peaks, camisole from strongest Taft, headbands from natural flowers and ornaments in the shape of oak leaves, shells, crescents and snake tongues; Furthermore, blue and white bracelets with glass tops, ears of corn, lilies and plumes, all to serve as a headdress, artificial shells, inlaid with silver, and finally a thousand other figurines and jewelry, which is usually worn around the neck. By now the fairies showed all this splendor Cecella, they told her that she should choose according to their desire of these things and take them as much as they wanted; Cecella However, humble and unassuming as a violet, all things passed from larger values ​​and only took a ragged woman skirt that no six pence was worth it. Then ask the fairies Cecella: "Which door will you go out of the house, dear heart," and this, up to the earth bowing and as wallowing in the dust replied: "For me, fitting it to go through the stable . "then they embraced the fairies of the most friendly, they kissed a thousand times, pulled her a brand new, embroidered all over with gold robe and made her the crown on Scottish manner in the form of a basket and with so many curls and ribbons that he as a flowery corridor looked like the forehead hair with a toupee and buttons, the lichen they left her hanging down behind; then accompanied them to the door Cecella that, saying of solid gold and around was covered with carbuncles to her: "Go now, dear Cecella, accompanied by our wishes, you married soon to see; So go now, and if you stepped out that door, so the eyes suggest, and see what's up there, "Cecella then made deep bows and departed. once they had but stepped out the door, she lifted her head up, and a golden star struck her on the forehead, which was so wonderful to see so that they gestirnt like a fairy slow, returned step home and stood before her stepmother, the up she told everything had happened from start to finish. However, this was made for the wicked woman nothing pleasant, but rather just a stab in the heart, which is why they could not be satisfied and finally call the residence of the fairies of Cecella where to because without delay the monster of daughter sent. Once they enter the magic palace and those three gems of fairies there had encountered them first and foremost was to search their heads and questioned the order, what she found, she answered: "Each louse is the size of a fist and . each Nisse like an egg "While here about the fairies annoyed very much, and the naughty behavior of coarse Liese drove them hard in the nose; But they were silent quite still, by recognizing on this sample the whole piece, they led then into the room where the precious vestments were, saying there about her that she should choose the very best. Grannizia now, which looked to offer a finger wanted to take the whole hand and thus took the most beautiful dress, which was located in the closets. As the fairies Grannizia saw take something so precious, she resented her much more, however, they wanted to wait and would like more far their insolence, and asked them thus: "Which door do you want out of the house go, dear little mistress, by the golden or "replied What Grannizia with bold face" through the back door? by the best, is it? "the fairies could now no longer endure the insolence of Vettel and therefore gave her not the slightest, but sent them empty handed. continued by saying to her. "as soon as you step out of the stable door, lift up your face in the air and watch what will fall," Hardly was therefore Grannizia stepped out on the dung heap of time, so she lifted her head up, and soon she remembered donkey testicles on the forehead, which together grew immediately with their skin and looked as if her mother had had during pregnancy a strange lust. With this beautiful gift now Grannizia went slowly back to her mother, so that these angry as a bitch that has thrown, and let himself out with foaming mouth Cecella immediately and they sent away with a few rags that barely covered his nakedness to drive out the pigs while they cleaned out her own daughter with their clothes, how ruthless treatment Cecella but endured with great devotion and true Hiobsgeduld. O pitiless cruelty that would have the stones of the field must soften that that mouth, which nature had formed only Liebesgekose, was forced to blow the horn of a swineherd and "shoo, shoo, holla ho" to call that that beauty that was created for free, had always carried about outdoors and pigs that those hand whose delicacy would have hundreds of hearts can turn into their fetters, instead, hundreds of sows with a truncheon chased before them. the plague would have rather brought those grotesque faces she chased into the woods, where studied under dark canopy of fear and silence protection against the sun. but the sky, kicking the proud in the dust and lifts up the humble, sent Cecella a gentleman named Cuosemo, on their way towards that does not once this gem in the feces, this Phoenix torn among pigs, this magnificent sun among the clouds enveloping rags saw when he already so fired into it was that he was once asked who she was and where she lived, and then immediately went to her stepmother and wanted her to wife, and giving her a enormous sum as dowry promised what Caradonia who wish to catch this roast for her daughter, he replied that he would return only in the evening, as if to invite their cousins ​​in order to consult with them. Cuosemo returned to this full of joyful hope back home, even though it seemed the time up to the moment where the sun lies down on the silver bed that gives her the Indian electricity, a thousand years by himself with the sun, from the his heart was inflamed longed to lay down. Caradonia meanwhile, had locked Cecella into a barrel, with the intention to give her a warm bath, and because they leave the pigs, they scald like a pig with hot water while Cuosemo, who was in perpetual ecstasy and died with desire express his passion by pressing the beloved beauty. When the air had finally dimmed and the sky looked like a cleft palate, he said: "This is the moment where I can the tree that Amor me planted in the chest notch, to coax to the manna of love candy; this is where I can the treasure Fortuna promised me dig that hour; therefore lost no time Cuosemo; if you promised you a pig, come running, not crawling. O night, happy night, friend of lovers, which thou, verwandelst into one body and a life of one heart and soul, and you, O Amor, hasten, hasten induce head over heels for me under the tent of darkness can I protect against fire that consumes me, "Whilst he spoke, he arrived at the house and found Caradonias Grannizia instead Cecella, an owl instead of a nightingale, a thistle instead of a-blown rose. for although Grannizia the clothes Cecellas had dressed, and they say: "Clothes make the man," she but looked like a dung beetle on Brocade, and neither the red and white make-up, nor the Schönpflästerchen, nor any other surface, which the made mother to you, you could banish the scales from his head, the butter from the eyes, the freckles from the face, the fire from the teeth, the warts from the neck, the ulcers of the breast and the goat under your armpits, whose stench one could remember far a mile. As Cuosemo this monster saw before him, he did not know what was happening, and as he drove back, as it the Evil One had appeared, he said to himself: "Am I awake or is taking a dive in my eyes? Am I or am I not do it? What do you see in front of you, unhappy Cuosemo? You are there duly given! This is not the face that suddenly got me this morning during the winding; that is not the image that I carry around in your heart! What does that mean, oh fate? Where is the beauty where the hook boarded me? The winds that pulled me to him? The arrow that pierced me? I know well that neither canvas nor woman may be-is in the light, but because I chose yes in broad daylight! Woe is me, the piece of gold today has earlier turned me in copper coin, the diamond in glass, the wine in vinegar "growled These and many other words and he mumbled into his beard. recently, however, forced by necessity, he gave Grannizia a kiss, but as if he should kiss an old chamber pot, approached and he removed more than three times his lips before he touched his mouth to his bride, and when it finally happened, he believed be located at the shore of Chiaja to the hour when the tribute of what others pay as Arab perfumes lack of an appropriate channels, the brave women of the sea. But since now the sky to young look, to his white beard was dyed black and the apartment Cuosemos was very far away, he was forced to Grannizia for that night in a not far situated from Panecuocolo house to bring into which he threw a straw bag on a few boxes and then put it with his bride. But who could describe what a bad night both zubrachten! Because even though it was summer and they therefore lasted barely eight hours, it seemed to them but longer than the longest winter night. The lascivious bride certainly scratched, coughed, pushed sometimes with their feet, sighed and called with dumb words, the interest rate for the rented house. Cuosemo however, did as if he snores, and retreated to the edge of the deposit to Grannizia not to touch so that it fell from the bag on the chamber pot and a shameful stench rose. O how often cursed Cuosemo the cruelty of the sun that lingered so endlessly to keep him the longer excited about this torture, and how intimately he pleaded that the night would break the neck and the stars disappear, so that it the by the arrival day could create these evil hours from the neck. Hardly the dawn but was finally released to chase the hen and wake the roosters, including Cuosemo jumped from the camp and hurried, without having to even the pants buttoned in place properly, in the house Caradonias to break away from her daughter and to pay her forfeit with a broomstick. However, when he reached her, he did not find her at home because she went to a bunch of wood in the forest to prepare a hot bath for the step-daughter, who was imprisoned in Bacchus' grave, a wine cask, though they rather in the cradle Cupid with total comfort may rest would. By now Cuosemo Caradonia searched everywhere, but could not find her anywhere, and therefore began to shout: "Heda where you are," raised a black cat crouched in the ashes, suddenly and unexpectedly, her voice and said, "Meow meow your bride is locked into the barrel. "and immediately approached Cuosemo to the cask and heard a dull, low wail, which he nimbly took an ax from the fireplace and hewed the tires of the barrel so that the falling down of the staves the curtain of a theater disperse and a goddess who were speaking the prologue, seemed to be visible. Only by a miracle it was that Cuosemo not suddenly blind at such great splendor; but after he stood there for a time, was as if he saw a house gremlin, and finally regained consciousness, he took her in his arms and shouted: "Who has locked you in this dark dungeon, jewel of my heart? Who made you hidden from me for so long, hope of my life? What's this? A devoted pigeon in a cage of tires and a basilisk with me in bed? What happened here? Say, sweet little mouth, comforting me in my grief and put balm on my wounded heart! "Then began Cecella him everything that had happened without it passed even one tittle to tell in detail what they namely her stepmother since had set this her foot into the house, up to the moment endured where they buried her in a barrel to blow out her life light. "Keep it in here a little while calmly Once Cuosemo heard this, he was Cecella, crouch behind the door and hiding there, after which he beat up the barrel again, then Grannizia induce outdated and after he packed into it, said to her , until I have performed some magic, so you no witchcraft can harm. "Then he made the barrel too tightly hugged Cecella, and as he took her behind him on a horse, he rushed to her posthaste to Pascarola, where he lived. Hardly Caradonia was now returned with a great bunch wood home, they made a great great fire, put a huge kettle of water over, and as soon as this began to boil, she let it through the bunghole in the keg run so that Grannizia, crunched over and over scalded with his teeth as if she had eaten cramp herb, and the skin peeled off her like a snake when she changes her brat. But when it Caradonia appeared that Cecella be abgesotten properly and all four would have stretched out, they smashed the barrel, and by now (O heavens, what a sight!) Saw her own daughter in front of him, the birth from her mother so cruelly had been boiled, she tore her hair out, scratched his face, the chest mangled, crunched his hands, ran his head against the wall, stamped his feet and made such a clamor and din that the whole place together ran. Having now so long like a maniac had behaves in such a way that no consolation to reassure them and no persuasion could soothe, she ran at once posthaste after the fountain and - plop! - they plunged his head forward down by proving in this way the truth of the proverb: Who digs a pit shall fall into it. No sooner had ended this tale, as Giallaise and Colajacovo which occurred one of the court cook and the other of Hofkellermeister, and a dialogue hersagten that all so very pleased that they hardly perceived that the sun, tired of the whole day in alone to keep the realms of heaven a calendula dance that chased to the Fackeltanz, had himself but pulled back to another shirt to put on. But when they finally noticed as yet that the air obscures himself to everyone went home and to bed.
The three Feldscherer	1125	660	German	Three Feldscherer traveled in the world who thought to have had their art, and they came to an inn where they wanted to stay. The host asked where they would be here and also wanted. 'We draw on our art in the world around.' "Just show me again what you can," said the host. Then the first said he would cut his hand and replace it next morning early again: the second said he would tear out his heart, and put it back in the morning: the third said he would cut out his eyes and heal them again tomorrow morning. 'Can you that, "said the host," so you have finished learning.' but they had an ointment, which they rubbed themselves, which healed together, and the vial, where she was in, she wore constantly with them. Since they cut hand, heart and mind from the body, as they had said, laid them all together on a plate and gave it to the host: the host gave it to a girl ask sollts in the closet and take good care. But the girl had a hidden treasure, who was a soldier. How, then slept the innkeeper, the three army surgeons and all the people in the house, the soldier came and wanted what they have to eat. Since closing the girl picked up the cabinet and give him some food, and the great love forgot to shut the closet door, sat down to loved ones on the table, and they chatted with each other. As hilarious as sat and thought of no evil, the cat came in, found the cupboard open, took the hand, the heart and the eyes of the three army surgeons, and ran off with them. When the soldier had eaten and the girl away the things and wanted to shut the cupboard because you think it looked that the dish that had given her to him the host, was single. Then said fright to her lover 'oh, what I want to do poor girl! will there is a thief out there on the gallows, The hand is gone, the heart and the eyes are gone too, what will become of me tomorrow morning fare !, 'Be quiet, "said the soldier,' I will help you out of trouble I cut off the hand; Which hand was it ?, 'the right.' Then the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he went to the poor sinner cut off the right hand and brought it to her. Then he grabbed the cat and stung his eyes from it; now only the heart was missing. 'Have you not been and not the dead pigs in the cellar?' 'Yes,' said the girl. 'Well, that's good, "said the soldier, went down and fetched a pig's heart. The girl did everything together on a plate and put it in the closet, and had taken as her lover to leave, she went quietly into Bett.Morgens, stood up when the army surgeons, they told the girl she was to bring them the plate, BE REDUCED to hand, heart and eyes. Then she brought it out of the closet, and the first fixed the thief's hand on and smeared it with his salve, and it grew to his. The second took the cat's eyes and healed them: the third made the pig's heart firmly. The innkeeper stood, admired their art and said he'd like not seen, he wanted to boast with everyone and recommend. Then they paid their bill and left weiter.Wie they walked so, remained with the pig hearts not with them, but where a corner was, he ran and was sniffing around in it like pigs do. The others wanted him to hold back on the tail of his coat, but that did not help, he broke free and ran wherever the dirt was thickest. The second also behaved very strangely; he rubbed his eyes and said to the others, "Comrades, what is it? these are not my eyes, I do not see anything, but I derive a that I do not fall. ' As they walked with difficulty on until the evening, when they came to another inn. They entered together into the bar, sat there was one in a corner of a wealthy gentleman in front of the table and money. The twitched with the thief's hand walked around it a few times with the arm, at last, as the stranger turned away, he reached into the pile in and took out a handful of money. One of them saw and said, "Comrade, what are you doing? Thou must not steal, shame on you! ' 'Why,' he said, 'what can I do? twitches in my hand I have to snatch things whether I will or not. ' They lay down to sleep, and how they lie there, it was so dark that you can not see a hand in front of eyes. Suddenly the one with the cat's eyes, woke woke the others and said, "Brothers, look once, you see the white mice running around there ?, The two sat up, but could see nothing. And he said, 'it is not right with us, we have not got back again what is ours, we must return to the innkeeper, he has deceived us.' So they set out the next morning, and told the host they had not got back again what it really work, the one had a thief's hand, the second cat's eyes, and the third a pig's heart. The innkeeper said that the girl would have to be to blame, and it wanted to call, but how had the three come see it was run out by the back door, and did not return. Then said the three, he should give them a lot of money, otherwise they left him the red rooster fly over the house: he gave what he had and could muster, and the three went away with it. It was days of their lives enough that they had but rather, nevertheless had their correct work.
The three children of fortune	670	1650	German	A father once left his three sons to come and gave to the first a cock, to the second a scythe, and the third a cat. 'I am old,' he said, 'and my death is nigh, and I wanted to for you before my end. Money I have not, and what I now give you seems of little worth, but it is merely important that you apply it wisely: you search only a country where such things are still unknown, and your fortune is made. " After his father's death the eldest went away with his cock, but wherever he came the cock was already known in the towns he saw him from a distance sitting on the towers and turn around with the wind, in the villages he heard more as a crow, and no one would be surprised by the animal, it is not that the reputation had when he would make his fortune with it. But finally geriets him but that he came to an island where the people knew nothing about cocks, even their time not divide understood. They knew well, wenns was morning or evening, but at night when she did not do slept, no one knew from the time out. 'Look,' he said, 'what a proud animal, it has a ruby ​​red crown on his head, and wears spurs like a knight, it calls you at night three times, at fixed hours, and when it does it causes last time, the sun on soon. But if it crows by broad daylight, so you aim, then there certainly different weather. ' The people were well, she did not sleep for a whole night and listened with great delight as the cock at two, four and six o'clock, loudly and clearly called off the time. They asked him if the animal was for sale, and how much he wanted for it. 'About as much as a donkey wearing gold,' he replied. 'A ridiculously small price for such a precious creature,' they cried, and willingly gave him what he hatte.Als demanded he came with the richness home, his brothers were astonished, and the second said, "and I will still open and see if I can not get rid of my scythe. ' It had not look as if he, for everywhere met him, and they had as good a scythe on the shoulder as he. But recently, he chanced on an island where the people knew nothing of scythes. When the corn was ripe, they took cannon out to the fields and shot it down. This was rather an uncertain affair; many shot right over it, others hit the ears instead of the stems, and shot them away, whereby much was lost, and on top of that it made a terrible noise. Then the man turned back and mowed it down so quietly and quickly down that people mouth and nose opened their astonishment. They were willing to give him for what he wanted, and he got a horse, the gold was charged as much wear it konnte.Nun wanted to bring the third brother his cat to the right man. He was like the others, as long as he remained on the continent, was nothing to be done, there was everywhere cats, and were so much that the new-born boys were drowned in the water most of them. Finally he settled on an island on ships, and it happened fortunately that there ever yet been seen and yet the mice had taken so out of hand that they were dancing on the tables and benches, the landlord did not like at home or be. The people complained bitterly of the plague, the king himself did not save the other hand, in his castle: in all corners whistled mice and gnawed whatever they could with their teeth only pack. But now the cat began her chase, and soon cleared a couple of rooms, and people asked to buy the wonderful beast for the country the king. The king willingly gave what was asked, which was a loaded with gold mules, and the third brother came up with the very greatest treasures heim.Die cat made in the royal palace with the mice a real desire and bit so many dead that they were no longer to count. At last she grew hot from work and she got thirsty '. Meow, meow "when she stopped, turned his head in the air and shouted, The king and all his people, when they heard this strange cry, terrified and ran all the castle in their fear also. Below held Council of the king what to do the best thing; last was determined to send a herald to the cat and ask them to leave the castle, or to expect that force would be used against them. The councilors said, "Rather will we let ourselves be plagued with the mice, for to that misfortune we are accustomed, than give up our lives to such a monster. ' A noble youth had to go up and the cat ask if they wanted to leave the castle willingly. But the cat, whose thirst had become still greater, merely answered, "Mew mew. ' The noble youth, 'not quite, quite,' understood and gave the king the answer. 'Well,' said the councilors, "she shall yield to force. ' Cannon were brought out, and the palace on fire. When the fire in the hall was where the cat was sitting, she sprang safely out of the window; but the besiegers did not leave off, was shot down by the whole castle in the land.
The three apprentices	1143	360	German	There were three apprentices, who had it agreed to stay together while traveling, and always to work in a city. At a time but they found their masters had no more work, so they were finally completely demolished and had nothing to live. As one of them said 'what do we start? we can not stay here longer, we want to walk again, and if we do not find work in the city where we go, we want to make the innkeeper that we write to him where we are, and have a news of each other can, and then we want to separate us; ' that seemed the others are getting the best. They departed, as they came on the way a richly dressed man who asked who they were. 'We are apprentices looking for work, we have kept us together so far, but if we find any more, and we will separate us.' 'That is nothing, "said the man,' if you will do what I tell you, you shall not want money or for work; nay, you shall be great men and head coaches. ' One of them said, If our souls and salvation be not endangered, we will certainly do it. ' 'No,' replied the man, 'I have no claim on you.' but the other had seen to his feet, and when he then saw a cloven hoof and a human foot, he did not want to get involved with him. And the devil said 'you give satisfied, it is not after you, but on another soul, which is already half mine, and shall but run full the Mass.' Because they were now safe, they agreed, and the devil told them what he wanted, the first to respond to every question, "All three, 'the second' For money," the third, "And quite right. ' They were always behind the other say, but further they could not speak a word, and they disobeyed this order, so all the money would have disappeared equal: but as long as they followed it, their pockets were always full. To the top he gave them as much as they could carry, and bade them to the city in and go to the pub. They went in, the landlord came to meet them and asked, 'do you want something to eat?' The first replied, "all three. ' 'Yes,' said the host, "that is what I mean. ' The second 'money.' 'That goes, "said the host. The Third 'and that was right.' 'Certainly it is right, "said the host. It came to pass them good food and drink and brought well-attended. After the meal, the payment had to be done, and the innkeeper gave one the bill out 'of the spoke, "All three,' the second 'For money," the third, "And quite right.' 'Indeed it is right, "said the host,' Pay all three, and without money I can give nothing. ' But they paid even more than he had asked. The guests saw the with and said, "These people have to be great. ' 'Yes, they are,' said the host, "they are not very wise. ' They stayed for a while in the inn, and said nothing else but, "All three, about money, and that was right. ' But they saw and knew everything that was going on. It happened that a great merchant came with a lot of money, who said, "Mr. Landlord, he heb my money for me, here are three crazy apprentices who wish it to me steal. ' So did the host. As he was carrying the trunk into his room, he felt that he was heavy with gold. Thereupon he gave one the three apprentices, but the merchant came up stairs into a separate room. When it was midnight and the host thought they were all asleep, he came with his wife, and she had an ax and struck the rich merchant dead; according murdered him they went to sleep again. It was day, there was a great noise, the merchant lay dead in bed bathed in his blood. All the guests ran together, but the host said, "have done the three great craftsmen. ' The lodgers confirmed it, and no one be told 'different kanns been. but the landlord they sent for and told them, 'you killed the merchant?' 'All three of us,' said the first, "For money," the second, 'and that was right,' the third. 'Because now, you hear,' the host said, 'they confess it themselves.' They were taken to prison, and should be addressed. When they saw that it was so serious, but they became scared, but at night the Devil came and said, "Bear it just one day longer, and not away your luck, it shall be hurt no hair. ' The next morning they were brought to trial: as said the judge "Are you the murderer? ' 'All three of us.' 'Why did you kill the merchant?' 'Around the money.' 'You wicked,' the judge said, 'did not you spared her sin?' 'And that was right.' "They have confessed and are still stubborn," said the judge, "lead them to death. ' So they were taken out, and the landlord had to step into the circle. As they have now been taken by the executioners and led up to the scaffold, where the executioner stood naked sword, suddenly came a carriage with four blood red foxes covered, and drove the fire jumped from the stones, but waved from the window of a with a white cloth. As the executioner said, "there is mercy, 'and was out of the car' mercy! Grace!' called. Then the devil stepped out as a very noble gentleman, beautifully dressed, and said, "You three are innocent; you now are allowed to speak, make known what you have seen and heard. ' Then spoke the eldest 'We did not kill the merchant, the murderer is standing there in the circle,' and pointed to the host, 'the symbol goes into his cellar, there still hang many others that he has killed.' Then the judge sent the executioners out who found it had been said, a nd when they had the reports to the judge, he let the host lead up and his head cut. Then the devil to the three said, "Now I have got the soul which I wanted to have, but you are free and have money for the rest of your lives. '
The Three Little Men in the Wood	126	480	German	It was a man, whose wife was dead, and a woman, whose husband was dead; and the man had a daughter, and the woman also had a daughter. The girls were acquainted with each other and walked together sometimes to the woman into the house. And she said to the man's daughter, "Listen, tell your father that I wanted to marry him, then you shall every morning you into milk wash, and drink wine, but my daughter shall wash herself in water and drink water." The girl went home and told her father what the woman had said. The man said, "What should I do Marriage is a joy and also a torment?". Finally, because he could not grasp a decision, he pulled his boots and said, "Take this boot, it has in the sole of a hole, so go to the floor, hang it on the big nail and pour then water into Keeps it. the water, and I will again take a wife, but it goes through, I will not. " The girl did as he was made to feel; but the water drew the hole together and the boot became full to the top. She informed her father how it had failed. Then he went upstairs himself, and looked as if it was all true, he went to the widow and wooed her, and the wedding was held. The next morning when the two girls got up, there stood before the man's daughter milk for washing and wine for drinking, before the woman's daughter there stood water for washing and water to drink. The second morning was water for washing and water to drink so well in front of the man's daughter as before the woman's daughter. And on the third morning stood water for washing and water for drinking before the man's daughter, and milk for washing and wine to drink for the woman's daughter, and this was it. The woman became her stepdaughter fiercely hostile and did not know how she would make it her from day to day worse. she was also jealous because her stepdaughter was beautiful and lovely, but her own daughter ugly and disgusting. Once in the winter when it was freezing hard, and hill and vale lay covered with snow, the woman made a dress of paper, called the girl and said, "There, the dress get dressed, go out into the forest and bring me a basket of strawberries ; I desire. " "Good Lord," said the girl, "grow in winter no strawberries, the ground is frozen, and the snow has covered everything. And why should I go in this paper frock? It's out there so cold that one's breath freezes, as the wind will blow through, and the thorns tear to me from the body. " "Will you still disagree with me?" said the stepmother. "Do that yourself off, and do not be likely to see again, until thou the basket of strawberries." Then she gave her a little piece of hard bread, and said, "Of this you can overeat the day," and thought: Outside it gets freezing and starving and I never come back to his eyes. Now the girl was obedient, the paper dress did and went out with the basket. There was nothing but snow, the width and breadth, and had to remember not a green blade. When it came to the forest, she saw a little house out of which three little men peeping. She wished them good day, and knocked modestly at the door. They shouted, "Come in," and it went into the room and sat down on the bench by the stove, where she began to warm herself and eat her breakfast. The little men said, "Give us some of it." "Good," said he, shared his piece of bread in two and gave them the half. They asked, "What do you want to winter time in your little thin frock here in the forest?" "Oh," she answered, "I should get a basket of strawberries and should not rather come home until I bring with it." When she had eaten her bread they gave her a broom and said, "Return with it at the back door away the snow." As it was, but outside, the three men said to each other: "What shall we give her, because it's so pretty and well and shared his bread with us." Since the first said, "I grant that it is more beautiful every day." The second said, "I grant that gold pieces falling from his mouth as often speaks a word." The third said, "I grant that a king comes and takes it to his wife." but the girl did as the little men had said, returned with the broom the snow behind the little house, and what do you suppose that it has found? Lauter ripe strawberries very dark emerged from the snow. She hastily gathered in his joy his basket full, thanked the little men, shook everyone's hand and ran home to his stepmother wanted to bring what is wanted. As it entered and "Good evening," said the same occurred to him a gold coin from the mouth. Thereupon she related what had happened to him in the woods, but with every word she spoke, he noticed the gold pieces from the mouth, so that soon the whole room covered with it was. "Now look a the high spirits," cried the stepsister, "so the money to throw," but secretly she was jealous about it and wanted too into the woods and strawberries. The mother: "No, my dear little daughter, it is too cold, you could freeze me." But because she let her alone, she finally gave in, made her a magnificent coat of fur, which it had put on, and gave him bread and butter and cake along the way. The girl went to the woods and straight to the little house. The three little men peeped out again, but it did not greeted, and without looking at them and greet without them, it stumbled into the room inside, sat down at the stove and began his sandwich and his cake to eat. "Give us some of it," cried the little men, but she answered: "It is not enough for myself, how can I give to another, neither of them?" When it was finished eating, they said, "You're a broom, transport us out outside the back door in." "Oh, returns yourselves," it "does not, I am your servant." Replied, As it saw that she wanted to give her anything, she went out the door. Since the little men said to each other: "What shall we give her as she is so naughty and wicked jealous heart, has grudging everybody everything?" The first said, "I grant that it is uglier every day." The second said, "I grant that to him at every word she speaks a toad jumps out of the mouth." The third said, "I grant that it may die a miserable death." The girl was looking outside for strawberries, but as she found none, she went glumly home. And how he had opened his mouth to tell his mother what had happened to him in the forest, as he jumped at every word a toad from his mouth, so all was seized with horror before him. Now the stepmother angered even more, thinking only of how they wanted to do to the man's daughter every possible injury, but whose beauty all the days of greater ward. Finally she took a kettle, set it on fire, and boiled yarn in it. When it was ready she hung it over the poor girl's shoulder and gave her an ax, so it should go to the frozen river and break a hole in the ice and slide the yarn. It was obedient, went thither and cut a hole in the ice, and when it was in the middle of chopping, a splendid carriage came driving up, in which the king was sitting. The carriage stopped, and the king asked, "My child, who are you and what are you doing?" "I am a poor girl, and yarn." Then the king felt compassion, and when he saw how she was so very beautiful, he said, "Will you go with me?" "Oh, with great pleasure," said it, because it was glad that it should come from the eyes of the mother and sister. So she got into the car and continued with the king, and had come when she to his castle, the wedding was celebrated with great splendor, as it had given the girl's little men. More than a year gave birth to the young queen a son, and had heard as the stepmother of the great good fortune she came with her daughter in the palace and acted as if she wanted to make a visit. But when the king went out once and no one else was present, the wicked woman seized the Queen by the head, and her daughter grabbed her by the feet, they lifted off the bed and threw them out the window at the passing stream of electricity. Then her ugly daughter lay in bed, and the old woman covered her up over his head. When the king came back and wanted to talk to his wife, the old woman cried: "Hush, hush, now is not, it is strongly sweat, you have to let it rest for today." The king suspected no evil, and only came the next morning again, and as he spoke to his wife and she answered him, jumped with every word a toad, while otherwise a piece of gold had fallen out. Then he asked what it was, but the old woman said that she had gotten from the strong welding and would lose again. But in the night the kitchen boy saw a duck come swimming up the gutter, saying, "King, what are you doing you asleep or you wake up?" And when he did not answer, she said, "What are my guests?" Since the boy answered: "You are sleeping soundly." Then she asked: "How is my little child?" he replied: "It sleeps finely in the cradle." As they went into the queen shape up, gave him a drink, he shook his crib, covered it and swam back down the gutter of a duck. So she came two nights, in the third she said to the kitchen boy, "Go and tell the king that he takes his sword and on the threshold three times over me." Since the kitchen boy ran and told the king, who came with his sword and swung it thrice over the spirit; and the third time his wife stood before him, fresh, alive and healthy as they had been before. Then the King was in great joy, but he kept the queen hidden in a chamber until the Sunday, when the baby was to be baptized. And was baptized, he said: "What does a person deserve who drags another out of bed and thrown into the water?" "Nothing," replied the old woman, "than that you put better the villain in a barrel and the mountain rolls down into the water. " Then the king said: "You have spoken your judgment," sent for a barrel and insert the old woman and her daughter, then was hammered and rolled down hill the barrel until it rolled into the river.
The three princesses from Witenland	4025	400	German	There was once a fisherman who lived not far from the palace and fished for the king's table. One day when he had gone back to the catcher, he could not get a fish; he liked it start as he wanted, and so much fish and fishing, so never go but a bone on the hook. But when it was already late in the day, dipped a head out of the water and said, "Will you give me the what your woman wearing under your belt, so you should have enough fish" The man immediately said yes;. because he did not know that his wife was pregnant. but after that he got the day and fish, just as much as he wanted. When he came home at night told how he get all the fish caught the woman to wail and cry, and said that God would forgive her because of the promise that had done the man, because she was carrying a child under your belt. soon there was talk in the castle from the fact that the fisherman's wife would still grieved so; and when the king heard and learned the cause, he promised the fishermen that he would take the child to him and try to save it. Time passed, and should be delivered as the woman who brought them to a boy, whom the king took with him and raised him as his own son. When the boy now grown, he asked to be allowed to accompany his father on fishing the king one day, he would have such a great desire to fish, he said. The king wanted not at first, but as the boy begged so persistently that he allowed him finally. The son is now accompanied his father on fishing, and everything went the day well until the evening as they returned to land. Since the boy was aware that he had forgotten his handkerchief in the boat, and he wanted to go and fetch it. But no sooner had he got into the boat, so this darted away with him that only the water seethed like that, and how much the boy to row and work liked, yet all did not help him; the boat sped on until it drove away on a white sand shore. As the boy went to the land, and how he had gone some distance, he met an old man with a white beard; the asked the boy: "What is this country" - "Witenland," said the man;? after, he asked the boy where he was from and where he was going. When he had told him, the man said: "If you go this beach along, so you come to three Princesses, which are lowered into the ground so that only the head protruding. Once they see you, the first, which is the oldest, probably call and ask you to come to her aid, and just as it will happen with the second; but neither of these two Thou shalt go; make haste only them over come, and am doing as if you they do not bemerktest, but to the third Thou shalt go and do to them what you ask; . Because it will be your happiness "When the boy now came from the princess to the first, called them and asked him pleadingly, but he wants to come to her; but he went past her, as if he did not at all noticed, just as well as the second, but the third went. "Do you want to do, what I say to you, so you shall have Which three of us you want," said the princess. Yes, the boy wanted to, and now she told him that she would be here three trolls been sunk; earlier but they had lived in the castle, which he could see the forest over there. "Well, you must," she said, "go into the lock and let whip a night for each of us like the trolls; . You can stand it, so you may save us, "- Yes, the lad replied, he would carry it a try. - "If you go to the castle," the princess continued, "so there are two lions in the gate, but just go in the middle between them, so they do you nothing. Then go from grade to a small room, and there lie down low. Then the troll comes and beats you; but if he hit you enough to wash yourself with the water from the bottle that hangs on the wall there, then you will once again healthy, and after that take the sword that hangs next to the bottle, and slay the trolls . "Yes, the boy did as the princess had told him, he went in the midst of the lions through it, as if he did not pay attention, then walked out just in the small chamber, and as he lay down. The first night was a troll with three heads and three rods and whipped the boys pitifully; but this kept everything from quiet until the troll was finished; because the boy took the bottle and washed his wounds, then grabbed the sword and the haute trolls head off. When he arrived the next morning to the princesses, they were to the waist above the earth. The second night we went equally; But the troll, who was coming, had six heads and six rods and whipped him far worse than the previous. But when the boy came to the princess in the morning, they were only up in the shin in the ground. On the third night a Troll came who had nine heads and nine rods and beat and whipped the boys until this last fell down unconscious. Since it took the troll and threw him against the wall, but on that occasion was the bottle down, spraying the guy over and over so that it instantly became healthy again. He now not lazy, the sword and cut off so took the trolls head off; and when he came out in the morning to the princesses, they were with the whole body above the Earth. Now he married the youngest of them and was then king, and lived happily with her a long Zeit.Da he was once so great desire to go back home and visit his parents. but liked the Queen, his wife, not at all; but as he now definitely wanted to get away and had she said to him: "One need you to promise me, however, that you namely merely the wish to do, what asks your father you, but not to what your mother like asking" That, and he promised her as well. That she gave him a ring, which had the property that he who wore it on her finger, two wishes could do. He now wanted back home, and when the parents saw him they could not all be surprised about how handsome and magnificent he aussah.Als he few days had been at home, wanted his mother, he should go to the castle and the King show what had become a man of him. But the father said, "No, he is not; for then we can no longer have the joy to see him with us, "But it did not help. the mother asked and tortured him until he finally went. So when he came to the castle's, he was far handsome of clothes and all, than another king; that was this now not quite, so he said, "Yes, but now you shall see my wife; .! I do not think yours is as beautiful as my "-" God existed, she was standing here, so you should see it, "said the young king, and immediately she stood; but she was very distressed and said, "Why did not you listen to me and hear only that which your father you said? Now I must away again, and you have nothing to be desired. "Then she bound him a ring in your hair, what her name was, and wished again Hause.Da was the young king very sad, thinking of nothing other than how he should come to his wife only again. "I must see if I can not find somewhere where Witenland is" thought he, and went on his way. When he had gone to an end, he met one who was master of all animals in the forest, and they came to him, if only he blew his horn; the asked the king to Witenland. "I do not know where it is," said the man, "but I want to ask my animals" Then he breathed on him, and asked whether not one of them knew where Witenland would be;. but that did Keiner.Da the man gave him a pair of snowshoes. "If you're wearing the" he said, "You come to my brother, who lives about a hundred miles from here; the Lord of all the birds in the air, you can ask the. If you are but arrived there, the shoes return only, so that the tip applies to here, then they go away by itself home. "When it was the king now arrived on the spot, he returned the snowshoes how Lord of the animals had told him, and then they went away by itself after Hause.Er now asked for Witenland again, and the man blew all the birds him, and asked her if not one of them knew where Witenland would. No, it did again None. was long after the other birds also an old eagle, ten years was long in a foreign country before, but it did not know. "Well," said the man, "then I want you to borrow a pair of snowshoes; if you're wearing the, you come to my brother, who lives hundreds of miles from here; he is the master of all the fish in the sea, you must to ask; forget but not to reverse the shoes again when you arrived there. "The king thanked the man and put on the shoes. When he had come to Him, the Lord was upon all the fishes in the sea, he returned the shoes to get back what they, just as the countries to back home gingen.Der King then asked again Witenland. Then the man blew brought all the fish; but they knew no one know. Finally came an old, old pike; the man had a lot of trouble herbeizublasen him, and when he asked him about Witenland said the pike, "Yes, I am well known; because I'm there for ten years been cooking. Tomorrow shall I go; . Because the Queen, who has lost her husband, makes tomorrow Wedding "-" If this is so, then I will give you a good advice, "the man said," Out here on an alder bog stand three brothers who as even one hundred years standing and gebalgt a hat, a coat and a pair of boots. If one has the three things, he can make himself invisible and make a wish as far away as he wants. You can say, you wanted to rehearse the things and after talking the judgment between them. "The king thanked the man and did as he was told. "What are you standing here and constantly jostling you," he said when he came to the three brothers: "let me rehearse things, then I want the sentence to talk between you," Yes, they would like to.. When he had got the hat, the coat and boots, he said: "If we meet again the next time you shall the judgment he go," and he wished continues. As he drove through the air, he met with the north wind. "Where are you going?" The North Wind asked. "After Witenland," said the king and told him what had happened to him. "Yes, well you drive a little faster than I," said the North Wind; "I have now in every corner and blow and blow. but if you come on the spot, so you put down only on the stairs near the door; then I will come breezed when I wanted to blow round the whole palace. Then, when the prince is to have your wife come out and want to see what there is, so it just sat by the collar and throw him out; then I will soon watch as I continued creating him, "Yes, the king did as the north wind had told him. He stood on the stairway, and breezed as the north wind and gebraust came and did a handle to the palace roof, so that it shook and cracked, the prince went out and wanted to see what it was. But at the same moment the king grabbed him by the collar and threw him out. Since it took the north wind and drove off with him. When the king so with the last race the prince had become quits, he went into the castle. Initially, the Queen did not recognize him because he had become so pale and thin through the long walking and his violent grief. but when he showed her the ring, she was heartily delighted, and now only the right wedding was celebrated with great jubilation.
The Three Snake Leaves	156	612	German	There was once a poor man who could no longer feed his only son. Then said the son, "Dear father, things go so badly with us that I am a burden, I would rather go away and see how I can earn my bread. ' Since he was the father his blessing and took with great sadness leave of him. At that time, the king led a mighty empire war, the youth took service with him and went to war with. And when he came before the enemy, was a battle, and it was great danger and rained bullets that fell down his comrades from all sides. And also remained the leader, the other wanted to flee, but the youth stepped out, said to them courage and shouted 'we do not want our country can perish.' As the others followed him, and he pressed on and conquered the enemy. The king, when he heard that he had only to thank him victory, raised him above all the others, gave him great treasures, and made him the first in his Reich.Der king had a daughter who was very beautiful, but she was also very strange. She had made a vow not to take to the Lord and husband, did not promise when she died first, to let the buried alive with her. 'Does he love me from the heart,' she said, 'why him then use will life?' However, they would do the same, and if he died first, would go up with him into the grave. This strange oath had deterred all the suitors so far, but the youth was captured by her beauty that he cared for nothing but her father stopped them. 'Do you know well, "said the king,' what you have to promise? ' 'I have to go with her to the grave,' he replied, 'if I outlive her, but my love is so great that I do not mind the danger.' Then the king consented, and the wedding was celebrated with great splendor gefeiert.Nun they lived for a while happy and contented with each other because it happened that the young queen in a serious illness fell, and no doctor could help her. And when she lying there dead, as the young king what he had obliged to promise, and was horrified to lie down alive in the grave, but there was no way out: the king had occupied all the gates with guards, and it has not been possible to avoid his fate. When the day came where the body was buried in the royal vault in which he was brought down with, and then locked the gate and verschlossen.Neben the coffin stood a table were four candles, four loaves of bread and four bottles of wine. Once this stock came to an end, he had to languish. Now he was sitting there full of pain and sorrow, ass every day only a little piece of bread, drank only a sip of wine, and nevertheless saw death was approaching. Whilst he thus gazed before him, he saw from the corner of the vault creep out a snake approached the corpse. And because he thought it came to gnaw at it, he drew his sword and said, "as long as I live, you shall not touch her, 'and cut it into three pieces. After a little while crawling a second line from the corner out, but when she saw lying dead and dismembered the other, they went back, came back and had three green leaves in the mouth. Then it took the three pieces of the snake, put it like they belonged together, and on each wound one of the leaves. Immediately the severed parts joined together, the snake moved, and became alive again, and both hastened away together. The leaves remained lying on the ground, and the unfortunate who all had viewed with, it came into the mind if not the wondrous power of the leaves which had brought the snake back to life, could also help a human. So he picked up the leaves and laid one of them on the mouth of the dead, the other two on her eyes. And no sooner had happened, the blood was moving in the veins, rose into her pale face, and colored it again. Then she drew breath, opened her eyes and said, "Ah, God, where am I? ' 'You are with me, dear wife, "he replied, and told her how it had happened and how he had brought to life. Then he gave her some wine and bread, and had come when she regain her strength, she rose, and they went to the door and knocked, and called so loudly that it reported the sentries heard it, and the king. The King came down himself and opened the door, and he found both strong and well, and rejoiced with them that now all sorrow was over. but the three snake-leaves took the young king, gave them to a servant and said, "Keep them for me carefully, and carry it with you at all times, who knows in what trouble they still help us können.'Es but was in women after the life she had been awakened again, proceed a change: it was as if all love for her husband had made her heart. When he wanted to make a trip to his old father over the sea after some time, and they had gone on a ship, she forgot the great love and loyalty that he showed her and which he had saved from death, and took a wicked inclination for the skipper. And when the young King lay there asleep, she called in the skipper and took the sleeper by the head, and the skipper had him put on the feet, so they threw him down into the sea. When the shameful deed was done, she said to him, 'Now let us return home and say he died on the way. I want to emphasize you before my father so and boast that he will marry me to thee, and make thee the heir to his crown. ' But the faithful servant who all had viewed with made unnoticed a small boat from the ship big going on, got into it, sailed after his master, and let go the traitors. He fished the dead, and with the help of the three snake-leaves which he carried with him and put on the eyes and the mouth, he brought him happy again rowed into Leben.Sie both with all their strength day and night, and their little boat so flew fast that they arrived earlier than the other with the old king. He was astonished when he saw them come alone, and asked what had happened to them. When he learned the wickedness of his daughter, he said, "I can not believe that she has behaved so ill, but the truth will soon come to light, 'and told both go into a secret chamber and keep themselves hidden from everyone. Soon afterwards the great ship came by, and the godless woman appeared before her father with a troubled expression. He said, "Why do you come back alone? where is your man?' 'Oh, Father,' she replied, 'I'll be back home in great sadness, my husband became suddenly ill during the trip and died, and if the good skipper had not given me his help, it would have gone ill with me; He was present at his death, and can tell you everything. ' The king said, "I will make the dead alive again," and opened the chamber, and told the two come out. The woman, when she saw her husband was stunned, dropped to his knees and begged for mercy. The King said, "There is no mercy, he was ready to die with you, and gave you given your life, but you killed him in his sleep, and shall love your earned wages received. ' Then she was placed with her accomplice in a perforated ship set and sent out to sea, where they sank into the waves soon.
The three spinners	136	501	German	It was a girl lazy and would not spin, and her mother say what she wanted, she could not make it. At last the mother came over once anger and impatience that she beat her, which the girl began to cry loudly. Well just the Queen drove by, and when she heard the crying, she let stop, entered the house and asked the mother why she was beating her daughter that one out on the street heard the screams. Then the woman was ashamed to reveal the laziness of her daughter and said, "I can not distract from the spiders, she always wants and spin forever, and I am poor and can not procure the flax." The queen replied. "I hear nothing more than spin and I am never happier than when the wheels purr Give me your daughter to the castle, I have flax enough as it is to spin as much as she wants." The mother's it like to heartily satisfied, and the Queen took the girl mit.Als they had come to the castle, they led it up to three rooms which were from bottom to top with the finest flax. "Now spin me this flax," she said, "and when you bring it done, you shall have my eldest son for a husband, you are equally poor, so be careful I did not care, your unverdrossner Fleiss is dowry enough." The girl was secretly terrified, for she could not have spun the flax, and 'bout three hundred years old and became'd sat there from morning to evening every day. When she was alone, she began to cry and sat as three days without lifting a hand. On the third day the Queen came, and looked as if that nothing had been spun, they marveled, but the girl excused herself by saying that before great sadness to remove him from his mother's house had not been able to begin. The Queen let himself fallen, but said on leaving: ". Tomorrow you need me to start working" When the girl was alone again, did not know more at advise and help and in her distress went to the window. Then she saw three women coming from, it was the first broad flat foot, the second had such a large lower lip that it hung down over her chin, and the third had a broad thumb. Who remained outside the window, looked up, and asked the girl what was wrong. It accused them his distress because they offered her their help and said, "Do you want to invite us to the wedding upon us not be ashamed and called us your bases, also set at your table, we will spin up the flax for you, and the in a short time. "" With all my heart, "she replied," only comes in and catch the work at once. "it let in the three strange women, and made in the first chamber a gap where they sat down and her spiders anhuben. One drew the thread and trod the wheel, the other moistened the thread, the third twisted it, and hit his fingers on the table, and as often as she struck, a skein of thread fell to the ground, and that was spun in the finest manner. Before the queen she hid the three spinners and showed her, she often came, the amount of the spun yarn that these could not praise her end. was empty when the first chamber, we went to the second, and finally to the third, and was soon cleared up. Then the three women took leave and said to the girl: ". Do not forget what you promised us, it will be your happiness" When the girl the queen the empty rooms, and the big pile yarn showed she straightened the wedding, and the groom was pleased that he have such a clever and industrious wife, and praised her mightily. "I have three bases," said the girl, "and as they have done me much good, so I did not want it like in my happiness forgotten. Allows yet that I invite them to the wedding and that they sit at the table. " The Queen and the bridegroom said, "Why should we not allow that?" And when when the feast began, the three Virgin appeared in whimsical costume in, and the bride said. "Welcome, dear aunts" "Oh," said the groom, "how to get to the nasty friendship?" Then he went to the one with the broad flat foot, and asked, "how do you come such a broad foot" "From Kicking," she replied, "from stepping". Then the bridegroom went to the second and said: "What you have just the falling lip" "From licking," she answered, "from licking" He asked the third. "What you have broad thumb" "From twisting the thread? , "she answered," by twisting the thread. " Because of fear, said the prince, "So I will now and never my beautiful bride touch a spinning wheel." So she was going on the evil flat spiders.
The three languages	317	671	German	In Switzerland, there lived an old count, who had an only son, but he was stupid, and could learn nothing. The father then said: "Listen, my son, I can get nothing into your head, I like it to start as I want You have to leave here, I will deliver thee to a celebrated master is to try it with you..." The boy was in a strange city sent, and stayed with the master a whole year. After this time, he returned to his house, and the father asked, "Now, my son, what have you learned" - "Father, I have learned what the dogs bark," he replied. "The fact that God have mercy!" the father exclaimed, "that's all what you have learned? I will send thee into another town, to another master." The youth was taken thither, and stayed with this masterpiece a year. When he came back the father again asked, "My son, what have you learned?" He replied, "Father, I have learned what the birds say." Then the father became angry and said, "Oh, you lost man, have spent the precious time and learned nothing, and ashamed not want you to appear before my eyes I want to send you to a third master, but you will also learn? nothing this time, I will no longer be your father. " The son remained with the third master also a whole year, and when he came back home and the father asked, "My son, what have you learned" he replied, "Dear father, I have this year learned what the frogs croak." Then the father fell into the most furious anger, sprang up, called his people thither, and said: "This man is my son no more, I run it and command you, that you take him out into the forest and take the life of him. " They led him out but they should when they kill him, they could not before compassion and let him go. They cut a deer eyes and tongue, so that they bring the old landmarks konnten.Der youth wandered on, and after some time came to a castle, where he asked for a night's lodging. "Yes," said the lord, "if you want to stay in the old tower down there, go, but I warn you, it is dangerous, because it is full of wild dogs that bark and howl without stopping, and they must have a man has certain hours, they at once devour. " The whole district was in sorrow and suffering, and yet no one could help. The youth, however, was without fear, saying, "Let me go down to the barking dogs, and give something that I can throw them me; I have done them anything." As he himself would have it so they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the tower. When he went inside, he did not bark at the dogs wagged their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and curled him no hairs. The next morning he came to the astonishment of everyone safe and unharmed reappeared and said to the lord of the castle. "The dogs I have revealed in their language, why there live and bring the country harm They are bewitched, and must avoid a big treasure, which is below in the tower, and they can have no peace, as is raised until it, and must like this happen, I have likewise learned, from their speeches. " Then all who heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him as a son if he accomplished it successfully. He went down again, and because he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought up a chest full of gold. The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth heard no more, they were gone, and the country was from the plague befreit.Über a time it came to his mind, he wanted to go to Rome. On the way he came to a marsh, in which frogs were sitting croaking. He listened, and heard when he what they were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad. At last he arrived in Rome, where the Pope had just died, and among the cardinals great doubt whom to appoint as his successor. They agreed last, the one who should be elected Pope, at which a divine miracles would reveal. And was decided on as the, at that moment, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly flew two snow-white doves on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The clergy recognized it as the sign of God and asked him on the spot if he would be pope. He hesitated and did not know if he were worthy, but the doves counseled him that he wants to do it, and finally he said, "Yes." When it was anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled what he, that he should be the holy Pope heard from the frogs on and what had made him so upset. Then he had a fair singing and knew a word of it, but the two doves always sat on his shoulders and said it all in his ear.
The three animal brothers	3400	552	German	Quite a few of the audience were deeply moved by the by Marcuccio his brother demonstrated compassion, and all were in agreement that virtue gives a secure wealth that neither the world increased nor a storm continues, eat even the moths, as on the contrary the other goods of human life come and go and the wrong material is acquired never enjoyed by children's children. Finally Meneca but continued as an accompaniment to the newly interrogated event following story on the board of fairy tales dishes. There was once a king of green hills, the three daughters, three true gems possessed. For this, it is true, the three sons of the king of Schonau had taken a violent love; However, since they were bewitched by a fairy and turned into animals, the king would not give to women by green hills them his daughters; therefore the oldest, had the shape of a beautiful hawks, called together all the birds to a meeting and the finches, wrens, capercaillie, Tree hackers, flycatchers, jays, woodpeckers, bullfinches, cuckoos, blackbirds and all other spring animals, all of which appeared on his reputation , gave the order to destroy all the blossoms of trees in green hills, without exception, so that neither flowers nor leaves remained. The second, which was a deer, called all the goats, rabbits, hares, porcupines and other animals of the country, leaving all the sown fields such ravage that not even a blade of grass was left. But the third, a dolphin, conspired with countless sea monsters and caught on the coast such a powerful storm that even a boat escaped destruction. When the king saw that it was getting worse and he could not fight off the damage that these three impetuous lover inflicted him, so he decided to break free from these troubles, and it was pleased to give them his daughters to women what they are, without requiring parties nor music, led their wives from the country. At parting but the Queen Grazolla gave each of the three daughters of a ring that wanted the other two on the most accurate possible, saying to them that if they had to once separate and recover after some time, or any other of their relatives see so they would recognize themselves in these rings. After they had taken leave and go on the road, the falcon brought the oldest of the sisters, Fabiella, at a tremendously high mountain that went up above the clouds and passed with the dry summit to where it never rains, let them Set in a beautiful palace and held her like a queen. The deer led the second sister, named Vasta, in a forest so dense that the darkness when she was summoned by the night, not knowing how they should come to their reputation to be followed, and lived there they as their rank deserved, in a magnificent palace, in which an equally beautiful garden was located. But the dolphin swam with Rita, the third sister, on the shoulders midst of the sea, where they encountered on a rock so magnificent building that even a crowned head could it can take up residence. Soon after the departure of her daughters gave birth Grazolla a nice boy, who was named Tittone. But when he was sixteen years old, and kept hearing moaning mother the fact that she had never heard anything about his married three animals sisters, he put it into his head so long to roam the world until some of them was hearing. Having therefore parents had tormented long, they allowed him to move out and gave him all travel gear and accompanied with that as it was necessary for a prince and became him, his mother and especially a ring, which quite similar, they gave the daughters would have. Tittone now left no corner of Italy, no corner of France, no part of Spain unexamined, and after he traversed England, Slavonia roams, ransacked Poland, in a word, walked through the east and west, and his ministers had partly, partly left in the inns in the hospitals and had remained without a hat in his pocket, he arrived on the inhabited by the hawks and Fabiella mountains. While he beside himself stood in amazement and the splendor of the palace, the cornerstones of porphyry, the walls of alabaster, the golden windows and silver bricks admired, he was seen by his sister, who did call him in at once and asked who he would be where he came from and what reason led him to that country. Hardly Tittone had therefore announced her his home, his parents and his name, so Fabiella recognized him as her brother and all the more so when they the ring he wore on his finger with which they receive from the mother, compared, and after she embraced him with great joy, she hid him for fear that her husband would be angry with his arrival. As soon as the hawk had returned home, Fabiella began to talk of what would have a great desire for their own people they seized, but what the hawk replied: "Take your this wish only pass away, dear wife; for it is in vain unless I would like to meet him. "-" At least, "said Fabiella," let me one of my relatives get that some time can stay with me. "-" And who, "said the Falcon, "will make such a long way to see you?" -? "And if someone now come," said Fabiella, "you would also annoyed to be" - "Why should I also be angry," said the hawk, . "it would be enough that it would be a relative of yours, so I wore it on his hands" When Fabiella hearing this, they took heart, let her brother come forth and set him the falcon before, exclaiming what so soon, "blood relatives is faithful and good, the water passes through the boot and friendship through the glove; had me a thousand times welcome, consider yourself Lord of this House, command what you want, and unlock as seems good to you. "And at the same time he commanded his servants, Tittone how to respect himself and to use. After a two-week stay with his sister but thought Tittone them to visit his other two sisters, and therefore adopted by Fabiella and her husband, the latter gave him one of his feathers while saying, "Take this spring, dear Tittone, and eighth worth it, because if you should find yourself once in great need, you will consider it a great treasure; keep them so carefully, and if you needest help, saying:. 'Come here, come here' And you'll be happy with me, "Tittone grabbed the pen in a piece of paper, which he then put into a bag and said goodbye thereto as a thousand mutual assurances of love and friendship. Having now come a terribly long way, he reached into the forest to where the deer with Vasta lived, and when he stood almost dead from hunger in the garden, pluck a few fruits, he was seen by his sister and as well as from Fabiella recognized by her, which she introduced him to her husband, who treated him in the most friendly received and how a prince. But also traveled here Tittone fortnight again to the third sister to visit, and received from the deer one of his hair with the same words as they spoke the hawk at presentation of the spring. Upon this Tittone went with a bag of money to him and others of the hawk, with one, had given him the deer, back on the road and pulled on and on, until finally he reached the end of the earth, and now that he no longer could get stuck foot, he rented a boat with the intention to search all islands and so maybe heard something from his sister. So he set sail, and drove as long around on the lake until he reached the island on which the Dolphin with Rita lived, and barely come to land, it was from this well recognized as before from the other two sisters and the brother with all imaginable kindness received. but once Tittone wanted to leave from there to finally see his parents after all this time, the dolphin gave him one of his scales in the same terms as the other two in-laws; what Tittone sat down to horse and went on his way. He was hardly half a mile away from the shore, when he came into a forest, where the fear and the night resident had and a stable market of horror and darkness was held. In this Waide now Tittone saw in the midst of a lake that kissed the feet of the trees so that they would not see the sun be greuliches waters, a high tower, and at one of its windows a very beautiful maiden at the feet of a sleeping dragon. When she saw Tittone she called to him in a low voice: "Beautiful youth, perhaps sent here to me the sky as a savior out of my misery, which can never be a Christian soul see me deliver but from the power of this serpent that me my father has and locked the king of Helltal snatched in these terrible tower, where I meet go with grief and sorrow my death. "-" Beautiful maiden, "said Tittone," how shall I begin to want to drive to your wish? Who could put on this lake? Who climb the tower? Anyone near this terrible dragon, is the sight of terrified, sow horror and aroused horror? However, only have patience and wait a little bit, maybe I manage to chase that snake through the help of others; but only gently and slowly; because haste slowly; We will soon see what's behind it, "and as he spoke, he threw the pen, the hair and dandruff, which he received from his in-laws, at a time to the ground, where he exclaimed." Come here, come here " and no sooner had they touched the earth when they brought also brought like a summer rain, which elicits the frogs suddenly the falcon, the deer and the dolphin who proclaimed at the same time: "here we are! What do you want "When Tittone saw them he said with joy:" I want nothing more to snatch as this poor maiden the clutches of that dragon, they continue from the tower to smash everything and the beautiful maiden herself as a woman with me . to lead home "-" Just left, "said the Falcon," because before you know of that will happen what you want; It will not be long before the monster to cross crawl and will dance the way you whistling. "-" Let us not lose time, "began the deer," for what you want to do, do quickly "And after that. speaking, the hawk was at hand: a flock of griffins, who flew to the window of the tower, continued the Virgin and carried across the lake to the place where Tittone there was with the in-laws, and if they had resembled in the distance to the moon, so she seemed near a sun, so brilliant was her beauty. While it but Tittone just been hugged and embraced, awoke the dragon and came, rushing out of the window, brought swam to devour Tittone when the deer suddenly a crowd had lions appear tigers, panthers, bears and monkeys, the once over fell upon the dragon and tearing him apart with their claws into small pieces. By now Tittone wanted to travel to, the dolphin began. "I also want to do something to get me to prove you service willingly" With that not even the slightest trace would be left of such a cursed unfortunate places, he made that the lake terribly swelled, transgressed its shores and losstürzte with such fury on the tower that he destroyed it from the ground up. Tittone now thanked his in-laws with all my heart and asked the Princess to do the same as they had been freed by the help of those of such great distress. "On the contrary," said the three animal brothers, "we must thank this beautiful virgin, because it is the cause that we regain our natural shape. When we were born we were namely because of an annoyance that our mother caused a fairy bewitched by this, that we should be transformed into animals until we had a king's daughter freed from great distress. These of us so awaited time has finally been published and the magic released; already we feel a new spirit in our hearts and new blood in our veins. "And while they spoke so they turned into three fine young men, of whom one after another embraced the brother and his bride warmly shook hands, which now had fallen beside himself with joy. As Tittone this all saw, he let out a deep sigh, as if it had been his last, and said, "My God, why my father and my mother did not also participate in this great joy? Because they would get out at the sight of so beautiful, amiable sons delight "-" It is still not over till the evening, "staggered the three brothers. "For the shame of having to appear in animal form, forced us to flee the eyes of men. Since we are but now, thank God, can be seen in front of people, so we want to live together with our wives from now on all under one roof and bring our lives in joy and happiness. Therefore done briskly on the way; because before the sun its rays bales unpacks tomorrow morning at customs house of the East, we have to be all of our women. "This means they now but would have no need to go on foot, since otherwise there was when the emaciated nag that Tittone had worn , the brothers were one of six lion-drawn, very beautiful car body appear that all five boarded and where they arrived after continuous driving of the night at an inn, they woselbst during preparation of the supper the time sold it, all the evidence of human read stupidity that were smeared on the walls. After they had but duly swallowed and put to bed, the three brothers stole secretly continued and related the night such that when the star, bashfully as the Virgin, in the morning, hidden from view of the sun, they are all with their women in the same inn homed took place followed by a general embrace and all were filled with joy and singing. Then all sat eight back into the same car and arrived after a long journey in green hills, where they were received by the King and Queen with inexpressible jubilation, as they not only regained long-lost capital of four children, but also three sons and a daughter-in which one of the four pillars could call the temple of beauty, had to get as interest. The kings of Schonau and Helltal were notified immediately of the happy accident and at all appeared both in the then organized festivals by added also did their share of the lard of joy to the stew of general rejoicing, so that all the former troubles rich replacement felt; because: By a einz'gen hour joys you forget millennial suffering.
The three little birds	917	707	German	It is probably a thousand or more years ago, there were in this country nothing but small kings; as well as a lived on the Keuterberg, who was very fond of hunting. As he pulled out again with his hunters out of the castle, were watching the mountain three girls their cows, and how they saw the king with the many people, the oldest of the other two girls shouted, while pointing to the king: "Helo ! Helo! If I do not get him, I will not. " Since the second answer on the other side of the mountain, pointed to the one who went to the king at the right hand "! Helo Helo If I do not get, I will not!" As the youngest cried, pointing to the one who left hand went "! Helo Helo If I do not get him, I will not!" but those were the two ministers. The king had heard everything, and had come home when he spoke of the chase, he caused the three girls to come up and asked them what they had said yesterday on the mountain. She would not tell him, and the King asked the eldest if she wanted to be a man it well? And she said yes, and her two sisters asked the two ministers, for they were all three fair of face, especially the Queen, who had hair like Flachs.Die two sisters but had no children, and had to travel even as the king, let he come to the Queen to cheer her, for she was just hopeful. She had a little boy who brought a red star with the world. As the two sisters said to each other that they would throw the beautiful boy into the water. As they had thrown him in (I believe it was into the Weser) a little bird flew into the air and sang, "Tom Daude ready to weiter'n BescheidTom lily bloom? Brave boy, is that you" When the people heard the two, they got scared and made to continue came. When the King came home, she told him that the Queen had given birth to a dog. Then the king said: "What God does, is well done." But a fisherman who dwelt on the water fished the little boy out again when he was still alive; and as his wife had no children, they reared him. After a year the king was away again, as the Queen had another boy who took the two false sisters well and threw into the water. As the little bird flew up into the air and sang, "Tom Daude ready to weiter'n BescheidTom lily bloom, Brave boy, is that you?" And the king returned, they told him that the Queen had to get a dog again, and he said again: "What God does, is well done." But the fishermen fished this one also out of the water and fed him auf.Da the King again journeyed forth, and the Queen had a little girl, which is also the false sisters threw into the water. As the little bird flew up into the air and sang, "Tom Daude ready to weiter'n BescheidTom lily bloom, Bonny girl, is that you?" And as the king came home, she told him that the Queen had been a cat. The king was angry and left his wife to prison throw, in which they sit for long years musste.Die children had meanwhile grown up as the eldest once went with other boys out to fish. Since he wanted to not change it and have said, "You boulder, you go your way!" Since he was very sorry, and asked the old fisherman if that was true? Who told him that he had once fished, and he had pulled him from the water. The boy said he wanted to continue looking and his father. The fisherman asked him, he would still remain, but he let himself did not hold until last the fisherman consented. As he went on his way and went on for several days in a row; he finally came to an almighty big water, stood an old woman fishing. "Good day, mother," said the boy. - "Great thanks." - "You have probably long fish before you catch a fish?" - "And you gotta look long before you find your father How wilt thou get over the water there.?" the woman said. "Yes, that may know God." As the old woman took him on his back and carried him through, and he was looking for a long time and could not find his father. And when was a year passed since moved the second and wanted to look for his brother. He came to the water, where it just happened to him as his brother. Now only was the daughter alone at home, and she cried so much for her brothers that last she also begged the fisherman to let them go, they would seek their brothers. Then she likewise came to the great water, and said to the old woman. "Good day, Mother" - "Great thanks." - "God help you with your fishing." When the old woman heard that, she became quite friendly, and carried her over the water and gave her a wand, and said, "Now just always go on this way again, my daughter, and when you come to a big black dog, so must you silently and boldly, and without laughing and without looking at him, pass by. Then you come to a large open lock. on the threshold of which you must drop the rod and straight out to go back through the lock on the other side. There is an old well, from an old tree has grown, whereon hangs a bird in a cage which must take down. Then even take a glass of water from the fountain, and with these two the same way back. from the threshold take the rod again, and then when you come around again at the dog, then he beat her face., but be sure that you hit him, and then just come to me back. " Since they found everything exactly as the women had said it, and on the way back because they found the two brothers who had sought each other over half the world. They went up to the black dog that struck the girl's face: he was a handsome prince who went with them to the river. There stood still the old woman was very happy that they were all there again, and carried them all over the water, and then they went away, for now she was freed. The others all went to the old fisherman, and were happy that they had found each other again; But the bird hung on the Wand.Der second son could not settle at home, and he took his bow and went hunting. When he was tired he took his flute and played a few notes. The king was also on the hunt, it stopped and went, and when he met the youth, he said, "Who gave you permission to hunt here?" - "Oh, no." - "Who do you belong?" - "I am the fisherman his son." - "But he has no children." - "If you will not believe it, come with me." So did the king and asked the fisherman who told him everything; and the little bird on the wall began to sing: "The mother sits alone There in the Kerkerlein.O king, royal blood, These are your children good.The false sisters both wrought the children woe, There in the waters deep Where the fishermen come. " Since they were all terrified, and the King took the bird, the fisherman and the three children to the castle, the prison let unlock and took his wife out again. But this had become quite ill and weak. There, you were the daughter of the water of the fountain to drink because she became strong and healthy. The two false sisters were burnt, and the daughter married the prince.
The three lemons	3415	408	German	One can not express in words how much the narrative Paola liked all listeners; but since now the turn of Ciommetella was, and you waved the prince, that is what they began: That wise man indeed was right, of the saying, "Do not say everything you know, and do not do everything you can. "will hear because both brings unknown risks and unexpected destruction, like her (it should be said with Vergunst the wife Princess) from a Moor slave, a poor maiden wanted to add all sorts of evil and so bad, it mattered that they which itself about their offense judgment spoke and himself awarded the deserved punishment. Once there was a king of Long Tower, who had a son whom he loved more than himself, which he topped all his hopes and he prefers today for as tomorrow a suitable wife would have liked to find in order to soon name a grandfather to listen. The prince, however, was getting married so hostile and so stubborn that when you spoke to him about women, he shook his head and one hundred miles wegwünschte far, which is why the poor father, as he perceived the inflexibility and obstinacy of his son and the extinction his tribe foresaw so morose and sad and so sorry, and was crushed like a whore who has lost their customers, like a merchant whose trade friend become bankrupt, and as a farmer, the donkey died; because touched the prince neither the tears of the father, nor the entreaties of his subjects softened him, nor the advice made him brave men changed their minds, the desire of him who begot him, asked him the need of the people and his own advantage in mind, and that he would be the last in the series of his royal predecessors and that he festgestemmt with the tenacity of a support alarm Zigen horse, with the stubbornness of an old mule and the callousness of a long-eared bat with his feet, his ears blocked and the heart that maybe could still be wounded, was armed with an impenetrable armor. Because now but often maintains in an hour more than a hundred years to happen and you can not say, "This is what I want to do and that can" so it happened one day that, while they were all at the table and the Prince wanted to cut a fresh cheese, but it paid attention to the conversation of his surroundings, he cut carelessly in the finger, so that fell two large drops of blood on the cheese and such a lovely, lovely color mix brought forth that the prince, whether, that the seismogram him Amor chastise him or that the sky would have mercy on the brave man, his father, said did not matter as much Kreuz as his crosshead of son, the Prince, I say, it sat in the head, to make women find themselves, which would be just as white and red as the dyed his blood cheese, and therefore said to his father: "If I do not get a woman of such appearance, father, it is mi t pass me by. Never has heated my blood woman, but now I want a woman who looks like my own blood. If you wish therefore that I may live, so you have to allow me to travel about the world and a beauty that exactly corresponds to this cheese seek, otherwise my resume is complete and I can lubricate my soles. "No sooner had the King heard that horrendous decision, he thought the roof would fall on his head. He changed color, the blood clotted in his veins, and when he finally regained consciousness and the language was powerful, he exclaimed: "My beloved son, my sweetheart, my life, prop my age, are you completely of your mind? Do not you have completely lost your mind? You want nothing or everything; because only you liked did not get married and give me a grandson, and now you've got a lust that I could also descend into the pit. Why do you want to wander in the wide world and your life spend so useless, your house, your oven, but leave your home? You do not know how many hardships and dangers exposes himself to the one who goes on a journey; therefore you beat these Grille from the head and let you guess; otherwise, if it be with my life past our house will collapse, and the whole economy is destroyed. "But these and many other words were the prince to one ear and out the other out and were all spoken in the wind, so that the poor king, who saw that he could sense his son not bend, finally gave him a big bag with money, with some servants and took leave of him, and it seemed to him, as he would the heart out of his body torn; then he entered, weeping bitterly, in a bay window and watched the prince so long with his eyes until he had lost sight of him. When he was but divorced from the heavily afflicted father, he began to ride through forests and fields, through canyons and plains, over mountains and valleys always darauflos to pervade many countries and deal with many people, but it also always keep my eyes open if he could find the object of his desires somewhere until he reached the end of four months in France at the seacoast, where he left behind all the servants because of their sore feet in a hospital, and herself embarked on board a Genoese vehicle and after strait of Gibraltar went. There he boarded a bigger ship and made his way to India by getting another one kingdom after, one province after another, one city after another, one street after another, a house next after an angle after others searched to see if he might be at that picture he carried in his heart, find the exact original. As long as he touched her legs and drove for so long around until he reached the witches island. When he had gone there at anchor and come to land, he found a very old, shriveled, ugly wife, he told the cause that brought him there. The old woman came in amazement beside herself when she heard the strange whimsical idea of ​​the prince and the hardships and dangers he endured to satisfy this chimera, and finally said to him: "Get yourself off from here, my son; because if my three daughters here you who are after nothing lecherous as for human flesh, so I do not give three for your life; half alive and half fried can you find in a belly your sarcophagus in a crucible and your grave. That's why tear it out as fast as you can; because not far from here you'll find what you seek. "As soon as the prince heard these words, he took quite frightened, bewildered, shocked, afraid his legs on his back and began anew to ride shanks's pony until he again came in another country, where he again encountered an old woman who much uglier looked like the first, which he also told them what he was doing, and also told him: "Express yourself briskly from here when you see the little witch , my daughters do not want to serve in a sandwich bread. but running always; for thou now coming soon to rest and will find what you seek. "As soon as it heard of the poor Prince, he began to scratch out as if he had spurs in the sides, and ran until he returns an old woman encountered who was sitting with a basket full patties and sweets on a wheel and a herd fed donkey with sweets then umherzuspringen on the banks of a river and some poor swans running around there, began handing out hoofbeats. Now that the Prince had reached the old woman and she had welcomed in a thousand ways, he told her the story of his journey, so that the old woman comforted him kindly, put before him a good breakfast that he licked his finger after that and he then three lemons, presented the seemed to be only fresh-picked, and a nice knife, which she said: "now you can easily return to Italy because your work is done and you now have what you are looking for. Therefore now go your way, and if you're not far from your home, cut at the first source that you encounter, one of those lemons right through; it will come out of it a fairy and say to you: 'Give me a drink,' but you should rapidly with the water at hand, otherwise it will disappear as quickly as mercury, if you are now but not too quick in the second and the Eye hast opened the third by way to submit quickly to drink them, they miss you, before you know which; in the other case, you will be in possession of a woman, like your heart it demands. "The Prince kissed then the old full of joy the rough hand that resembled the back of a porcupine, then said goodbye and left. Having arrived at the seashore, he embarked for the Columns of Hercules (Isthmus of Gibraltar) that came into the Mediterranean and landed at last after a thousand times storms and threats a day's journey from his home. When he had arrived in a graceful wood where the canopy shaded the meadow land, so that he would not be seen by the sun, he settled on a source that summoned with crystalline tongue passersby, to refresh himself on a magnificent carpet of lawn and flowers down, pulled the knife out of its sheath and cut the first lemon apart from the quick as a flash a beautiful virgin, white as milk and red as a strawberry, emerged, which soon said to the Prince: "Give me to drink. "Now he sat with his mouth open so surprised and puzzled as he handed her fast is not enough water and the Virgin just as quickly disappeared as they had appeared. Whether this is felt the prince as a blow to the stomach, which may answer who had his luck already in the hands and it has still lost. When he then cut the second lemon, it was just him; that was the second neck-catcher for the prince, who now turned his eyes into two sources and, let gush forth on stream at the, where he sat vied drop by drop, wave upon wave, current and you gave in anything where he began to wail and exclaimed: "What I'm a dolt, a simpleton! Twice I've let them escape than I would have their hands tied (hol 'me the devil!), And I'm sitting there, like cast from lead, while I would like a greyhound to be nimble. By my faith that was once made good! - But take heart, nor is there a third, and all good things are indeed three; this time denied me the knife the fairy, I never alive from here to stand '' So saying, he cut the third lemon, then came out of the third fairy who like the first two said to the Prince: "! Give me a drink! "he handed her fast water, and once he saw a maiden standing there, white and tender like a fresh cheese with red stripes that she looked like a Abruzzoschinken and a Collared pork from Nola, a miracle that you've never been in the world seen a beauty as unprecedented, a white woman without equal, may be greater, be thought of as one a grace; their hair had Zeus Gold rained down from them could Amor can make the arrows with which he pierced the heart; her cheeks had Cupid painted red, so that any innocent person on that gallows hang of desire would remain; in their eyes the sun had mounted two Feuerwerkslunten so in the breast of one who saw it, the scale would begin fire and drove up the fanatics and missiles of Sighs; her lips was Venus, when she had the menses, attracted and had their roses lent their color to make them wounded with their thorns the souls of a thousand lovers; on her breast milk Juno had pushed out her chest in order to satisfy the longing and desire of the people; In a word, it was so beautiful from head to foot, that you could think of nothing Holdseligeres, and the Prince, who did not know what was happening, beside himself this lovely birth from a lemon, this graceful lemon sections of a woman looked at, so that he said to himself: "are you asleep or are you awake Ciommetiello? Are charmed your eyes or are you blind? What a white creature is there from a yellow bowl, what a sweet dough, emerged what a beautiful butterfly from a doll from the acid of a lemon? "But when he last saw that he was not dreaming and that all reality is, he closed the fairy in his arms, kissed her a hundred and a but a hundred times, words that were equal to accompany a basic melody sugar sweet kisses on the most cordial, and after countless flattering words of love, they said to one another, he said to her: "I want you, my beloved bride, now without the pomp that befits your beauty, and bring without the entourage, which belongs to a queen in the palace of my father; it climb to this oak, where nature, as they know what we need, a hiding place in the form created a Kämmerchens, and await my return there; because I fly at top speed back to you, and before you know whose, I'll pick you up with such clothes and such wake down, as befits our range. "What are the words he to the corresponding manner adopted by her and she left. Meanwhile, a Moor slave was sent with a pitcher of that source is water, and when she saw by chance in the waves the mirror image of the fairy, so she thought that she herself would, therefore exclaimed in amazement: "What is it, poor Lucia? You go get his so beautiful, and water? This must not happen any longer! "So saying, she broke the jar and returned home. When the mistress asked her what she had done there, she replied: "If I were the source of its gone and pitcher shattered by a stone" The mistress took out the lie and gave her the next day a nice barrel that they at the same. should fill source with water; but when she went back and looked again abgespiegelt in the water that beauty, she spoke with a loud sigh: "I do not breitmäulige Mohrin be, I would not be Bratgans; ? I'm not beautiful and lovely, and carry 'a barrel to the well down, "So saying, she broke, bums, and the barrel into a thousand fragments, returned growling back home and said to her mistress," proceeded: Come donkey pushes me . ans barrel on the earth 'falls that breaks in two, passing the fun "When the poor woman heard this, snatched out of patience; therefore she took a broomstick and beat the slave so through that she felt it for a few days; later she gave her a tube and said, "Now run and break your neck, you rags Liese, you saber leg, you black crap Fink, run and not dawdle me and turn up not long back and forth, but bring me quickly this tube full of water again; if not, I zerdresche up in despair and cut yourself together higgledy-piggledy "The slave ran away as brewed since she had felt the flash and wanted and not wait for the thunder. but while they filled the bottle, she again saw the beautiful form in the water and said, am "I fool if I draw water; better to live on your own; the face is not used to beaten to death, and an evil mistress. "So saying, she took a large hairpin and began to pierce the tube so much that he eventually resembled a free garden space with ornamental water, where the water from a hundred small fountain gushes and the fairy at the sight into a loud laugh broke out. As this is now heard the slave and therefore looked up, she saw the hidden fairy and said to himself: "So you Ursach that I beaten? But just wait, "Then she said to that:" What do up there, beautiful girl "And the fairy who was the friendliness itself, were all award, she knew without omit even one tittle of all that is? happened between her and the prince. Then she added that she was expecting his arrival with dresses and wake every hour and moment to embark with him in his father's kingdom and to lead there with him a happy life. When the wicked slave heard this, she thought, she could Fairy abgewinnen this beautiful price, and therefore said to her: "You expect groom, let me come up, comb you hair and make you more beautiful" - "Very much, either. a thousand times welcome me, "replied the fairy and the slave handed her white hand, gripped by the black claws of the Ethiopian, looked like a crystal mirror in a frame of ebony. The slave climbed now on the tree, and by beginning to bring the hair fairy in order, she pricked her a big needle into the temple. But no sooner had they felt the sting, she exclaimed, "pigeon," and turned immediately into a dove, which she soared and flew away. The Ethiopian now retired from all over, wrapped the rags and tatters, she was wearing on the body, in a bundle together and threw it as far as she could, by themselves, but they themselves remained stark chops on the tree, so that they looked as a statue of agate in a housing of emerald. Meanwhile, the prince with a large retinue returned, and when he takes the bucket of milk, which he left behind a barrel of caviar vorfand he stopped petrified for a while; Finally, however, he exclaimed: "Who gave me this ink blot on the stationery on which I intended to write my happiest days? Anyone who has hung me frischgeweißte home with grief in which I supposed to live a happy life? Who can find me this touchstone where I left a silver mine that would make me rich and happy, "But when the crafty slave perceived the astonishment of the prince, she said to him:"? Marvel not, my lord, because I in . am charmed an Ethiopian and have a white face, a black ass "the poor prince, who saw that the thing was not to rectify, dropped his head and swallowed this bitter pill; then he was coming down the Ethiopian, clothed from head to foot in new clothes, and sad and sorrowful, dejected and dismayed, he joined her on the way back to the home where she by the King and Queen to them six miles were far come to meet, were received with that joy with which the Imprisoned receives the acquittal by namely perceived it, what a choice made her foolish son, who was so long and so far wandered in the world to a white dove to find, and now a black crow had brought home. However, since they could not change the thing, they ceded the crown to their children and put the golden tripod to that carbon face. While massive feasts and sumptuous banquets were arranged and the cooks goose plucking, slaughtered pigs, kids departed, basted roast, pots abschäumten, chopped meatballs, was interspersed capons and prepared thousands of other tasty morsels, came to the window of the kitchen a nice pigeon and said: "Oh, chef's kitchen, o favorite cook! How it's done to the king and the Ethiopian, I'm saying! "The cook stayed initially little attention, but since the dove a second and third time recurred and the same words repeated, he rushed into the dining room to this miracle, what inform the which probably realized who was the dove to grab them immediately to slaughter Mohrin and fry ordered. So the cook returned to the kitchen, and it actually managed to catch them; he did this, as he was commanded by the blacks, the dove brewed from, plucked her and poured the water and the springs of it from a gallery in a garden bed from which, after barely three days a beautiful lemon tree produces drive and up grew then rapidly. This is what happened now that the king, when he entered once happened to a window that looked out onto the garden, this tree, which he never saw, saw and called the chef to ask him when and by whom he had been planted. Whilst he learned from master chef spoon how the matter behaved, he began to get suspicious and ordered therefore on pain of death not to touch the tree, but to maintain it most carefully. After a few days now three very beautiful lemons, similar to those that had received from the old king showed; once they were grown, he plucked it off, locked himself in a room with a large bowl of water and began to cut with the same knife he still wore on the side of the lemon. While he was doing with the first and second fairy just as it was the first time fared; However, when he cut the third lemon and who had come out to drink their request pursuant given the fairy was the same Virgin in front of him, which he left on the tree, and he let all the shameful process of Mohrin announced. Who could well describe the smallest part of the delight felt by the king in this happy event, who described his singing and jumping, cheering and shouting? Because he was swimming in a sea of ​​joy, the sky hung full of violins, and the room was too small for him. He therefore expressed the fairy in his arms, she let the splendid dress and then took her by the hand into the great hall where the whole court and the chief men of the city were located to the wedding party to decorate by their presence. Of these, so the king asked each one and said, "Tell me what would be thought worthy of punishment, the inflicted harm this beautiful maiden" To which the first replied that he was a hänfenes collar, a second that he was a tomb? stones, a third, that it comprises a music with a mallet on the stomach, a fourth that it comprises a sip hemlock, a fifth that it that he this, and the other a millstone as breast-pin, and the one that he that would earn. When he finally summoned the black queen and addressed the same question to her, she replied. "He deserve to be burned and scatter ashes in the air" As soon as the King now heard this answer, he exclaimed: "You have yourself the knitting rotated dug your grave, honed the knife, mixed the poison, because no one has inflicted so much suffering as you vile beast. Do you know that this is the beautiful maiden that you went through drills at the hairpin? You know well that it is the beautiful dove that you have them slaughtered and fry in the pan? Now what purpose, Liese do you mean? Hey? Now you may say and do what you want, it does not help you; you you yourself have stirred the broth; tit for tat, who digs a pit shall fall into it. "So saying, he left the Ethiopian take immediately to put live on a big pile of wood, and after it was set on fire and burned to ashes, they sprinkled it from the pinnacle of the castle to the four winds, which in turn the saying was true: Those who have butter on their heads, do not go in the sun.
The owl	1668	1281	German	Were a few hundred years ago, when people still not nearly as crafty and cunning as they are now, has taken place in a small town a strange story. Of about a big of the owls that are Schuhu was called, come from the neighboring woods at night while in the barn of a citizen and dared, and when day broke, for fear of the other birds when they look can be , a terrible screaming collect, not back out from their hiding places. And when the servant morning came into the barn to fetch straw, he was startled at the sight of the owl, which sat there in a corner, so powerful that he ran away and his master announcing a monster as his life none would have seen, were sitting in the barn, his eyes turned around in my head and could swallow a unceremoniously. 'I've known you,' said the Lord, 'a blackbird in the field chasing, you have courage enough, but when you see are a dead chicken, you have to get only a stick before you get close to him. I have only myself once to see what kind of a monster, 'added the master, and went quite boldly to scrub in and looked around. But when he saw the strange grim creature with his own eyes, he was no less fear than the servant. With a few sentences he jumped out, ran to his neighbors and asked them imploringly to assist him against an unknown and dangerous animal; anyway the whole town could be in danger if it would break out of the barn, where there were sitting out. There was great hue and cry in all the streets: the citizens came with pikes, pitchforks, scythes and axes armed cause, as they wanted to take off against the enemy: at last the men appeared the council with the mayor at the top. When they had drawn up in the market, they marched to the barn, and surrounded it on all sides. Then came one of the beherztesten out and went in with precipitated Spiess, but came right out with a scream and deathly pale running out again, and could not utter a word. Two others ventured in, but they fared no better. Finally someone came forward, a big strong man who was famous for his military exploits, and said, "naked reputation you will the monster not drive, Ernst must here be used, but I see that you are all grown women, and not the wants to bite fox. ' He let himself get armor, sword and Spiess and equipped. All praised his courage, though many feared for his life. The two scouring gates were opened, and they saw the owl, which had, however, set in the middle of a large transom. He let a ladder brought, and when he raised it and was preparing to climb, so he called on all to him to keep male, and commended him to St. George, who had killed the dragon. When he was up soon, and the owl saw that he wanted to them, the people and was also bewildered by the crowd and the shouting and did not know to escape, she rolled her eyes, ruffled her feathers, flapped her wings, gnappte with the beak and her left schuhu, schuhu hear a hoarse voice. 'Shock to, shock to!' the crowd shouted out to the brave heroes. 'Who was standing where I stand,' he replied, 'that would not shock to call.' Although he continued to walk even one season later, but then he began to tremble, and half passed out on the Rückweg.Nun no one was left who dared to put himself in danger. 'The monster,' they said, 'has poisoned the strongest man who was to see us through his Gnappen and just breathing and mortally wounded, we are to others, our lives in the hill suggest?' They took counsel, what to do if the city should not perish. For a long time everything seemed in vain, until the mayor found a way out. 'My opinion is towards' he said,' that we, and all that darinliegt out of the common coffers this barn, corn, straw and hay to pay, the owner and indemnify him, but then the whole building and burn with it the terrible animal so no one will have to risk his life to it. This is no time to save, and stinginess would be ill applied. ' All agreed with him. Thus was the barn at four corners lit, and burned miserably to her the owl. Whosoever will not believe him go and inquire for himself.
The Lazy Spinner	1219	1405	German	In a village there lived a man and a woman, and the woman was so lazy that she would never work at anything; whatever gave her to spin the man that she did not get done, and what she spun, she did not wind, but let everything lie entangled in a heap. Now she scolded the man, she was vornen with her tongue, and said, "Well, how should I haspeln, since I have no reel, you go into the forest and get me one. ' 'If that is all,' said the man, 'I will go into the forest to fetch wood for reels.' Then the woman was afraid that if he had the wood that he turned it into a reel, and jabber them and then have to spin again. She changed her mind a bit because it was a good idea, and she ran secretly followed the man into the woods. As he had climbed into a tree to the wood and to cut, she crept including skin hinauf'wer reel wood into the bushes where he could not see her and called, who dies, who winds, shall verdirbt.'Der man listened, laid down his ax for a while and wondered what would have meant. 'Eh, what?' He said finally, "what can have been! it gave you sounded in the ears, you do not make unnecessary fear. ' So he grabbed the ax again and began to hew as skin came cries again herauf'wer down wood for reels shall die, And he who winds, the verdirbt.'Er stopped, and felt afraid and alarmed, and pondered the thing. but as for a while was over, he took heart again, and he reached for the third time for the ax and began to cut. But for the third time came cries and skin-to deli laut'wer wood for reels shall stirbt'wer winds, shall verdirbt.'Da ers had had enough, and all inclination had departed from him, he hastily that the tree came down and made his way home. The woman ran as fast as she could, on side roads so that they would rather go home. As he entered the room, she did innocent look as if nothing had happened, and said, "Well, you bring a good wood for reels? ' 'No,' he said, 'I see very well, it's not with the reels,' told her what had happened to him in the forest, and had them from now on so that in Ruhe.Bald afterwards began the man yet again, to to complain of the disorder in the house. "Wife," he said, "it is really a shame that the spun yarn should lie there all entangled. ' 'You know what,' she said, 'because we still come by any reel, so stand on the ground and I stand down, I will go up, throw you the all entangled, and you throw it down, so there still a line.' 'Yes, it is,' said the man. So they did that, and when it was done, he said, "The yarn is in skeins, now it must be boiled." The woman was terrified, she said, although 'Yes, we will tomorrow morning cook,' but thought to himself another trick. Early in the morning they got up, turned on the fire and put the kettle on, only instead of yarn, she put in a lump of tow, and let it cook all the time. Then she went to the man who was still in bed, and said to him, 'I have to even go out, stand up and look after the yarn which is in the boiler above the fire: but you do mussts beizeit, mind that, because where the rooster crows, and you do not sawest after, the yarn to tow. ' The man was to miss anything by the hand and wanted arose quickly, as fast as he could, and went into the kitchen. But when he reached the kettle and peeped, he saw horror, nothing but a lump of tow. As the poor man was very still, thought he had neglected and was to blame, saying no longer in the future of yarn and spinning. But you have to say it was an odious woman herself.
The five sons	3413	653	German	After the end of the story Antonella's the series of storytelling in Ciulla was, and after they get along set properly and had thrown a look in all directions, she began gracefully, as follows: Whoever sits behind the stove, remains a fool his whole life long ; those who do not travel read anything; who sees nothing, learn nothing. The many trips makes the wise; Practice creates masters; go out into the world, then you acquire wisdom and money, as I will show you by the evidence of the following narrative. There once was an honest man, named Pacione, the five so simple-minded sons had that they already were good for nothing in the world and the father, who could not feed longer, finally decided to create it at arm's length. Therefore, he said one day to them as follows: "My dear children, God knows that I love you and you regard as my own flesh and blood; but I am old and can only do some work, but you are young and eat too much, so that I can go through to help me no longer as before. Every man for himself and God for us all; why go in search of you, one Lord and learn; However, you realize that you are not hired you as a year longer because of course this time I expect you back with me, and that you must then something decent can. "When the sons of this decision could hear her father, she said goodbye to him, and with some rags in the bundle they hit every one a special way by everyone wanted to make his fortune in its own way. After the course of the year, all of appointment met as in her father back together, received them with great joy and since they tired from the trip and were exhausted, immediately ordered the table to which they sat down all. And while they were in the middle of the best food, they heard a bird singing so that the youngest got up from the five sons from the table and went out to listen. But when he returned, had already been cleared away, and Pacione said to his sons. "Well, children, tell me what you good and beautiful have learned your absence in time, and therefore gladdens the heart of your Father" Then began Luccio , who was the eldest, as follows: "I have studied the art of thieves and have the pattern of all the rogues, the model of all thieves, the doyen of all crooks, so that you do not even find one that with more skill to steal coats and wegzupraktizieren , amass laundering and carry away to facilitate pockets and cut to clean up shops and sweep out, pull out wallet and wegzustibitzen to empty boxes and understands sweep out than me, so that, wherever I go, I am doing wonders in the art of Mercury. "-" well done "said the father," you have learned a true changer art in order for the game of finger payment on the back, for turning Sch lüsseln, the turning of rowing and for the climbing of windows rises the executioner exchange. Woe is me poor, I would have rather taught you to rotate a spindle, then my head would not now fear turn, I see you have in mind in court with a hangdog cap of paper, or whatever you of with bare backs . thwart passed or if you entgehst the, will increase by a rope "So saying, Pacione turned to his second son, named Titillo, and said," and you, what did you learn "-" The shipbuilders art, "said? the son. - "That I leave me," fallen, replied the father, "because that is a noble craft and fed his man. And you, Renzone, what about you? "-" I can with the crossbow as good aim, "said the latter," that I make the white of the eye. "-" That's something, "said the father," . because you can go hunting and earn your bread, "he then turned to the fourth son, named Ghiacuccio, and asked him the same, to which he replied:" I know a herb with which you can make a dead man back to life can. "-" Well done, I must say, "Pacione cried," thus we can finally help us out even from our misery and be the people of greater benefit than Hippocrates "Most recently, he asked the youngest son, named Menecuccio what. he could, whereupon he replied: "I understand the language of birds" - "Not without reason, then," replied the father, "you stood on, while we sat at the table to listen to the chirping of that bird.. Since you're now so boast to understand what the birds say, tell me what you have heard from the one who was sitting on that tree. "-" He said, 'returned Menecuccio that "a wild man, the daughter of the King robbed of deep throat and she has brought upon a rock, so that one can do nothing out of it and that he the one who finds the princess and she again brings him will make of his son, therefore the father made known make. "- "If this is so, then we are made of people," Luccio exclaimed; "Because I trust myself to free the princess from the clutches of the wild man." - "If you're the getraust" Then said the father, "so do we go standing foot to the king, and if he gives us his word that he wants to keep his promise, we undertake, to bring back his daughter. "Since all assented to this opinion, Titillo soon made a beautiful ship, which they boarded all what they aufspannten the sails and drove to deep throat. Once there, they asked the king for an audience, and that they rose undertake to free the daughter, they received from him new confirmations of his promise. They drove then to the rock and met fortunately, so that the wild man was while he basked, said head in the lap of the princess who Cianna, asleep. Once she saw the ship, therefore, they wanted to jump right in front of great joy; Pacione waved her but that she should keep quiet, and after they had placed a large stone at the head of the wild man, they were called up Cianna and come with them to the ship on which they stood briskly to sea again. They were not very far from shore, awoke as the wild man, and he did not see Cianna beside him, his eyes turned seaward. There he saw the ship that she suffered, which is why he soon in a black cloud turned and nacheilte through the air the ship. Cianna who knew the art of the wild man, realized immediately that he had hidden in that cloud, and revealed such fear that she could sit with difficulty Pacione and his sons from what they faced, having regard to and then lifeless sank , So when Renzone saw approaching the cloud, he took a crossbow and shot the wild man exactly both eyes, so that he in pain from the cloud like a grain floor, plop, fell. Now that all of their eyes were directed with fear long in the cloud, they turned finally into the ship back to see what Cianna do, and saw them all fours stretched out and transferred from the stage of life, so that Pacione started to pluck his beard, and exclaimed: "That's what I call true time and effort to lose; All efforts are now free, Gone With all hopes like the wind. Because here has made out of the dust and got us in the lurch in the dirt; they said 'Good night,' to give us a bad day, she has torn her lifeline and also bitten through the fishing line of our hopes. As you can clearly see quite how an honest man never succeed in anything; here it shows up clearly right that, who should be one unhappy remains unhappy! Because the princess is free, we will return to Deep Throat, the marriage is settled, the wedding hosts, waving the scepter, and lo -. Now we have a right Quark from all "Ghiacuccio had this talk belongs to the father long with ; but as he finally saw that it did not want to tear down and that, except for the sound hole he played down the lyre of pain, he said: "Only gently, dear Father, for we want to go and despite all this after deep throat happier our things to a install and happier end than you think. "-" Stay if we bring me with this consolation from the body, "said Pacione," the king that corpse, he will let us indeed mentioned, but not about money, while others that sea Not so hot, "said Ghiacuccio," where have you left your head - have navigated happy, will only increase the evil in us. ""? Do not you remember, then, what did for an art I learned? Let's just end up and I find the herb that I know, then you shall see your miracle. "At these words the father took courage, closed Ghiacuccio in his arms, and so strongly moved away his impatience, so strong he pulled at the helm so that they arrived after a short time on the coast of deep throat, what Ghiacuccio went on shore, the herb visited so hurried back to the ship and Cianna squeezed its juice into her mouth so that she, a frog same, the one in the dog cave has brought and then thrown into the lake of Agnano, came back to life. Here About enjoys high, they went without delay to the king, who did not stop to embrace his daughter and to kiss and thank their liberators. When she asked him but, to keep his promise, he said: "Which of you shall I give my daughter? It is not a cake that can be cut into pieces; it can also be one got me the job, the others must certainly go empty, "-" Lord King, "then said the eldest, who was a shrewd saint," the reward must depend on the effort. therefore see to it who is worthy of the glorious bite the most, and then decide how it is fitting. "-" You talk like Solomon "said the king, so I reported all what all were done her so me the right utterance . not the correct insight lacks "thus, once each of the sons had told what he contributed to the liberation of the princess, the king turned said to her father and"? and what did you do this "-" it seems to me the most " replied the latter; "Because I've done to people my sons and they let the learning for my money, what they can; otherwise they would have the time even louder wild strains, it whereas now such beautiful fruit produce. "When the king both parties heard, the reasons of both considered and once again considered and what right in his own him, considered from all sides and considered had, he said his decision as meaning that his daughter Pacione, as their main liberators tO ISSUE. As the saying has also been carried out, but given to the sons a rich reward of money, so they should invest it in an advantageous manner, while the father joy young was and the proverb was mindful: When two quarrel, the third pleased.
The goose	3408	571C	German	It is a true word spoken, the Hesiod that the craftsman the craftsman, the blacksmith to the blacksmith, the musician the musician, the neighbor to the neighbor and the beggar the beggar ill will, because there is no corner in the world building to which the damn spider envy, living on nothing but the damage to the neighbor, is not dependent on tissue; as it did will particularly see from the following story. Once there were two sisters who were in destitution and only be fed to the most wretched that they do from morning to night made the fingers wet and then sold the little cocoon. Despite this miserable life but did not succeed in the white ball of poverty but, at the confluence with the red of honor, to push away this, which is why the sky, in the reward of the good always equally generous evident as in the punishment of evil, the poor brought girl on the idea of ​​going to the market, there peddle some Gebund yarn and then for the few pennies they would get for buying a goose. said; done, they brought the goose back home and cultivated them with as much love and care as a natural sister by they let even sleep in their own bed. So it happened now that finally entered once for the poor girl clear weather; because quite suddenly the goose began to enter from behind gold coins of, so that the sisters gradually a large box anfüllten with them, and since they had money now like crap to hold their heads higher and also in their appearance much handsome look began than in the past; why two spoke of their familiarity, who one day had come together to clap each other as follows: "Did you see Goody Vasta how it goes with Lilla and Lolla now? It is not so long ago, they had barely a few rags to cover the nakedness, now they go hand in hand in the state and pomp, as great ladies; can also be seen at their windows always chickens and pots of meat that neat smile at one. What might as well have been going on? You must either tapped the barrel of honor or have found a treasure. "-" I am beside myself with wonderment, godmother Perna, "said Vasta," because I thought just that they are quite run down, I see them on top, so it seems to me as if I'm dreaming. "After these and many other similar speeches they made, driven by envy, in order to see a hole in the wall, and was the sisters from their home to eavesdrop and, if they could perhaps give her curiosity some food. They peered actually until it to the daylight hours to give one evening, struck as the sun with the ruler of the beams on the banks of the Indian Ocean, the characters after work, Lilla and Lolla a sheet on the ground wide, a goose put it and saw give this such a diarrhea of ​​Talern of themselves that they opened their mouths and eyes. And when the morning came and Apollo with his golden rod shadows chased from heaven, Vasta visited the two girls, and after a thousand circumlocutions in length and in width, they finally came to the main point by asking them to her but to a few hours to borrow the goose to some young goslings bought them to get used to the house; and as much and as long as she spoke, and partly to bring up the two silly things, partly because they could not refuse from good nature in the Goody no suspicion, it borrowed the goose, under the condition however that they will bring home they soon , The neighbor was now looking at once her other godmother, and then without delay they spread on the ground a sheet on which they put the goose, but instead of opening in her butt a ducat formative mint, once a privy channel opened and the white stuff of poor women such colored with Gilbkraut that the smell from it spread equally throughout the house as of Sunday from the frying pans. When the gossips perceived this, they thought that the goose would start with good food better food for Stone. They gave her therefore to eat so abundant that it was up to her to the head, and then put them back on a clean sheet; but if the goose had previously not rejected hartleibig, they got now even a diarrhea, which also includes the indigestion might contribute their part. but here about the two women got into such a rage that they turned the goose's neck and they hurled through the window into a Sackgäßchen through which no one used to go and where they used to throw the garbage. The random but, if you expect least of it, promotes the strangest things to light, it added that the son of a king who had gone out hunting, it suddenly so got into his body that he sword and horse to a servant was to keep then stepped into that alley to relieve himself to do, and after he had finished, the frischgetöteten Gans served as detergents, as he just did not have any paper in his pocket. The goose but that was by no means dead, drove with her beak the poor prince in such a way into the flesh that he uttered a loud cry, and then rushed his people and wanted to tear the goose, but they did not succeed; because she had hung like a fury, a winged leeches, like a vampire in him, so that the prince, who could no longer ausholten in pain and the futile efforts of his servants saw themselves wear on their arms in the royal palace and then the most skilled doctors had to summon. The now consulted given the injury site long back and forth and used all possible means for the cause, remedy by spreads ointments, docked pliers and aufstreuten powder; but as the goose was stuck like a louse, which can not by mercury, and like a leech, which you can be unable to move by vinegar, so the prince was known publicly that he who would be able to rid him of this troublesome appendage of his buttock when it man would get half the kingdom, but it would be a woman, she should be his wife. Once saw one brought people come in droves and stick their noses into things where they could not help; because the more means used, the tighter bite the goose and the more they squeezed the poor Prince, that it seemed as if all of the recipes Galen, all aphorisms of Hippocrates and all remedies in the world conspired against Podex torment of the unhappy , but fate would have it, after so many people who brought came to try their skill, finally, also appeared Lolla, the youngest of the sisters. As soon as she had seen the goose, they recognized them on the spot, and exclaimed: "My dear Wulli-Wulli" Now when the goose heard the voice of her faithful nurse, she had the same prey go and ran to meet her by they flattered her and kissed her and very much mixed up the butt of a prince with the mouth of a peasant woman. At the sight of this strange incident, the prince wanted to know was related how the matter, and when he came in this way behind the prank of the two gossips, he let them out of the land crops and banish for ever, then married Lolla, giving it countless guess-making goose as dowry brought, and also gave Lilla a wealthy man. So now all lived in happiness and joy despite the gossips that the sisters wanted to block the rejected from heaven road to riches and precisely because they gave them another to happiness, so that it is clearly proved in the end: it put obstacles sometimes help only ,
The goose-girl at the well	1715	923	German	There was once a very old woman, who lived with he flock of geese in a remote area between mountains and had as a small house. The remote area was surrounded by a large forest, and every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbled into it. However, since the dame was quite active, he would have expected at its high years, more than one, collected grass for her geese, broke from the wild fruit she could reach with his hands, and carried everything on his back home. One would have thought that heavy burden they would have to press down, but she always brought it safely home. If any one met her, she greeted quite friendly: "Good day, dear countryman, it is nice weather Yes, you are surprised that I drag the grass, but everyone has his load on his back taking.." But the people did not meet her happy and rather took a detour, and when a father passed away with his boys at her, he spoke softly to him: "Take care of the old woman, who's a sly old ears: it is a witch. "One morning, a handsome young man through the woods. The sun shone bright, the birds sang, and a cool breeze blew through the leaves, and he was full of joy and pleasure. Yet it was not a man encounters when he suddenly perceived the old witch in sections on the ground on his knees and sat grass with a sickle. A whole load had already thrust into her sling and it stood two baskets, which were filled with wild apples and pears. "But, Mother," said he, "how to get to create all this?" - "I must carry it, dear sir," she replied, "rich people's children do not need it but called the Farmer's: Look at you not to, Your hump is crooked.." "Will you help me?" she said, when he stopped at her, "You have still a straight back and young legs, it will you be an easy Even my house is not so far from here, are behind the mountains there, it is on a heath How soon.. ye up jump there. " The young man felt sorry for the old man. "My father is certainly no peasant," he replied, "but a rich count, but that you may see that the farmers can not bear alone, I will take your bundle." - "Do you want to try," she said, ".! So I should be loving one hour's far you will have to go, of course, but what makes you this from the apples and pears must you also carry." It was the young man just a little serious when he heard of an hour's walk, but the old woman would not let him, seized him the bundle on his back, and hung the two baskets on his arm. "You see, it's very easy," she said. "No, it's not easy," replied the count, and pulled a rueful face, "the bundle weighs as heavily as if full of cobble stones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as if they lead; I can not to breathe." He had a mind to put everything back, but the old woman did not let on. "Just look," she said mockingly, "the young gentleman will not carry what I old woman, have so often dragged away. With beautiful words, they are at hand, but when it becomes serious, so they want to make out of the dust. What does it say you, "she continued," and hesitates, legs picks up! no one will take the bundle again. " As long as he walked on level ground, it was not unbearable, but were superior to them in the mountain and had to climb, and rolled down the stones behind his feet, as if they were alive, it was beyond his powers. The drops of sweat stood on his forehead, and ran, hot and cold, down his back. "Mother," he said, "I can not, I want to rest a little." - "Not here," replied the old woman, "when we have arrived, so you can rest; but now you have to forward Who knows what you that's good." - "old, you're outrageous," said the count, and tried to throw off the bundle, but he labored in vain; it stuck as fast to his back as if it grew there. He turned and twisted, but he could not get rid of it. The old man laughed and jumped to quite delighted on her crutch. "Incensed you not, sir," she said, "You will indeed red in the face as a tap. Carry your bundle of patience when we are at home, so I will soon give you a good tip." What could he do? He had to submit to his fate, and crawl along patiently behind the old woman. She seemed to be more nimble and his burden still heavier. Suddenly she was doing a set, jumped on to the bundle and sat down on top of it; however withered was, they still had more weight than the stoutest country lass. The youth's knees trembled, but when he did not go, the old woman hit him with a switch and with stinging nettles to her feet. Groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at length reached the house of the old, just as he was about to drop. When the geese, the old saw, they stretched ahead of the wings in the air and the necks, ran to meet her and shouted their "wulle, wulle." Behind the herd with a rod in his hand was an old wench, strong and big, but ugly as night. "Wife's mother," she said to the old man, "is anything happened to you, you have stayed away so long." - "Keep my daughter," she replied, "I have encountered no evil, on the contrary, with this kind gentleman, who has carried my load; think you, when I was tired, he even took me on his back. the road is not even made us long, we have been merry, and always have fun a lot together. " At last the old woman slid down, the young man took the bundle from the back, and the baskets from his arm, he looked quite friendly and said, "Now seat yourself on the bench before the door, and rest you have fairly earned your wages. neither should he fail to appear. " Then she said to the goose, "You go into the house, my daughter, it is not proper that you are a young gentleman alone, you do not pour oil into the fire, he might fall in love with you." The Count did not know if he should laugh or cry. Such a sweetheart, he thought, and if it were thirty years younger, but my heart could not move. Meanwhile stroked and fondled her geese as the old children and then went with her daughter in the house. The youth lay down on the bench, under a wild apple tree. The air was warm and mild; around spread a green meadow, which was set with cowslips, wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers. By mid rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled, and the white geese went walking off, or paddled in the water. "It is quite delightful here," he said, "but I'm tired that I do not keep my eyes I want to sleep a little If only a gust of wind come and blow my legs off my body, for they are brittle like. tinder. "When he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shook him awake. "Get up," she said, "here you can not stay., Of course, I have made thee mad enough but life has it not cost. Now I want your giving wages. Money and possessions you do not need because you have something other." So they thrust a little in his hand, which was cut from a single emerald. "Take great care's well," she added, "it will bring you luck." The count jumped up, and he felt he that very fresh and had regained his vigor, he thanked the old woman for her present, and went on his way without once looking back for the beautiful daughter. When he was quite a distance away, he heard from the distance the noisy cry of Gänse.Der Graf had three days in the wilderness wandering, before he could find out. So he came to a big city, and because no one knew him, he was in the royal castle out where the king and queen sat on the throne. The Count settled on one knee, drew the emerald from his pocket and placed it at the Queen's feet. They told him to get up, and he had her hand up the little box. But no sooner had she opened it, and looked therein, than she fell as if dead to the ground. The count was seized by the servants of the king and was being led into captivity: since the Queen opened her eyes, and ordered them to release him, and every one was to go, they would secretly with him reden.Als the queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly and said, "What helps me shine and honor around me, every morning I awake in pain and sorrow. I have had three daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that it held all the world for a miracle. she was as white as snow, as red as apples flower and her hair so bright as the sun. When she cried, not tears fell from her eyes, but pearls and precious stones. When she fifteen years old was the king let all three sisters before his throne come. You should have seen how all the people made for eyes, entered as the recent: it was as if the sun rose the king said. 'My daughters, I know not when my last day comes today, I want to determine what each shall receive at my death. her a ll have loved me, but what made me of you prefer, you want the best. ' Each said they would most like him. 'Can not express it to me said the King,' as you love me you have? That's what I'll's see how you think it. ' The oldest said, 'I love my father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.' The second, 'I love my father as dearly as my prettiest dress. 'The youngest was silent. Then the father said, 'And you, my dearest child, how much you love me?' - 'I know there is nothing she replied,' and can compare my love with nothing. ' But the father insisted she had to call something. As she finally said: 'The best food does not please me without salt, therefore I love my father like salt.' When the king heard this, he became angry and said, 'If you love me as a salt, so your love will be rewarded with salt.' Then he divided the empire between the two oldest, the youngest but he left a sack of salt tie on the back, and two servants they had to perform in the wild forest beyond. We all begged and prayed for her, "said the queen," but the wrath of the king was not to soften. How she cried when she had to leave us! The whole road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes. The King soon afterwards repented of his great severity, and had the poor child can search the whole forest, but no one could find them. When I think that they have eaten wild animals, so I know me not to contain myself for sorrow; Sometimes I console myself with the hope that she is hiding or still alive and had found shelter in a cave with compassionate people. But introduce yourself, when I opened your little emerald, a pearl lay therein, just the way they flowed from the eyes of my daughter, and as you can imagine, as I am the sight moves the heart. You shall tell me how you came to the Pearl "The count told her that he had received it from the old woman in the forest that would not have seemed uneasy and would have to be a witch;. Of her child but he had not heard . and saw the king and queen Made a decision to seek out the old; they thought where the pearl had been, they would also have news of her daughter finden.Die old sat out there in the lonely place at her spinning wheel and spun it was. already become dark, and one which was burning on the hearth gave a scanty light. Suddenly ward's out loud, the geese were coming home from the pasture and let their hoarse cries heard. Soon after came in the daughter. But the old woman thanked her hard and shook just a little with his head. the daughter sat down beside her, took her spinning wheel and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl. so both sat two hours and did not speak to each other . Finally, something rustled at the window and two fiery eyes peered in. It was an old owl who shouted three times "ugh". The old woman looked up just a little in the air, then they said, "Now, it's time, little daughter that you go out and do your work." She stood up and walked out. Where is she gone? Over the meadows ever onward into the valley. At last they came to a well, stood by the three old oak trees. The moon had risen, however, round and large over the mountain, and it was so bright that you would have a pin can find. She removed a skin which covered her face, then bent down to the fountain and began to wash. When she was finished, she dipped the skin also in the water and then put them on land, so it should bleach in the moonlight, and dry again. But how the maiden was changed! So what you have never seen! When the gray mask fell off, her golden hair like sunbeams, and spread as if it were a mantle over her whole form. Her eyes shone out as brightly as the stars of heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a soft red like Äpfelblüte.Aber the beautiful girl was sad. It sat down and wept bitterly. One tear after another came from his eyes and rolled between the long hair on the floor. It sat there and would have stayed long sit, if it had not cracking in the boughs of the neighboring tree and rushed. She jumped up like a deer hears the shot of the hunter. The moon was obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instant the maiden had put on the old skin and vanished like a light that the wind ausbläst.Zitternd like a leaf, she ran back to the house. The old man stood at the door, and the girl wanted to tell her what had happened to him, but the old woman laughed kindly and said, "I already know everything." She led her into the room and lighted a new log. But she did not sit down to her spinning again, but fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour. "Everything must be pure and clean," she said to the girl. "But mother," the girl said, "why do you begin in this late hour to work on? What did you do?" - "Do you know then what time it is?" asked the old woman. "Not yet midnight," answered the girl, "but already past eleven o'clock?" - "Dost thou not remember," continued the old woman, "you came to me three years ago today Your time is up, we can not stay together longer?". The girl was frightened and said, "Oh, Mother, do you want me violate Where shall I go I have no friends and no home to which I can turn I've done everything you've asked, and you are always?. satisfied with me, I will not send away "! The old woman did not say what was before him the girl. "My stay here is over," she said to him, "but when I depart, must house and room to be clean: therefore do not hold on to my job because of you no care, you shall find a roof under which you! Land can, and with the reward that I will give you, you'll be satisfied. " - "But tell me what to do?" the girl asked. "I tell you again, do not hinder me in my work! Do not say a word more, go into your room, take the skin off your face and put on the silken dress that you wore when you came to me, and then wait in thy until I call chamber you. "But I must again by the king and queen tell who came out with the count in order to seek out the old woman in the desert. The count was at night strayed into the forest of them and had to go on alone. The next day it seemed to him like being he is on the right path. He went on and on, until darkness came, he climbed up a tree and wanted to stay there because he was worried he would get lost. When the moon lit up the area, he saw a figure coming down the mountain. She had no stick in his hand, but he could see that it was the goose, which he had seen earlier at the house of the Old. "Oho!" he cried, "here she comes, and I have only a witch, so I want that others do not even miss it." But how amazed he was when they went to the well, took off the skin and washed her, when her golden hair fell down all about her, and she was as beautiful as he had not seen anyone in the world. No sooner had he dared to breathe, but stretched his head forward through the leaves as far as he could, and looked at her with unblinking eyes. Either he bent over too far, or whatever the cause might, the bough suddenly cracked, and at the same moment the maiden slipped into the skin, sprang away like a roe, and as the moon was suddenly covered, disappeared from his eyes. as soon as she was gone, the Count rose from the tree down and hurried after her with nimble steps. He was not gone long before he saw walking through the meadow two figures in the twilight. It was the king and queen, who had perceived from a distance the light in the house for the elderly and were it / u gone. The count told them what he had seen wonderful things in the well, and they did not doubt that her daughter would have been lost. Full of joy she went on and soon came to the little house; The geese were sitting around, and had thrust their heads under their wings and were sleeping, and not stirred. They looked through the window, there sat the old woman quietly spinning, nodding her head and did not look back. It was very clean in the room, as if there lived the little mist men that carry no dust on the feet. but her daughter did not see them. They gazed at all for a while to finally they took heart, and knocked softly at the window. The old man seemed to have expected it, she stood up and called out quite kindly, "Come in, I know you already!" As they entered the room, the old woman said, "would have the long road you you can save if you, would not have failed three years ago unjustly your child who is so good and lovable You never hurt anything's, she has three. have for years tend the geese; she has learned no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart but you are by the fear in which you have lived sufficiently punished. ". Then she went to the chamber and called, "Come out, my little daughter!" As the door opened, and the princess stepped out in her silken garments, with her golden hair and her shining eyes, and it was as if an angel from heaven käme.Sie walked up to her father and her mother, they fell by the neck and kissed her; it was not different, they all had to weep for joy. The young count stood near them, and when she saw him she became as red in the face as a moss-rose; she herself did not know why. The king said, "Dear child, my kingdom I have given away, what shall I give you?" - "She needs nothing," said the old woman, "I give her the tears that she has cried for you, these are all beads, beautiful as they are found in the sea, and are worth more than your whole kingdom more And as a reward. for their services I give her my little house. " When the old woman had said, she disappeared before their eyes. It rattled a little in the walls, and when they looked around, the cottage into a magnificent palace was transformed, and a royal table had been spread, and the servants were running back and her.Die story goes even further, but my grandmother they told me about, the memory had become weak: she had forgotten the rest. I always feel the beautiful princess was married to the Count, and they remained together in the palace, and lived there in all happiness so long as it would to God. Whether the snow-white geese, which were kept near the little hut, were verily young maidens (it takes's no one to blame), which had taken the old woman, and whether they now received their human form again, and stayed as handmaids to the young Queen, I do not know exactly, but I suspect it anyway. It is certain that the old woman was no witch, as people thought, but a wise woman, who meant well. Probably she has been she who the princess gave the gift at birth of weeping pearls instead of tears. That does not happen anymore, or else the poor would soon become rich.
The goosemaid	851	533	German	There once lived an old queen who had died her husband had long years, and they had a beautiful daughter. As that grew, she was promised in marriage to a prince. When the time came where they should be married, and now the child had to leave in the foreign realm, you grabbed the old woman did many costly and adornments, both gold and silver, cups and jewels, in short everything royal only to a dowry belonged, for she loved her child from the heart. They also gave her for a maid, which ride along and should provide the bride's hands groom. And each got a horse for the journey, but the horse of the king's daughter was called Falada and could speak. How then was the parting came, the old mother went into her bedroom, took a little knife and cut her fingers that she bled; later she held a white lobules under and let fall into three drops of blood, she gave her daughter and said, "Dear child, her take care of well, they will do you go not." So they both took one another sad goodbye. The patch put the princess in her breasts in front of him, sat on the horse and then went away to her bridegroom. After she had ridden an hour she felt hot thirst and said to her maid: "Get down, and fill my cup that you took for me to drink water from the brook, I would like again." - "If you are thirsty," said the maid, "Sun rises itself from, puts you to the water and drinks, I may not be your slave." Since the king's daughter rose against great thirst down, bent over the water in the creek and drank and was not allowed to drink from the golden cup. She said, "Oh God!" Then answered the three drops of blood: "If that knew your mother, the heart in the body would break in two." But the king bride was humble, said nothing and mounted her horse again. So they rode on some miles farther, but the day was warm, the sun beat, and she was thirsty again soon. And they came to a water flow, she cried again, her maid: "Get down and give me a drink from my golden cup," for she had long forgotten all the bad words. but the maid spoke still more scornfully, "Do you want a drink, you alone, I may not be your slave." As the princess descended before large thirst, fell over the flowing water, wept and said: "Oh God!" and the drops of blood again replied, "If your mother knew, the heart in the body would break in two." And how they drank so and stooped over, she noticed the napkin on which the three drops were from her bosom and flowed on to the water without her noticing in their great fear. The maid had but watched and rejoiced that they should have power over the bride; because the fact that these had lost the drops of blood, she had become weak and powerless. Now when she tried to get back on her horse that was called because Falada, the maid said: "On Falada I belong, and on my nag you belong;" and that she had to put up with it. Then she ordered the maid with harsh words, take off your royal garments and put on their bad, and finally she had to open air conspire to no one wanted to talk about something in the royal court; and if she had not taken this oath, they would have been killed on the spot. But Falada saw all this and took it home in acht.Die chambermaid now climbed to Falada and the true bride the bad horse, and so they continued until they finally arrived at the Royal Castle. There was great joy at their arrival, and the prince sprang to meet them, the maid lifted from his horse and said she was his wife. She was led up the stairs, but the real princess had to stop down. Then the old king looked at the window and saw her in the yard stopped and saw how she was fine, delicate and even beautiful; then he went down royal apartment, and asked the bride after she had brought with her and stands in the yard down there and who would be "The I've only brought her to society;? give the maid what to work, that they do not idle stands." But the old king had no work for them and knew nothing except that he said: "Since I've such a little boy who tends the geese, which they like to help." The boy was called Conrad (Konrädchen), which had the true bride help goose hüten.Bald but the false bride said to the young king, "Dearest husband, I beg you, do me a favor!" He replied: "I should like to do." - "Well, let the slave-call and since the horse, which I am ridden, cut off the neck because it annoyed me go." Actually, but she was afraid that the horse would talk about how they had dealt with the king's daughter. Now that was so far advised that it should be done and the faithful Falada die because there was also the right princess to ear, and she promised the knacker secretly a piece of money that she wanted to pay him if he erwiese her a small service , In the city was a large dark gate where evening and morning with the geese by had, sinister in the gate he wants the Falada hinnageln his head that she could see him more than once even though. replied "Oh, you Falada because you hangest," da: So that the Grinder's servant promised to do, cut off the head and pinned him in the dark gate fest.Des Early next morning as she and Conrad drove out under the gate, she said in passing the head: "O thou maiden queen, since you gangest when the knew your mother, her heart would shatter her." But she went on through the town, driving her geese to the field. And when they had arrived in the meadow, she sat down and made her hair, which were pure gold, and Conrad saw it and rejoiced as they glistened, he wanted to pull a few. She said, "Alas, alas, Windchen, take Conrad his cap, and lass'n with hunting until I with my and geschnatztund aufgesatzt again." And there came a wind strong that it blew the Conrad his cap away over, and it had to run after him. By the time he returned, she had finished combing and putting, and he could get no hair. He was sulky and would not speak to her; and they tended the geese until it was evening, they went to Haus.Den next morning as they drove out under the dark gate, the Virgin: "O you Falada because you hangest," Falada replied, "O you spinster queen, since you gangest when your mother knew, her heart would break. " And in the field, they sat down on the grass and began to comb out her hair, and ran Conrad and wanted to reach for it, and she said quickly: "Alas, alas, Windchen, take Conrad his cap, and with lass'n hunt until I with my and geschnatztund aufgesatzt again. " As the wind came and blew the hat from his head far away that Conrad chase had, and came back when it, she had long handle her hair, and there was none of it out, and so they tended the geese until it was evening. but in the evening after they had got home, Conrad went to the old king and said: "with the girls I will no longer tend the geese!" - "Why then?" asked the old king. "Oh, that annoys me all day." As he told the old king to tell how's it was doing to her. As Conrad said, "In the morning when we pass under the dark gate with the herd, so is there a Gaulskopf on the wall, and she says: 'Falada because you hangest,' because the responses of the head: 'O thou king of honor, since you gangest when the knew your mother, her heart would 'break her!' "and so told Conrad on what would happen on the Gänsewiese and how it since run after his hat in the wind müsste.Der old king ordered him the next day drive out again, and he himself, as it was morning, sat behind the dark gate and listened as she spoke with the head of Falada. And then he went after her in the field and hid in a bush on the meadow. Who seeing now with his own eyes how the goose girl brought driven the herd and how after a while she sat down and her hair losflocht that shone with brilliance. Soon she spoke again: "Woe, woe, Windchen, barrel Conrad his cap, and lass'n with hunting until I with my and geschnatztund aufgesatzt again." Since a gust of wind came and went with Kürdchens hat away that it had far to walk, while the maiden combed and bound up her hair still, saw all the old king. Then he went unnoticed back, and when evening came home the goose girl, he called her aside and asked why she was doing all this way. "I can not tell you, nor shall any man complain my grief, because that 'I've outdoors conspired because I had come for my life otherwise." He urged her and left her no peace, but he could not get out of it. Then he said: "If you want I do not mind saying so the iron stove klag 'because your sorrow," and walked away. Since crawled it, caught in the iron stove whine about and crying, her heart poured out, and said, "Here I sit by the whole world abandoned and am a princess, and a false maid brought me by force then that I my royal garments had to take, and has taken my place with my fiance, and I do mean service. If that knew my mother, the heart in the body ty 'you burst. " But the old King was standing outside by the oven, you lurking about and heard what she said. Since he came back in and let them go out of the oven. Since her royal garments were done, and it seemed a wonder how she was so beautiful. The old king called his son and revealed to him that he had the wrong bride: that would be merely a maid, but the true standing here than BEEN Gänsemagd. The young king was heart glad when he saw her beauty and virtue, and a great meal was hired, were asked to which all people and good friends. At the head of the bridegroom, the king's daughter to one side and the maid was sitting to the other, but the maid was blinded and realized that no longer the shiny jewelry. When they had eaten and drunk and good cheer were the old king of the maid gave up a mystery what such would be worth that would have so and so betrayed the Lord that told the whole course and asked, "What judgment is this worthy?" Since the false bride said: "This is worth nothing better than being naked undressed and put into a barrel, which is within shod with pointed nails, and two white horses must be biased, they grind alley to alley off to death . " - "That's you," said the old king, "and have your own judgment found, and then you will be done." And was completed when the verdict, the young king married his true bride, and both ruled their kingdom in peace and happiness.
The little folks' presents	1738	503	German	A tailor and a goldsmith were traveling together and heard one evening, was dropped as the sun set behind the mountains, the sound of distant music, which became more and more clearly; It sounded strange, but so pleasant that they forgot all their weariness and stepped quickly. The moon had already arisen when they came to a hill where they saw a lot of little men and women who had passed at the hands and whirled with the greatest pleasure and delight in the dance; they sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music that had belonged to the hikers. In the middle sat an old man who was slightly larger than the rest, who wore a colorful colored skirt, and a gray-haired beard hung down over his chest. The two remained in amazement standing, watching the dance. The old man waved, they should occur, and the little folks willingly opened his circle. The goldsmith, who had a hump, and like all hunchbacks boldly was enough drew near; the tailor felt a little afraid at first, and held back, but when he saw how things were going so funny, he took heart and came to. Soon joined the circle again and sang the little ones and danced in the wildesten jumps on, but the old man took a large knife hanging from his belt, sharpened it, and was sharpened well as there, he looked around for the strangers. They were terrified, but they had not much time for reflection, the old man grabbed the goldsmith and shaved in the greatest speed him hair and beard clean off; an equal happened then the hook. But her fear disappeared when the old man finished the work, both friendly patted on the shoulder, as if to say they have done well that without reluctance everything would willingly let it happen. He pointed his finger to a heap of coals which lay to the side, and pointed to the travelers by gestures that they should fill their pockets with it. Both obeyed, although they did not know what they should serve the coals, and then went on to seek shelter for the night. When they arrived in the valley, the bell of the neighboring monastery struck twelve. Instantly silenced the singing, everything was gone and the hill lay in lonely Mondschein.Die two travelers found an inn, and covered themselves on the straw beds with their coats, but forgot because of their fatigue, take out the coals before. A heavy weight on their limbs awakened them earlier than usual. They attacked in the pockets, and could not believe their eyes when they saw that they were not filled with coals, but with pure gold; and hair and beard were happy again present in all its fullness. They had now become rich people, but possessed the goldsmith, who had his acquisitive nature better filled according to the bags, twice as much as the tailor. A greedy person when he has a lot, demanded more, the goldsmith made the Schneider's proposal to stay one more day to go out again in the evening to pick up with the old man on the mountain even greater treasures. The tailor refused, and said: "I have enough and am satisfied; now I'm going to master, and marry my dear object (as he called his sweetheart), and I am a happy man." But he wanted to stay to please him the day still. In the evening the goldsmith hung a few bags over her shoulder to can bag to right, and made his way to the hill. He found, as in the previous night, the little people in song and dance, the old man shaved him again smooth and pointed him to take some coal. He did not hesitate to insert what just wanted to make in his pockets, went quite happily home and covered himself with the skirt. "If the gold does weigh heavily," he said, "I want to have endured," and finally fell asleep with the sweet anticipation of waking in the morning as a very rich man. When he opened his eyes, he rose quickly to investigate the pockets, but how amazed he was when he pulled out nothing but black coals, he might reach into it as many times as he wanted. "There is still my gold I got the night before," he thought, and fetched it, but how shocked he was when he saw that it likewise had again turned into coal. He slapped his dusty black hand his forehead, as he felt that the whole head was bald and smooth like the beard. But his misfortune was not yet over, he noticed only now that it was just as great front grown to the hump on his back, a second on the chest. Then he recognized the punishment for his greed and began to cry loudly. The good tailor, who was wakened by this, comforted the unhappy as best he wanted to go, and said, "You've been my comrade in my wandering, you shall stay with me and live off of my treasure." He kept his word, but the poor goldsmith had to carry the two humps and cover his bald head with a cap his life.
The golden goose	615	571	German	There was a man who had three sons, of which the youngest was called the Simpleton, and was despised, mocked and reset at every opportunity. It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest, cut wood, and before he left, he gave his mother with a beautiful fine cake and a bottle of wine, so it does not hunger and thirst litte. When he came into the forest, he met a little old gray man, who wished him a good day and said, "Please give me a piece of cake out of your pocket and leave me a sip of your wine drinking I am so hungry and thirsty! . " But the prudent youth answered, "Geb I you my cake and my wine, I have not got any, be off with you the way!" let the little man standing and went away. When he started to trim a tree, it did not take long before he made a false stroke, and the ax cut him in the arm, leave that he had to go home and connect. That was what came of the little gray man. Afterwards the second son went into the woods, and that mother gave him as the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The met also the old gray man, holding a piece of cake and a drink of wine at. But the second son spoke plainly, saying, "What do I give to you, that goes from myself, be off with you the way!" let the little man standing and went away. The penalty was not like he did a few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, he had to be carried home. Then Simpleton said, "Father, let me once to go out and cut some wood!" The father answered, "Your brothers have done damage here, let it bring you, you know nothing about it." but simpleton begged until he finally said. "Go, then, by damage you will be wise" The mother gave him a cake that was baked in the ashes with water, and a bottle of sour beer. When he came into the forest, he also met the old gray man, greeted him and said, "Give me a piece of your cake and a drink from your bottle, I am so hungry and thirsty." Simpleton answers: "I have only cinder-cake and sour beer, if that content thee, and we will sit down and eat." As they sat down and took out as the Simpleton his cinder-cake, it's been a rich pancake, and his sour beer became good wine. Now, ate and drank, and then the little man said. "Because you have a good heart and yours from the so willingly, I will bring you happiness There stands an old tree, cut it off, so you're going to something in the roots Find." Then the little man took leave. Simpleton went and cut down the tree, and as he fell, was sitting in the roots of a goose with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her out, taking her with him and went to an inn, because he wanted to stay. but the landlord had three daughters, who saw the goose and were curious as to what that would be a strange bird, and would have liked to have one of its golden feathers. The eldest thought: There will soon find an opportunity where I can pull out a feather. And went out once as a simpleton, she took the goose by its wing but her finger and hand remained her, held fast. Soon after came the second and had no other thought than to pick up a golden pen, but no sooner had she touched her sister, so she could not get laid. Finally, the third came in the same intention. Since shouted the others: "Stay away, for heaven's sake stay away!" But she did not understand why she should stay away, thinking: Are there so I can be there and sprang forward, and as she had touched her sister, so she stayed at her hang. So they had the night with the whole match. The next morning the Simpleton took the goose under his arm went away and did not care about the three girls who were hanging on it. They always had behind the three-run, left and right as it came into his legs. In the middle of the field, they met the pastor, and when he saw the procession, he said, "Shame on you, you nasty girl, what are you running the young fellow through the fields after sending that?" He summed up the youngest by the hand and wanted to retire as he touched but he was also stuck and had himself behind three run. Before long the sexton came by and saw the pastor, who followed three girls on the foot. As he marveled, and cried, "Oh, Father, whither away so quickly do not forget that today we still have a Christening?." Ran up to him and grabbed him by the sleeve, but remained hanging tight. As the five tramped on, two farmers came with their hoes from the field. Then the pastor called her and begged that they would recover him and the sexton. But no sooner had they touched the sexton when they got caught, and now there were seven of them running behind simpleton with the goose. He came to a city; because there was a king who had a daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. That's why he had given a law, who she could make her laugh, which was to marry her. Simpleton, when he heard this, went with his goose and his hangers before the king's daughter, and when she saw the seven people running here in row; she burst out laughing and did not want to stop. As they demanded Simpleton to the bride, but the king did not like the son, he made all kinds of objections and said he would only bring him who could drink a cellar full of wine a man. The Simpleton thought that the little gray man, that could probably help him, went out into the forest, and on the spot where he had cut off the tree, he saw a man sitting, who made a very sad face. Simpleton asked him what he was taking so much to heart. Then he answered: "I have such a great thirst and can not delete it, the cold water I can not stand, a barrel of wine I have emptied, but what is a drop in the ocean?" - "I can help you," said the Simpleton, "come with me, you shall have enough!" He led him to the king's cellar, and the man went on the big drums, drank and drank, that he did his hips hurt, and before a day was over he had drunk up the whole cellar. Simpleton again asked his bride, but the king was annoyed that a bad fellow, whom everyone called Simpleton, should carry his daughter, and made new conditions: He would have to create only one man who could eat a mountain of bread. Simpleton did not hesitate long, but went straight out into the forest. Since sitting in the same spot a man who laced his body with a belt together, making a very piteous face and said, "I have eaten a whole bakehouse full of rolls, but what good is when big as hungry as I am mine. stomach will be empty, and I need him tie up if I do not die of hunger. " Simpleton was glad, saying, "Get up and go with me, you shall eat your fill!" He led him to the court of the king, who had jump all the flour in the kingdom and let build a mountain of bread; but the man turned out of the woods in front of it, began to eat, and in one day the whole mountain had disappeared. Simpleton demanded his bride the third time. The king found one more excuse and demanded a ship that can travel on land and water. "As soon as you come but sailing along with it," he said, "you shall have my daughter to wife have." Simpleton went straight into the forest, sat there the old gray man, to whom he had given his cake, and said: "I also give the ship for you drank and ate, I want you, all I do, because you were kind to me, "and he gave him the ship that could sail on land and on water, and when the King saw this, he could not withhold longer his daughter. The wedding was celebrated; after the King's death Simpleton the kingdom, and lived long inherited happily with his wife.
The golden root	3411	425A	German	Many a of the audience would have been a finger of his hand around it, if he has a better half would have been quite as desired can prepare, but especially the Prince, who, instead of previously a bunch of poison, a sugar dough had seen at his side; since, however, the number of tales game was at Tolla now, so she waited until no execution to pay this debt off, but said, curiosity and curiosity have ready in their hands always the fuse to the ammunition to blow their happiness in the air, so that very often, who are doing other distressed lose his own possessions there and who nachgräbt to vorwitzig treasures, often meets with his nose in a sewer, as learned the daughter of a gardener in the following manner. There was once a very poor gardener, who was in spite of strenuous work spare nothing and finally, once bought for the three daughters he had three piglets, so they feed them up and should have something for dowry. Pascuzza and Cice, the oldest of the girls drove their pigs on a beautiful meadow, but did not allow that her youngest sister Parmetella went with them, but they chased them from themselves so that they maintain their cause elsewhere piglets to pasture. So Parmetella drove their animals in a forest where the darkness had secured against the attacks of the sun. When they arrived at a clearing in the middle of a source, like a tavern, is given in the fresh water, with silver tongue, travelers urged to drink half a pint, she saw a tree with golden leaves, from which they a plucked and it brought the father who sold it with great joy for more than twenty ducats and one and the other hole hes pluggin with the money in his business. But when he asked his daughter where she found it, she replied: "Take only what I am giving you, dear father, can not continue to ask" what they so made it the next day again, and the tree as long as its leaves robbed until he stood at the end completely defoliated as if he had been sacked by the autumn storms. However, since they end up noticed that the tree had a golden root, which could not pluck with your hands, so she brought from home an ax and began to expose the base of the tree around, which she so well it go wanted, lifted the root and looked at her a beautiful staircase of porphyry. Parmetella which was immensely curious, rose this down and then passed through a very deep, long corridor until they came to a beautiful Au, on which a magnificent palace was, shimmering of pure gold and silver, and nothing showed as beads and gems. And when Parmetella had in amazement these glories for a long time considered to be out and saw not a living soul in this superb residence, they finally entered into a room where she saw a large number of paintings, many beautiful things represented, among others, the stupidity a person deemed wise injustice one who held the balance, and the punished from heaven violence; everything shown so vivid and true that it was the astonishment; also was in the room a richly decorated table. Parmetella that was reminiscent impetuously from her stomach and no one saw, sat down at the table and began to feast how to do a count; But while she was within the prime access, entered Mohr in, said to her: "Stay here and not leave the place, because I want to marry you and make you the happiest woman on earth" Though now Parmetella a huge fright. got, it still took them by the friendly promises courage again, and when she came in to the request of the Moor, they received from him equal to a car from diamond drawn by four horses of gold, with wings of emeralds and rubies, through the air was to make them walk lead in it; also her husband nor a crowd in gold fabric ordered dressed monkeys to their service, Parmetella once dressed from head to toe in new clothes and so beautifully decorated that she looked like a queen. But when the night came and the sun full of desire, unmolested to sleep on the shores of the Indian stream of the mosquitoes out the light, of Mohr said to Parmetella: "If you make Hela want, dear child, then lie down in this bed ; if you have you but wrapped in the blanket, the lights extinguish and do so, as I tell you; otherwise it might go ill with you. "Parmetella did as she was told, but hardly had closed his eyes, turned as the Moor into a handsome youth and laid beside her. Here About awoke Parmetella, and when she realized that their wool was carded without hackle, she nearly died of fright; but because they perceived that the matter was confined to an internal war, they held the repeated attacks courageous stand. Marriage, however, Aurora rose to fetch fresh eggs to strengthen their elderly lover, the young man jumped out of bed and took his other shape again, while Parmetella remained full of curiosity, what did ausgeschlürft a sweet tooth the Erstlingsei such a beautiful hen. As now reappeared the night and Parmetella just as lain down last night and the lights had been extinguished, and the handsome youth appeared again to lie to her, and had sunk when he tired of his tricks in bed, grabbed Parmetella a lighter she had sat down at the hand struck the steel, lit the sulfur thread and with this the light, which she lifted the blanket and the ebony Ivory, the caviar in milk and cream and the coals in quicklime turns saw. "Woe to me for your sake: but as she sat there with her mouth open and the most beautiful of all the brush strokes that nature ever done on the canvas of the miracle anstaunte, woke the boy and began to heap Parmetella with allegations, and he cried I must have seven years to endure this punishment cursed because have you been out of curiosity your nose in my secrets; go and do that yourself off, pack you out of my eyes and go back to your farmer Liesen; for thou ahnest not know what losing lucky you are. "With that, he disappeared like mercury, while the poor Parmetella, rigid and cold left the palace with fear, with bowed head. When she was but stepped out of the underground passage, she met a fairy who said to her, "Your suffering, my daughter hurt me in the deepest soul; because you're going unfortunate battle against bank and have to pass a hair wide bridge. Therefore, in order to forestall your risk, take these seven spindles, these seven figs, this cups with honey and these seven pairs of iron shoes and wander without rest, until they tear, then you're going on a balconies of a house seven women see the down spin from the top and the threads are wound on the dead bone. You know now what to do? Keep it very quiet and hidden, but always drawing, when a thread comes down, the bones out and insert it one coated with honey spindle on, with a fig instead of the button; because if they are to come up and taste the candy they say, 'Who sweetens our mouth, becoming known only sweet life' Having said this will be a talk after the other.> O thou who us these sweets have brought, let me see you, 'and you then have to answer>! I do not want; for ye devour me <Then they will reply, 'We do not eat you, as sure as God forbid us our spoons <but you do not stir you and stay calm on your site;.. therefore they will continue, 'We do not eat you, as sure as God forbid us our spit' but you behave yourself motionless, as if you were on the ground rooted;. then they will continue to talk, 'We do not eat you, as sure as God forbid us our brooms <but you they do not trust;. and if they should say, 'We do not eat you, so true to God our bucket forbid,' then you still keep your mouth shut and not muckse; until they finally say:..> 'As we God forbid Donne round flash, we do not eat you!' Then you climb up and be sure that they will not eat you "Once Parmetella had heard this, they began to, over hill and valley hike until ruptured after an interval of seven years, the iron shoes and they had arrived at a large house, where they saw on a balcony, the seven spinning females, and having acted in accordance with the rate of the fee and that finally, after they thousand feints and temptations had done at Donne round flash the oath, they went up, what the women said to her: "You shameful Bübin are the cause of our brother twice seven years away from us in the form of a Moor in that subterranean dwelling has lived; but was only unconcerned; because if you have also been able to put us through the oath a castle in front of the throat, you will nevertheless at the first opportunity, the old and the new pay bill along. But now do the following: hide, and if our mother comes up behind this trough home, would you readily devour, so see to it that you come behind their backs; pack what she did at her breasts, which she has such cross bags hanging over the shoulders and pull with all their might, with no more let go until she swears by Donne round flash, nothing to do you harm. "Parmetella as she was told, and after the witch in the fire scoop in the pliers, the spinning wheel, in the washboard, the pot board and had finally sworn by Donne round flash, Parmetella released her and stepped in front of the witch, whereupon they said to her, 'You've got me this time, Bübin; but look before you; because in the first wash you will be with soaped. "By now the witch so the opportunity to devour Parmetella as searched with candles, she took one day twelve bags of various legumes, as peas, giggle, lentils, vetch, green beans, beans, rice and lupins, they mingled with each other, and said to her: "here, take these legumes, you disgraceful wench, and read it to me from such that each crop is separately; if you but until tonight're not ready, so I consume you like a triple roll "Poor Parmetella sat down next to the bags and said, weeping. ,, O dear God, how me the golden root to the root of so great become tribulation; this time it's with me over; and because I saw a black face knows me now for all black before my eyes. Woe is me, my hour has come, I do not be helped; it seems to me even when I was the hideous witch between the teeth. There is no one to stand by me, no one is there to advise me there is no one to comfort me. "As she wailed so suddenly appeared like a bolt Donne circular flash that had stopped him by a curse imposed exile. Although he was full now anger against Parmetella, yet gave him his love for her no peace, and when he heard her utter such loud complaints, he asked her: "What's the matter, traitor that you so cry," What Parmetella? the bad treatment by his mother, as she had bent on it to make it a full end and devour it, told him lengthwise. "Calm down and take courage," said Donne round lightning, "because none of this will happen. "He also sprinkled all legumes to Earth, leaving a myriad ants come out, which immediately began to pile up the fruits individually so that Parmetella could gather up each genre for itself and fill in the bags. And when the witch came home and everything was ready, they came almost in despair and exclaimed, "Damn Donne round Lightning has played me this trick, but you shall not escape me so; therefore these coatings take here of mattress covers, for Twelve lower beds, and see to it that they fully evening feathers are today; or I will tear you to pieces. "The poor took the Bettziechen, sat on the ground and began to whine by all scratched and turned their eyes in two tears resources quite miserably. Again, however, appeared Donne round flash and said to her, "Do not cry, traitor, but let me just make I'll take care of you. But you solve you your hair on, wide the Bettziechen on the ground and begin to cry and cry and cry it out, that the king of the birds died, then you will see what happens. tat "Parmetella how her was told, and suddenly a cloud appeared of birds that darkened the air and beating were falling in heaps with the wings the springs so that the beds were full in less than an hour. And when the witch came home and saw this, they swelled with anger to such an extent that they almost burst, and they exclaimed: "Donne round flash it has set his mind to annoy me; fetch me but this and that when I did not yet so off wars again that they can not escape me, "Then she turned to Parmetella and said,". Run, rush to my sister and tell her to me Send instruments; because Donne round flash is married, and we want to celebrate a royal wedding party "At the same time she let the nurse say that if Parmetella came around the instruments, they should be equal to slaughter and cook. for they themselves would come to her to attend the banquet. And when Parmetella saw that her imposed lighter services, she was quite pleased because she thought the weather would now cheerful; But how blind but are often the people! - Meanwhile met her go Donne round flash of them, as soon thereafter losschreiten seeing asked, "Where are you going there, unhappy? Do not you know that you entgegeneilst your death, yourself forge your bonds, yourself, sharpening the knife, even shuffle the poison; for you will be sent to a witch, so they devour you. But I listen and be without fear. Take here this bread, this covenant hay and this stone; and if you anlangst my aunt in the house, a barking dog meat is lunging at you to bite you. But you shove his throat with this bun. After the dogs you'll see a horse run free, which turn out against you and you want to get under his hooves, give him but the federal hay, characterized you shackle his feet. Finally, you'll come to a door that is always up and strikes; therefore put this stone in front, thereby you will bring it to a halt. Then climb up where you to fry the witch with a small child in her arms and the fire around you'll find already lighted. The witch will say to you:> holding me a little child, and wait until I have the instruments brought down <However, it is only going to whet the Hauer and then bit by bit to tear you apart.. But you throw in the meantime the child without pity in the oven, because it's witches meat, take the instruments that stand behind the door and get yourself away before returning the witch; otherwise it's over to you. However, you notice that the instruments are housed in a case, you must not open if it is not to you very fare badly. "Parmetella did as her lover advised her, but she opened on the way home, the case in which were the instruments - because, all of a sudden, flew here a flute, there is a reed pipe, a pipe over here, over there up a bagpipe that made a thousand music in the air, while Parmetella with grief scratched his face. Meanwhile, the witch came back into the room, and when she no longer Parmetella vorfand, she went to a window and the door called to "crush the traitor dead," What replied the door: "Why should I do the poor evil? Through them I can ruhn finally "Then cried the witch to the horse"! If the hussy with your hooves dead, "But the horse replied:" If I would occur them, I feel remorse, they even gave me a bundle of hay ! "Finally called the witch's dog and said to him:"! Grit your Schelmin dead, "but the dog replied," Truly, I do not bite dead, yes gave me a big piece of bread "Parmetella but that, however, behind! the continued flown instruments herschrie, met Donne circular flash that she scolded duly and said to her: "Have you not learned at your expense, traitor, that you have brought you through your cursed curiosity in the great need in which you are"? so saying, he called the instruments by blowing the whistle brought about and closed it back into the case, where he said to Parmetella that they now the mother should bring. As this now Parmetella saw her, she cried with a loud voice. "Cruel fate, even my sister is repugnant to me, as it does not even have me this favor will do" Soon afterwards arrived the bride of her son, which is a true plague, a real misfortune, a harpy, a ghost, a horror, a monster, a monster of ugliness, while the bodily consumption was and by the flowers and Reiser, with whom she had been dressing up as a newly opened inn looked. The witch is now held to be a big party, and she was still quite full venom, she left the table next to a fountain set up and put the seven daughters, each with a torch in his hand, along with out Parmetella but gave them the two and also pointed it into place on the edge of the fountain, so that when she was sleepy, down plunge. While the food is now up and were worn and already started the heads to be warm, spoke Donne round flash, the very displeased felt before his bride to Parmetella: "Do you love me, traitor" What this replied: "More than me .. even "-" Well, if you love me, "said Donne round lightning," so give me a kiss "-" God forbid, "said Parmetella," this is far from me; you've got such a cute creature beside you, which may keep the sky you a hundred years in health and numerous offspring. "-" One sees what you're in for a silly thing and will stay if you lived eternally " now the bride said, "because you play the prude and want to give such a handsome man no kiss because I have to kiss me for a few chestnuts from a shepherds to their hearts content. "The groom was very toxic in these words, and swelled like a toad, so that he stuck the food in the throat, yet he put a good face on a bad game and swallowed the pill by set himself, to retaliate later and compensate for the bill. When they had now abgegessen he sent the mother and sisters, while he himself, the bride and Parmetella remained to go to bed. When he was now to take off the shoes of Parmetella, he said to his wife: "Have you been careful, dear female, as this arrogant thing refused to give me a kiss" - "She has" done wrong, said the bride, "you the refuse kiss because you are such a handsome man; for I have suffered me to kiss for a few chestnuts from a shepherd. "Donne round flash now could not last longer, but with flashes of anger and thunder of actions he took, because this speech had gone too far in his nose, a knife the bride stabbed and buried them in a hole that he made in the cellar. He then hugged Parmetella and said to her: "You are my jewel, you are the flower of women and the mirror of honor; look at me, therefore, with your eyes, give me your hand give me, me your mouth, approach me who you are my life, because I want to be yours, as long as the world exists. "So saying, he went with Parmetella to bed and joked with her until the sun fire horses pulls out of the water stable and lists the seeded Aurora fields to pasture. And when the witch with fresh eggs appeared, so the newlyweds should strengthen and the young woman said, "Blessed are those who are married and gets a law," she Parmetella but in the arms of her son was and also still heard what had happened, she hurried to her sister, to consider with her how she could create this thorn out of sight. However, she found that this was also crawled out of pain about their roasted in the oven daughter in the oven and that even the smell of burning pollute the whole neighborhood, what the witch fell into such despair that they so long with the head against the same a ram wall ran until she sprayed her brain. Donne round flash but reconciled Parmetella with his sisters out what they all led a happy and merry life and recognized the truth of the proverb: Patience overcomes everything.
The Gold Children	813	555	German	It was a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little cottage, and who earned their bread by fishing, and always lived from hand to mouth. It happened one day sat as the man in the water and threw out his net, that he drew out a fish entirely of gold. And when he looked at the fish, full astonishment, it began to speak and said, "Hark, Fischer, you throw me back into the water, I will change your little hut into a splendid castle. ' Then the fisherman answered, "What helps me a lock if I have anything to eat? ' The gold fish on 'and it should be taken care of, it will be a cupboard in the castle, if you aufschliessest the, shall be dishes of the most delicate meats, as much as you can desire.' 'If this is, "said the man,' I can do you a favor. ' 'Yes,' said the fish, 'but it is the condition that you discover any people in the world who it might be, where your fortune has come; you speak a single word, so everything vorbei.'Nun threw the man the wonderful fish back home into the water and left. but where else his tent had stood, there now stood an ancient castle. As he opened wide his eyes, entered, and saw his wife dressed in beautiful clothes, sitting in a splendid room. She was quite delighted and said, 'Man, how that has come at once? the good in my sight. ' 'Yes,' the man said, 'I like it too, but I'm hungry too powerful, gives me just what to eat.' The woman said, 'I do not find anything and white in the new house.' 'That is nothing,' said the man, 'I see yonder a great cupboard, just unlock it.' As she unlocked the closet, there stood cakes, meat, fruit, wine, and quite a bright prospect. The woman joyfully shouted 'heart, what do you desire?' and they sat down, ate and drank together. They had had enough, the woman asked, "But husband, whence come all these riches? ' 'Oh,' he replied, 'I do not ask why, I dare not tell you if someone I disclose it, so our happiness is gone again.' 'Well,' she said, "if I do not want to know, so sought ego not to know. ' but that was not in earnest, it left her no rest day and night, and she goaded her husband so long, until he come out said in the impatient, there would be anything from a wonderful golden fish he caught and for free again would have left. And the secret was out, and instantly disappeared the beautiful castle with the cupboard, and she sat back in the old man had Fischerhütte.Der of vornen begin to follow his former trade and fish. but luck would have it, he pulled out the golden fish again. "Listen," said the fish, 'when you throw me into the water again, and I will once more give you the castle with the cupboard full of roast and boiled meats; just hold on tight and betrayal not certainly, from whom you have, otherwise lost am back. ' 'I will take good care, "answered the fisherman, and threw the fish back into the water. At home everything was now back in its former magnificence, and the woman was overjoyed about happiness; but curiosity left her no peace but that they began to ask again after a few days, as it had come, and how he had managed it. The man was silent for a time shut it, but at last she made him so angry that he broke out, and betrayed the secret. At the moment the castle disappeared, and they sat back in the old cabin. 'Well hast dus' said the man, 'now we can re starving.' "Ah," the woman said, 'I want the wealth rather not if I do not know from whom they come; then I have no Ruhe.'Der man went fishing, and for a time it, it was no different, he took the goldfish for the third out. "Listen," said the fish, "I see very well, I might fall into your hands again and again, I take with home and cut me into six pieces, two of which give your wife to eat, two to your horse and bury two of them in the earth, so you will a blessing. ' The man took the fish home with, and did as he was told. And it happened that, two golden lilies sprang from the two pieces that were buried in the earth, and that the horse two golden foals got, and the fisherman's wife gave birth to two children, the whole golden waren.Die children grew up, were big and beautiful, and the lilies and horses grew with them. They said 'Father, we want to mount our golden steeds and travel out into the world.' But he answered sorrowfully, "How shall I bear it if you go away, and I did not know you had it? ' They said 'the two golden lilies remain here because you can see us; if they are fresh, then we are healthy; they are withered, we are ill; they fall to, so we're dead. ' They rode forth and came to an inn, in which were many people, and when they perceived the gold-children they began to laugh and jeer. Like the one heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not in the world, turned around and came back home to his father. But the other rode away and came to a large forest. And when he was about to enter, the people said 'it's not that you ride through, the wood is full of robbers who would ill treat you, and even if they see that you are golden, and your horse likewise, be they you kill. ' but he let himself not frightened, and said 'I must and will ride through.' Then he took bear skins and covered himself and his horse with the fact that there was nothing to see more of the gold, and rode fearlessly into the forest. When he had ridden a little so he could hear it in the bushes rustle and heard voices speaking together. From one side came cries 'there is one,' 'let him go, that's a bearskin, as poor and bare as a church mouse, what to do with it!' But from the other So the gold-child rode joyfully through the forest, and served him not Leid.Eines day he came to a village wherein he saw a girl who was so beautiful that he did not believe it could be a more beautiful in the world. And because he felt such a great love for him, so he went to him and said 'I love you with all my heart, will you be my wife?' But he also liked the girl so much that she agreed and said 'yes, I want to be your wife and be faithful to my life long.' Then they were together wedding, and just as they were in the greatest joy, the bride's father came home and saw when he that his daughter made wedding, he marveled, and said 'where's the groom?' They showed him the gold-child, but that had to have his bearskins. Then the father said wrathfully, "A vagabond shall never have my daughter, 'and wanted to kill him. Since he asked the bride what she could, and said, "He is my husband, and I have loved him dearly, 'until he settled finally appease. But however he did not kams from the thought that he arose early the next morning and his daughter wanted to see man, if he were a common ragged beggar. But as he looked, he saw a magnificent golden man in the bed, and the cast-off bear-skins lying on the ground. Then he went back and thought 'how good ists that I restrained my anger, but would a great iniquity begangen.'Dem golden child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag, and when he awoke in the morning, he said, to his wife, "I must go out hunting. ' She was uneasy, and she begged him to stay, saying 'You might easily encounter a great misfortune,' but he answered, "I will and must continue. ' Then he stood up and pulled out into the forest, and not long before a fine stag stopped in front of him, according to his dream. He aimed and was about to shoot him, but the deer ran away. He gave chase for about digging and bushes, and was not tired all day; but in the evening the stag vanished from his sight. And when the gold-child looked around, he stood in front of a small house where there sat a witch. He knocked, and a woman came out and asked, "What are you doing so late in the midst in the great forest? ' He said, "You have not seen deer ?, 'Yes,' she replied, 'I know the stag well," and a little dog that had come with her from the house, barked at the man violently. 'Will you keep silent, you odious toad, "he said," or I will shoot you dead.' Then the witch cried angrily, Why, my little dog you want to kill! ' and immediately transformed him, that he lay like a stone, and his bride awaited him in vain and thought 'it is certainly fulfilled what I'm so scared and did so heavy on your mind lag.'Daheim but the other brother was standing by the gold lilies, when suddenly one of them fell over. 'Oh God,' he said, 'my brother has happened to a great misfortune, I must away to see if I can possibly rescue him.' Then the father said, "Stay here, if I lose you, what shall I do? ' But he answered, "I will and must continue. ' As he sat on his golden horse, and rode forth and entered the great forest, where his brother lay turned to stone. The old witch came out of her house and called him and wanted to entrap him also, but he did not go near her, said, "I shoot you down if you're not my brother back to life. ' She did so reluctantly sies also did on the stone with your finger, and he was immediately restored to his human shape. The two gold-children rejoiced when they saw each other again, kissed and caressed each other, and rode away together out of the forest, the one to his bride, the other home to his father. Then the father said, "I knew that you rescued your brother had, for the golden lily again stood up at once and has fortgeblüht. ' Then they lived happily, and all prospered with them until their death.
The Cicada and the Ant	4452	280A	German	The cricket that langzirpt the summer 'and sang, suffered because now threatening the winter' hard time and bitter distress: Not the smallest worms only, and flies a trace and with hunger, weeping softly, she crept to the neighbor Ant, and implores' them in their need to leihn her a piece of bread until the summer again return. 'Listen', "she says," on barbecue honor before harvest nor I bezahl'Zins you and capital. "the ant as some liebenLeut 'do not like to give their money, asks' the Borrower: "In the summer, tell but what were you doing there?" "night and day have I ergötztdurch my singing all Leut'" "through your singing.? Very pleased! You know what? Then dance now! "
Lean Lisa	1609	1430	German	Very different from the lazy Harry and fat Trina, who never let anything disturb their peace, thought Lean Lisa. They cremated away from morning until evening and invited to her husband, the long Lenz so much work that he had heavier to carry than an ass with three sacks. But it was in vain everything they had nothing and came to nothing. One night as she lay in bed and could scarcely move a limb fatigue, they left not fall asleep but the mind. She joined her husband with her elbow in the side and said, "you obey Lenz what I have been thinking:? if I found a florin, and would given a me, so I wanted a borrow it, and you should also give me one more: as soon as I the four guilders would have together, I wanted to buy a heifer '. Pleased the husband quite good, 'although I do not know,' he said, 'how do I to get the florin, which you have given to do with me, but if you still get the money together, and you can buy a cow, so do you like if you run your plan. ' 'I am happy' he added, 'if the cow brings a calf, I shall often get to refresh me a drink of milk.' 'The milk is not for you,' said the woman, 'we let the calf suck to make it big and bold, and we can sell it well.' 'Of course,' replied the man, 'but we take a little milk but that does not matter.' 'Who taught you deal with cows?' the woman said, 'it does harm or not, I do not want it: and if you stand on your head, you'll get a drop of milk. You long Lenz, because you're not satisfied, by you think you were going to eat up what I earn with difficulty. ' "Wife," said the man, 'shut up, or I will give you a mouth pocket.' 'What,' she cried, 'you want to threaten me, thou glutton, thou rascal, thou lazy Harry.' She was just lte his hair fall, but the long Laurence got up, grabbed with one hand, the skinny arms of Lean Lisa together with the other he pressed her on the pillow, let's head to scold and held it for so long , was asleep until it against excessive fatigue. Whether it the next morning upon awakening continued to quarrel, or whether she went out to look for the florin which wanted to find her, I do not know.
The heavenly wedding	1959	767	German	Suddenly she heard a poor farm boy in the church as the pastor said, "Whosoever will come into the kingdom of heaven must always go straight ahead. ' As he arose, and went all the time, always straight, without departing, over hill and dale. At last he was on his way to a big city, and in the middle of the church, where just service was held. As he saw all the glory, he said that now he would have arrived in heaven, sat down and was glad of heart. When the service was over and the clerk go it was said, he replied, "No, I do not go out again, I'm glad I'm finally in heaven, 'Then the clerk went to the priest and told him that it would be a child in , the church, which did not want to back out because it believed it would be in heaven. The priest said, 'If he believes that, and we will leave it there.' Then he went and asked if he had any inclination to work. 'Yes,' replied the boy, to the work he was used to, but from heaven he would not back out. Now he remained in the church, and looked as if he, like the people to the Mother of God image of the Child, which was cut from wood came, knelt and prayed, he thought 'that's God,' and said, "Hark you, dear God, what are you skinny! certainly let you starve the people: but I will every day give you half my food, 'From now on, he brought the picture every day half of his food, and the picture also began to enjoy the food. How were around a few weeks, noticed the people that the image grew, thick and strong, and wondered greatly. The pastor also could not do realize stayed in the church and went to the little ones, because he saw the boy his bread with the Mother of God announced and this also annahm.Nach some time the boy became sick and came eight days not out of bed; but as he could get up again, was his first, he brought his food of the Mother of God. The priest followed him and heard him said, "Dear God, do not take it amiss that I you have not achieved anything so long: but I was sick and could not get up, 'Then answered him the picture and said," I have your good viewed sake which is enough for me; Next Sunday thou shalt with me to the wedding to come, 'The boy was delighted and told the priest, who asked him to go and ask the image if he should come along. 'No,' replied the picture, 'you alone,' The pastor wanted to prepare him first and give him communion, which the boy was happy; and next Sunday, when the host came to him, he fell down and died, and was at the eternal wedding.
The bright sun brings it to light	1096	960	German	A tailor's traveled the world on his craft around, and he could even find a job, and poverty was so great with him, that he had not a farthing to live. In the time he met on the way a Jew, and he thought that would have a lot of money with him, and pushed God out of his heart, went to him and said, "Give me your money or I'll kill you. ' Then said the Jew 'gives me life, I have no money and no more than eight farthings.' But the tailor said, "you've got money, and we want it to," and used violence and beat him until he was close to death. And as the Jew was dying, he said the last word, "The bright sun will bring it to light !, and died with it. The tailor into his pocket and was looking for money, but he did not find more than eight farthings, as the Jew had said. Then he grabbed him up, carried him behind a bush and moved on to his craft. As he was now traveled long time, he came to a city with a master work, who had a beautiful daughter, with whom he fell in love and married her and lived in a good and happy Ehe.Über long as they had two children died father-in-law, and the young people kept house alone. One morning, as the man sat on the table in the window, the woman brought him his coffee, and when he it had been poured into the lower shell and was about to drink as the sun shone on it and the reflection flashed up on the wall so back and forth and made circles on it. Then the tailor looked up and said 'yes, the wills like to bring to light, and can not bear!' The woman said, "Oh, dear husband, what's that? what do you mean by that?' He replied, 'I can not tell you.' And she said, 'if you love me then you will have it to me saying,' and her most affectionate words, learn it sollts no man again, and left him no peace. As he said, many years ago, as he on the tramp quite worn out and without money, had he killed a Jew, and the Jew had in the last agonies of death pronounced the words 'bring the bright sun will the day!' want just like to bring now hätts the sun in the day and would have flashed on the wall and made circles, they had neglected but failed. He then asked them nor particularly, never to tell it, or he would lose his life, and she did promise. When he had sat down to work, she went to her friend and confided her story, but she was never to repeat it to anyone; but before three days passed, it did the entire city, and the tailor was brought to trial and directed was. Then she brought but the bright sun of the day.
The wise farmer's daughter	897	875	German	There was once a poor peasant who had no land, only a small house, and one daughter, Then said the daughter 'we should ask the Lord King for a bit Rottland.' Then the king heard of their poverty, he presented them with a piece lawn, the chopped her and her father to, and wanted a bit of grain and the way to sow it. When they had the field almost around, so they found a mortar made of pure gold in the ground. "Listen," said the father to the girl, "as our lord the King has been so gracious and presented us with the field, we must give him this mortar in it. ' The daughter, however, would not consent, and said, "Father, if we have the mortar without having the Stösser not 'we shall have to get the pusher, so better say nothing.' He will ye not obey, took the mortar, carried it to the king and said that he had found in the wood, if he wanted to accept it as a present. The king took the mortar, and asked if he had found nothing. 'No,' replied the farmer. Then the king said he must now bring even the pusher. The peasant said they had not found; but that helped him as much as ers would have said in the wind, he was put in prison, and was to remain sitting there until the pusher would have brought in. The servants had him daily water and bring bread, so what you get in prison, when they heard how the man as always crying, "oh, I should have listened to my daughter! oh, oh, I should have listened to my daughter !, As the servant went to the king and said that, as the prisoner as always crying, "Oh, if I had but listened to my daughter! ' and did not eat or drink. Then he ordered the servants to bring the prisoner ingen br before him, and there asked the Lord King why he was always crying, "Ah, would have, I listened to my daughter! ' 'What did she say your daughter?' 'Yes, she has spoken, I should not bring the mortar, or I must also make the pusher.' 'Have you such a clever daughter, then she let her come here.' So she had to appear before the King, who asked her if she really was so wise, and said he would set her a riddle if she could guess that, he wanted to marry her. And she said the same, yes, she would guess it. Then the king said, 'Come to me not clothed, not naked, not riding, not walking, not in the way, not out of the way, and if you can, I want to marry you.' And she went, and withdrew from splinter naked because she was not dressed, and took a great fishing net, and got into it and wrapped it all around him because she was not naked: and she hired an ass, and tied the asses the net to its tail, in which he dragged away she had and was not riding nor: but the donkey they had in the ruts haul, so they only with the big toe came to earth, and was not in the way and not out of the way. And when she arrived so said the king, she would have taken the mystery, and it would have all been fulfilled. As he let her father released from the prison, and took her as his wife and told her all the royal possessions an.Nun were some years were over, went as the Lord King once on the parade as it came to pass that farmers used their cars in front of the castle, who sold wood; some had urged oxen and some horses. There was a farmer who had three horses, one of them got a young foal that ran away and lay down between two oxen which were in front of the car. And when the peasants came together, they began to quarrel, to throw and make noise, and the Ochsenbauer wanted to keep the foal, saying had the ox hättens: and the other said no, had his horse had, and it would be. The quarrel came before the king, and he did the saying where the colt would have been as it should stay; and so bekams the Ochsenbauer, but Dems did not belong. Then the other went away, crying and complaining about his foal. Now he had heard that lady the Queen was so gracious, because it would have come from poor peasant folks, so he went to her and asked her if she could not help him that his foal back again. She said 'yes, if you promise me that you do not want to tell me, will you say ego. Tomorrow morning, when the King parades the guard, so you puts down the middle of the street, where he come, must take a great fishing-net and pretend to be fishing; go on fishing, and empty out the net as if Hers fully would have, 'and told him what he was to say if he was questioned by the king. So the farmer stood there the next day and fished on a dry place. As the king passed by, and saw that, he sent his messenger to ask what the stupid man was. Since he replied 'I fish.' The messenger asked how he could fish when there would be no water. Said the farmer 'so gu t as an ox to get a filling, as best I can fish on dry land.' The messenger went back and brought the king the answer, as he left the farmer the right to come and told him that he would not be, by whom he had? The peasant must confess the same. The farmer would not do so, and said always, God forbid he! he'd have it by itself. They laid him on a heap of straw, and beat him and tormented him so long known to ers that he had got from the Queen. When the king came home, he told his wife, 'why are you so wrong with me, I do not want you to wife: your time is up, go back down, where you came from, thy peasant's hut.' But he allowed her one, she might take the dearest and best thing she knew, and that was she dismissed. She said 'yes, dear husband, if you command so I will do it,' and fell on him and kissed him and said she would take leave of him. Then she left a strong sleeping potion come to drink farewell to him: the king took a big train, they drank but just a little. He soon fell into a deep sleep, and when she saw this, she called a servant and took a beautiful white linen cloth and wrapped him in there, and the servant had him in a cart to the door wearing, and drove them it home in her little house. She laid him in her own little bed, and he slept one day and one night without awakening, and when he woke up, he looked around and said, 'Oh God, where am I?' He called his attendants, but no one was there. At last his wife came to his bed and said, "Dear Mr. King, you told me I should take the dearest and most of the castle, now I have nothing more precious and dear than yourself, because I've taken you. ' Rose to the King tears in his eyes, and he said, "Dear woman, d u shall be mine and I yours, 'and she took back with him to the royal palace and had to marry her again; and they will probably still be alive to this day.
Clever Else	327	1450	German	It was a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. When she was grown up, the father said: "We want to marry her." - "Yes," said the mother, "if only one that would consent to have her!" Finally came from a distance, whose name was Hans and asked for them; but he made it a condition that Clever Else should also quite clever. "Oh," said the father, "which has twist in the head," and the mother said, "Oh, that looks through the wind in the street and hear the flies cough." - "Yes," said Hans, "if it does not turn out, so I do not take them." When they were sitting at the table and had eaten, the mother said, "Else, go into the cellar and draw some beer" Then Clever Else took the pitcher from the wall, went to the basement and opened the go obediently to the cover, so that you would not even long time. When she was down, she took a stool and stood it in front barrel, so they do not have to bend down and her back is not it woe did and unexpected damage would take. Then she put the jug in front of him and turned the tap on, and during the time that the beer was running, she wanted but her eyes do not let idle, saw the top up on the wall and saw, after much back and Herschauen a pick-ax just above to which the masons since accidentally had let stuck. Then Clever Else began to cry and said, "If I get Hans, and we have a child, and this is big, and we send the child to the basement, that it falls here beer to tap into, so his pick-ax on his head and kill it dead. " As they sat and cried and screamed with all his might of impending disaster. The above waiting for the drink, but Clever Elsie still did not come. Then the woman said to the maid: "You go down to the cellar and see where Elsie is!" The maid went and found her sitting and screaming in front of the cask. "Else, why are you weeping?" asked the maid. "Oh," she replied, "should not I cry? If I get Hans, and we have a child, and that's great, and it here to draw beer, perhaps the pickaxe may fall on his head and kill it dead. " The maid said: "What we have a clever Elsie!" sat down beside her and began to weep over the misfortune. did not return after a while, as the maid, and the upstairs more thirsty were, the man said to the servant: "You go down to the cellar and see where Elsie and the girl is!" The boy did so because sat Clever Elsie and the maid, and both cried together. Then he asked, "What are you crying for?" - "Oh," said Elsie, "should not I cry when I get Hans, and we have a child, and that's great, and it here to draw beer, the pickaxe might fall on his head and kill it dead. " And the servant said: "What we have a clever Elsie!" sat down beside her and began loudly to howl. Up they waited for the servant, but as he did not come, the man said to the woman: "You go down to the cellar and see where Elsie is" The woman went down and found all three in groaning, and inquired the cause; since you told the Else also that her future child would probably be killed by the pickaxe when it would be great only and should draw the beer, and the pick-ax fell down. Then said the mother likewise, "Oh, we have a clever Elsie!" sat down and wept. The man upstairs waited a little longer, but when did not return his wife and his thirst constantly increased, he said, "I have now themselves in the basement go and see where Elsie is." But when he came to the basement and all were sitting and weeping together and he heard the reason that the child that Else might guilty, they might even bring to the world and by the pickaxe could be killed if it is just the time when they fell down, including were sitting, drawing beer, when he cried: "What a clever Elsie!" sat down and wept. The groom was long up alone because no one wanted to come back, he thought: "They are waiting for you downstairs, you also have to go and see what they're up to." When he came down, sat there fünfe lamenting and crying miserably, an always better than the other. "What a misfortune is it done?" asked he. "Oh, dear Hans," said Elsie, "if we marry and have a child, and it is big, and we send it perhaps here to draw beer, can it indeed the pickaxe which is up there stuck, if they should fall down on his head to keep it that are; we should not weep "? - "Well," said Hans, "more understanding is not necessary for my budget, because you're such a clever Elsie, I want you," grabbed her by the hand and took her up and took her in marriage ihr.Als they Hans had for a while, he said, "wife, I am going out to work and earn money, you go into the field and cut the corn that we have bread." - "Yes, my dear Hans, I will do it." And after Hans was gone she cooked herself some nice stew, and took him into the field. When she came to the field she said to herself, "What am I doing cutting I first, or I ess ore Hey, I want to eat first?". Now they ate their pot of porridge, and when she was thick enough, she spoke again: "What am I doing cutting I first, or sleep I ehr Hei, I will sleep first?". Then she lay down in the corn and fell asleep. Hans was not long coming to the house, but the Else wanted, as he said. "What I have a clever Elsie that is so busy that she does not even come home and eat" But when she still stayed away and there was evening, Hans went out to see what they would cut. But it was cut anything, but it was in the grain and went to sleep. Since Hans haste home and fetched a bird with small clamps and hung it around them; and she was still sleeping on. Then he ran home, the front door shut and sat down in his chair and worked. Finally, when it was already quite dark, Clever Else woke, and got up as if it rattled around them, and the bells were ringing at every step she took. As frightened her, was mistaken if she was really clever Elsie and said, "Is it I or am I not?" but she did not know what she should answer it and stood for a time doubtful. Finally she said, I will go home and ask if it's me, or whether it's me not being's indeed know. She ran in front of their door, but it was closed. As they knocked on the window and shouted: "Hans is inside the Else?" - "Yes," answered Hans, "she is in." Since startled her, and said: "Oh God, it's me not," and went to another door; but when the people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open, and she could get in nowhere. So she ran away beyond the village, and no one saw her again.
The clever people	990	1384	German	One day a peasant took his good hazel stick out of the corner and said to his wife, "Trina, I am going across country, and shall not return for three days. When the cattle-dealer and in time with us will buy our three cows, you may strike them, but no different than for two hundred dollars, less, do you hear? ' 'Go on in God's name,' the woman answered, 'I will manage that.' 'Yes, you!' said the man, 'you have fallen as a little kid once on the head, you depend up to this hour. But I tell you, you do anything foolish, I will make your back black and blue, and without color, merely with the stick I have in my hand, and the coloring shall last a whole year, you can leave you.' So the man went his Wege.Am next morning came the cattle dealers, and the woman did not have to make a lot of words with him. When he had seen the cows and heard the price, he said 'I like to give as much as they are worth between brothers. I want to take the animals the same. ' He made her go from the chain and drove them out of the stable. As he was of the yard addition, it took the woman's sleeve and said, "You must give me the two hundred thalers now, or I can not let you go. ' 'Right,' the man replied, 'I have just forgotten to buckle on my money. But do not worry, you shall have security until I pay. Two cows I take with me, and the third I let you back, so you have a good pledge. ' The woman lit the one she left the man with his cows pull off and thought 'how pleased Hans will be when he sees that I've done it so cleverly.' The farmer came the third day, as he had said, and at once inquired whether the cows were sold. 'Of course, dear John, "replied the woman,' and as you said, for two hundred dollars. So much they are hardly worth it, but the man took them without question. ' 'Where is the money?' asked the farmer. 'The money that I did not,' replied the woman, 'he had happened to forget his money belt, but it gets bring soon; he left good security. ' 'What pledge?' the man asked. 'One of the three cows, which he does not get more until he has paid the rest. I made it wise, I have the smallest retained the fewest eats on. ' The man became angry, raised his stick in the air and wanted her so give the promised painting. Suddenly he let it sink and said, 'you are the most stupid goose that ever waddled on God's earth, but I pity you. I want to go on the road and three days to wait long, if I can find someone who is still stupider than you are. Succeeds it to me, you shall be free, I find him not, you shall receive your well-deserved reward without any discount erhalten.'Er went out to the large road, sat on a rock and waited for what was to come. Then he saw a waggon coming towards him, and a woman standing in the middle of it, instead of sitting on the bundle of straw which was lying beside, or walking near the oxen and leading them. The man thought 'that's probably a how you seek,' jumped up and ran in front of the car back and forth like that is a not very sharp. 'What do you want, my friend,' the woman said to him, 'I do not know you, where do you come from?' 'I fell from the sky,' replied the man, 'and do not know how can I get back again; You can not go up me ?, 'No,' the woman said, 'I do not know the way. But if you come out of the sky, so you can send me say, how is my man who's been there for three years: You've seen him certainly '? 'I have seen him, but it can not all people go. He guards the sheep, and the sheep give him a lot of trouble jumping on the hills and get lost in the wilderness, and there he must chase and drive them together again. Torn as it is, and the clothes will soon fall off his body. Schneider does not exist there, St. Peter lets in not, as you know from the fairy tale. ' 'Who would have thought it?' cried the woman, 'You know what? I will fetch his Sunday coat which is still at home hanging in the closet, he can wear that with honor. You are so good and take it with you. ' 'This is probably not,' replied the farmer, 'clothes must not bring into the sky, they are taken away at the gate.' 'Listen to me,' the woman said, 'Yesterday I sold my fine wheat and a pretty get money for it, I want to send him. If you hide the purse in his pocket, so it gets no one aware of it. ' "If you can not be otherwise, 'said the peasant,' I will do you that favor. ' 'One can only sit there,' she said, 'I want to go home and fetch the purse; I'll be back here. I do not sit down on the bundle of straw, but stand up in the car, so hats cattle easier. ' She drove her oxen, and the farmer thought 'that has talent for folly, if she really brings the money, my wife of happiness can say, because they get no beating.' It was not long before she came, brought the money and put it in his own pocket. Before she went away, she thanked him a thousand times for his Gefälligkeit.Als the woman again came home, she found her son, who had returned from the field. She told him what she had found out for unexpected things, and then added, 'I'm happy right that I have found the opportunity to send my poor man something, who would have imagined that he would suffer in heaven for want of anything? ' The son was in the greatest astonishment, 'Mother,' he said, 'so one out of heaven does not come every day, I'm getting the same and see that I can find the man, who must tell me, had there looks and pointed going to work. ' He saddled the horse and rode off in haste. He found the peasant who was sitting under a willow tree and the money that was in the bag, wanted to include. 'Have not you seen the man,' cried the youth to him, 'who has come from heaven?' "Yes," answered the peasant, "he has set out on his way back and up the hill went there, from where ers has little closer. You still can it catch up if you ride fast '' Ah, 'said the boy,' I have been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here has completely worn me: You know the man, be so kind as to get on my horse and persuaded him to come here. ' 'Aha,' said the farmer, 'that's one that does not wick in his lamp. 'Why should I not you do a favor?' saying he rose up and rode off in a quick trot. The boy remained seated until night fell, but the farmer did not return. 'Certainly,' he thought, 'the man from heaven great hurry and had refused to return, and the farmer has given him the horse to take to my father.' He went home and told his mother what had happened: the horse had he sent his father so he does not need to be always running. 'You've done well,' she replied, 'you've got young legs and canst walk gehen.'Als the farmer had reached home, he put the horse in the stable beside the cow pawned, then went to his wife and said, "Trina, as your luck, I found two who are still sillier fools than you. come this time you without a beating, I will store it up for another occasion ' Then he lit his pipe, sat down in the grandfather chair and said, "That was a good deal, for two lean cows get a sleek horse plus a big bag full of money. If stupidity always einbrächte much, so I wanted to keep it in honor. So thought the peasant, but you are certainly prefer the simple.
the ear of corn	1842	779	German	From ancient times himself still walked as a god on earth, as the fertility of the soil was much greater than it is now: then, the ears did not bear fifty or sixty, but four to fünfhundertfältig. Then the corn grew on stalk from the bottom to the very top as long as he was so long was the ear. But as the people are in abundance they do not value the blessings more that comes from God, are indifferent and careless. One day a woman went to a cornfield over, and her small child running beside her, fell into a puddle and dirtied her frock. As the mother tore off a handful of the beautiful ears of corn, and cleaned the dress. As the gentleman who just came by, saw this, he was angry and said, "from now on will bear no more ears the stalks of corn: the people are no longer worthy of the heavenly gift. ' The bystanders who heard it, terrified, and fell to his knees and begged that he would like a little leave on the stalks if they themselves do not deserve, but the innocent chickens because who would otherwise starve. The Lord, who foresaw their suffering, had compassion and granted the request. So once the ears were left as they now grow.
the crystal ball	1869	302	German	There was once an enchantress, who had three sons who loved each other as brothers but the old woman did not trust them and thought they wanted to rob her power. So she changed the eldest into an eagle, which had to dwell in the rocky mountains, and was often seen in the sky in large circles up and down floating. The second, she changed into a whale, who lived in the deep sea, and you could only see how he sometimes threw a powerful jet of water into the air. Both had their human form only two hours each day. The third son, because he was afraid she might change him into a traveling animal into a bear or a wolf, went secretly away. He had heard that a cursed princess were sitting on the castle of the golden sun, which was waiting for salvation: but it would any dare because his life, twenty youths had already died a miserable death, and now only one other, then no more must come , And as his heart was without fear, he made the decision to visit the castle of the golden sun. He had already traveled a long time and had been unable to find it, when he came into a great forest, and did not know where the exit was. Suddenly he saw in the distance two giants, who waved her hand, and when he came to them, they said, "We are quarreling about a cap, and it is to belong, and as we are equally strong, neither can the others overwhelm the small men are cleverer than we are, so we will leave the decision to you. ' 'How can you worry about an old hat arguing ?, said the youth. 'You do not know what properties it has, it is a wishing, whosoever puts it on, which can hinwünschen wherever he wants, and right now he's there.' 'Give me the cap, said the youth, "I want to go a short distance, and then when I call you, run a race, and who is with me at first, he should belong.' He put it on and went away, and thought of the king's daughter, forgot the giants and always went weiter.Einmal he sighed heartily and cried, "I would be on the castle of the golden sun! ' And no sooner were the words from his lips as he stood on a high mountain before the gate of the Schlosses.Er entered and went through all the rooms until he found a few hours the princess. But how shocked he was when he looked at her: she had an ashen-gray face full of wrinkles, redness of eyes and red hair. 'Are you the king's daughter, whose beauty the whole world praises?' he exclaimed. 'Oh,' she said, 'this is not my form, human eyes can only see me in this ugliness, but so you know what I look like not misled, then look in the mirror, which can be showing you my image as it is in truth. ' She gave him the mirror in his hand, and he saw it as the image of the most beautiful virgin who was in the world, and saw her rolled for sorrow, tears are on her cheeks. And he said, 'how can you be saved? I fear no danger. ' She said, "who gets the crystal ball, and holds it to the sorcerer, will destroy his power, and I return to my true form. Oh, 'she added,' so many have already gone to meet death, and you young blood, you make me sorry if you embark in such great danger. ' 'Me can not stop,' he said, 'but tell me what I must do.' 'You shall know everything,' said the Princess, 'if you're going down the mountain on which the castle stands, a wild bull will stand below by a spring, which you have to fight. And when you succeed to kill him, a fiery bird will rise out of him carrying in his body a red-hot egg, and is in the egg yolk as the crystal ball. but he can not drop the egg until it is forced to, but it falls on the ground, it ignites and burns everything in its vicinity, and melts the egg itself, and with it the crystal ball, and all your trouble will have been in vain .'Der youth went down to the spring, where the bull snorted and shouted at him. After a long struggle he pushed his sword into the body, and it fell down. Instantly arose from it the Firebird and wanted to fly away, but the eagle, brother of the youth who daherzog between the clouds' crashed down on him, he chased after the sea and pushed him with his beak, he that in the let fall distress the egg. but it did not fall into the sea, but on a fisherman's hut which stood on the shore, and began at once to smoke and was up in flames. Then arose in the sea gigantic waves streamed over the hut and subdued the fire. The other brother, the whale, had come swimming and the water had driven up. was when the fire extinguished, the youth sought for the egg and happily found it: it was not melted, but the shell was broken by being so suddenly cooled by the cold water, and he could see the crystal ball unhurt herausnehmen.Als the youth to the went magician and held it before him, the latter said, 'my power is destroyed, and you're now the King of the castle of the golden sun. Even your brothers you can the human form in order to return. ' Then the youth hastened to the king's daughter, and came when he was in her room, she was standing there in full splendor of her beauty, and joyfully they exchanged their rings together.
the Kitchen	3385	709	German	"Faith," said the prince, "every man must behave as befits him, the Lord as Lord, the servant as servant and the constable as a constable; because is like a Straßenbube who wants to be like a prince, laughed at, so losing a prince who is like a Straßenbube in universal respect. "After he said this, he turned to Paola and asked them, to begin its course, after which they coughed only and scratched his head and thus began: jealousy is to tell the truth, one does bad dish, a dizziness that makes turn the head, a fever that heats the blood, a draft, the cold the body, a diarrhea that much necessity is, in a word, a disease that robs sleep, acting appetite, disturbs the peace and shortens life, a stinging snake, rottenness, a poisonous Galle, a consuming cold, a drenching rain, a troublemaker in the joys of love, a troublemaker love lust and a persistent storm in the sea of ​​love happiness by never springs from something good out of it, as it did even a will vacate after her heard the following story. There once was a Baron of dark forest, cultivated with their playmates of the same age always umherzuscherzen in the garden which still youthful sister. When they found a full-blown rose one day, they agreed that whoever could jump from them about it, without touching any, should carry a certain price. While now sought drüberzuspringen so wanton girls, all clinked glasses, and not made it, as it should; only Cilla, the sister of Baron, which went back a little, took such a start that she just got off it, and since they nevertheless it swooped down a sheet, she was and turned so quickly that she picked it unnoticed by the earth there it was swallowed and so the price. And they were still not passed three days so she felt pregnant, what she almost passed out in pain by knew that she had become involved with anyone yet nibbled somewhere, and therefore could not explain why her of body rounded up. They therefore went to some friend of hers fairies, who said to her, it would be subject to even no doubt that this would be the consequences of intricate rose petal. therefore Cilla tried to hide her corpulence as much as possible, so that, when the hour came, where they could lay their burden, gave birth in secret a pretty daughter, which she called Lisa and immediately sent to the fairies. Each of these now to the girl a magic blessing, the last of them gave, however, was that hasten quickly to see the child, craned unfortunately the foot and let out pain here about the curse of that when Lisa once in the age of seven years would be combed from the mother, it should stick leave their forgetfulness of the comb in the hair and Lisa die by it. Therefore, once the appointed time was there, everything as it was determined had happened, so shut the mother, who came upon this misfortune into the deepest despair and broke out into the bitterest complaints, finally the body of her little daughter in seven crystal boxes, sat this then in the farthest room of the castle and carried the keys to the same always with you in your pocket. Since her but by the pain that this accident caused her, life was to the dregs trickled so she let his brother come to him and said to him: "I feel, dear brother, like the death of me gradually with draws its hook to himself, and therefore you leave all the frippery that I possess, so that now you will henceforth be his master and owner. Only I beg you, I promise that you never open the key but even carefully in your desk cancel mayest. "The brother, who sincerely loved the room, the key I give you here, gave her the sacred promise to fulfill their wish, which she said: "Farewell, I sail from" when, however, her brother had married after the lapse of a year and once invited to hunt, his wife the care recommended when leaving for home, where he especially her. inculcated, not to open the chamber to which the key lay in his desk, he had hardly turned his back, and even his wife, driven by suspicion, spurred by jealousy and curiosity, the natural dowries of women, irritated , the key took unlocked the room and opened the boxes through which they saw shine through the damsel. but this appeared to be asleep and had grown in the meantime, along with the boxes so that the jealous woman immediately cried out at the sight of this beautiful maiden, "Bravo, my word! purely from the outside, from the inside a pig. -. So that was the concern that the room would not open, so you do not see the idol that he worships and so carefully kept in the boxes "So saying, she grabbed the girl by the hair and pulled her up, such that the comb it fell to the ground and Lisa came back to herself as she cried out: "mother, mother" - "just wait," said the baroness, "I'll mother you and bevatern" and by being angry how! an Ethiopian, biting like a dog who has thrown, and poisonous as a snake, she cut her at once the hair off, beat her in a very pathetic way, put on her ragged clothes, they showered every day with bumps on the head, with bruises around the eyes and welts on his face and hit her so bloody mouth that she looked as if she had eaten cherry soup. But as soon as the man came home and saw her mistreat so the girl, he asked her who this would be, then, what his wife said it would be a Negro slave, her cousin had sent her and their stubbornness should they break through beatings feed. It now met once that the baron went to the next town to the fair and all the inhabitants of the house without even pass the cats, asked what he should bring each of them, and by the one thing, some another wished the had he last came also to the kitchen maid; his wife, however, behaved like nonsensical and exclaimed: "Yes, is not it, even this black Vettel is part of it, it is as much as all of us, and we are not over it! Send her to the devil out of the game and the nasty witch can not put such a conceit in the head! "- The Baron, however, which was very good-natured, insisted that the kitchen maid should express a wish, at last she said "I want nothing more than a doll, a knife and a piece of pumice; but if you forgettest this, I wish that you can not get away over the first river that you encounter on the road should. "After the Baron now had all things except those which his niece wished purchased and arrives at a river was, stones and trees carried from the mountains into the sea, just as if it were piled up from its huge, wonderful walls, so it was not possible for the Baron to pass him. Therefore, he remembered the curse of the kitchen maid, turned back, bought everything correctly and informed, reached home, the purchased goods under all residents of. But as soon as Lisa had received their gifts, they went into the kitchen, the doll placed in front of him and began to whine and complain, by telling the whole story of their sufferings these patched rags, as if she were talking to a living person , However, when she saw that she did not answer her, she took the knife and said, as she sanded on the pumice "Now you answer me the same if not, I thrust me through with this knife, and then have all the fun one end "to which the doll, little by little like a bagpipe swelling, finally answered:"! Well, I tell you that I've heard you better than a deaf "by but this piece so on playing a few days and the Baron, whose office rooms densely lay next to the kitchen, once again heard this plaintive sounds, he peeped through the keyhole and saw that Lisa told the doll, as her mother away jumped over the rose, ate the leaf and the fact it was born, as she herself thereon endowed with magical blessings, cursed by the fairy, left with the comb in her hair, taken from the dead sleep, closed in seven cases and has been placed in the chamber, as then the mother died, the key to the Brude been handed over, went on the hunt and the jealousy of the woman wakes up, they then kicked the command of the man in the room in which it was even cut off her hair, treats her like a slave and a thousand other r these torment would have been inundated, and that Lisa by saying so and cried to the doll said, "Answer me, doll, if not, I kill myself with this knife," where they grind the knife and already pierce wanted blew up as the Baron with a foot push the door, snatched the knife from his hand and after he had heard the story cumbersome and embraces the Virgin as his niece, brought from the house of one of his relatives so that they are at the same one should recover little, because by the cruel treatment that Medea heart she was very run down. But when Lisa after a few months again began to look like a goddess, he left them one day come to his house, saying she was a niece of him, held then a great feast, and called from the repealed panel Lisa all their history of suffering and how cruel they had been treated by his wife, telling so that all guests about burst into tears, whereupon he chased his wife out of the house and sent her back to her father, but his niece was a man who was true to the desire of their hearts so that they could clearly: If the need is greatest, is the Help 'at the next.
The life time	1688	173	German	When God had created the world and wanted to determine all creatures their life, the ass came and asked, 'Lord, how long shall I live?' "Thirty years," replied God, 'you is that right?' 'Ah, Lord, answered the ass,' that's a long time. Think of my painful existence: from morning to night wear heavy loads, drag sacks of corn to the mill, that others may eat bread, as encouraged with nothing with punches and kicks and foot to be refreshed! adopted me a part of the long term. ' Then God had pity and relieved him of eighteen years. The donkey went away comforted, and the dog appeared. 'How long will you live?' God said to him, 'the asses are thirty years too much, but you'll be happy with it.' 'Sir,' replied the dog, "is your will? Consider what I have to run that does not keep my feet so long out; and I've only lost my voice for barking and my teeth for biting, what I left but to run from one corner to another and growl? ' God saw that he was right, and issued him twelve years. Then came the monkey. "Thou wilt certainly live thirty years willingly? ' And the Lord said to him, 'you do not need to work as the ass and the dog, and are always in good spirits.' 'Oh Lord,' he replied, 'it looks like, but is different. When it rains porridge I have no spoon. I will always make funny jokes, making faces so people will laugh, and if they give me an apple and I bite into it, it is acidic. How often sadness hides itself behind the fun! Thirty years, I can not stand it. ' God was gracious and took off ten Jahre.Endlich man appeared, joyous, healthy and vigorous, and begged God to appoint his time. 'Thirty years shalt thou live, "said the Lord,' you is that enough? ' 'What a short time!' cried man, "when I have built my house, and the fire on my own hearth burns: when I have planted trees that blossom and bear fruit, and I intend to enjoy my life, so should I die! O Lord, lengthen my time. ' 'I will add to it the ass's eighteen years, "said God. 'That's not enough,' replied the man. 'You shall also the twelve years of the dog have.' "Still too little. ' 'Well,' said God, 'I will give you another ten years of the Monkey, but more thou shalt not.' The man went away, but was not zufriedengestellt.Also man lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years, which are soon gone; because it is healthy, merry, works with pleasure, and is glad of his life. This is followed by the donkey's eighteen years, when one burden after another is laid on him he must carry the corn which feeds others, and a beating and kicks are the reward of his faithful services. Then come the twelve years of the dog, as he lies in the corner, and growls and has no teeth to bite. And when that time is over, the ten years of the monkeys make the decision. Since man is weak- headed and foolish, does silly things, and becomes the jest of the children.
The months	3409	564	German	The laughter that seized the whole company when misfortune of Prince sounded so powerful, as if they had eaten Lach herb, and certainly they would have the whole gamut of laughter from the three painted F to the low C through when Cecca had not been for a sign that it was prepared to let go of their history, and after so the voice of others with fog covered all, she began to speak: There is a word you should write letters a yard long that silence never someone has harmed, and one does not must believe that slanderous people whose tongue another never nachsagt some praise, but only cuts, stings, pinches and bites, ever good about it get away, because you have found during sweep out every time, and still is, that if the benevolent people Love and benefits bestowed, is slander himself hostility and damage incurs, and if you have heard will, as this happens, we RDET her I certainly also completely give right. Once there were two brothers, one of whom, named Cianne, led a comfortable life as a count, the others are named Lise, barely had enough to eke out his life. So poor, however, this was at capacity, an equally low sentiment had that, so he was not a penny would have come to save him from starvation his brother, and therefore the poor Lise despair left his home. So he began to travel about the world, and wandered until he came one evening after a very busy day's march to an inn, where he found twelve young people sitting around a fire. As they now saw the poor Lise in such a pitiful state, he was partly paralyzed completely through the rigorous season partly because of the ragged clothes against the cold, they asked him to take them next to the fire place. He accepted the invitation with great pleasure, because it was his most welcome, and began to warm up, one of the young people whose sullen, dark look almost aroused fear him asked, "What do you think of this weather, compatriot ? "-" What should I think, "said Lise?. "I think all months of the year do their duty; we do that we ourselves do not know what we want, would like to prescribe the sky laws, and if we had only the things the way we want them, we would not examine very carefully whether what we in the head set is as good or bad, useful or harmful; because in the winter, when it rains, we want the sun in Leo, however, in August, torrential rains have not remembered that if the items so the seasons haywire, the seeds based on the crops would be, go to the cuckoo, bodies of men waste away and world and nature would be in great confusion. We will therefore only ever let the sky his run wild, since he also the trees created to to mitigate by their wood, the severity of the winter and through their leaves roofs the heat of summer. "-" You talk like Solomon " replied the young man, "you can but do not deny that the month of March, as we are now, by as much frost and rain, snow and hail, wind and weather, fog and storm and so many other hardships us arg life . embittered "-" you speak only of the evils of this poor month not, "Lise replied" but of the benefits that it brings us; for while he initiates the spring, it starts becoming one of the things, and if anyone, is he of the cause that the sun brings better weather to the country by it leads into the house of Aries. "The boy was happy even , the one who is very concerned about the words Lise, because he was just the month of March, which had returned with the other eleven brothers happened to be in that inn, and to reward the kindness Lises even for a month so bad that it even the shepherds not hear mention once like, no harm was rumored he gave him a nice box and said to him, "Take this box and wonder if you need anything; because if you open it, you will find in it what you desire. "Lise thanked the youth of the fondest, and by the box served as a pillow, he lay down to sleep. But no sooner had the sun had painted over with the rays brush the shadows of night light, so Lise took of the young people leave and went their way; He was, however, not fifty paces from the inn away when he opened the box and exclaimed: "Oh, if I but now a lined with Fries litter with some fire would have in it and comfortably pull my way so this snow could Heavens "He had these words not finished yet, so even a litter with carriers that once lifted him into it, and its transfer smashing as the way to his home appeared. But when came the hour when it is customary to set the jaws into action, said Lise: "Now I want to eat something," And immediately appeared in a large quantity, the best bite and he prepared such a banquet that ten kings it would feast can , When he evening arrived in a forest, who, because they came from the pestverdächtigen East, allowed the sun not passing through, he again opened the box and said, "Today I would like to spend the night at this beautiful place where the river for backing vocals the fresh winds makes the counterpoint with its stones. "as soon as he said this, a four-poster bed from the most precious scarlet was pitched with lower beds brimming with refined Flaumen, a Spanish cover and the finest sheets under a tent of oilcloth, and eat when he out demanded a sideboard as, prepared for a prince and a blackboard with dishes whose smell spread hundreds of miles to the quickest under another tent. Having now feasted on the glorious, he went to sleep, and as soon as the rooster, the spy of the sun, his master informed that the shades of night tired and were tired and it was time for an experienced General again, the enemy to fall in the back and him down close, opened Lise again the box and said, "now I want to have nice clothes, because I meet today with my brother and would like to see him jealous" at once saw Lise before a coat of the heaviest black. velvet with a push of red camlet and sumptuous embroidery on the lining of yellow wool, which therefore looked like a flowery meadow. After Lise wrapped in a cloak, he boarded the litter again and reached soon after the house of his brother's. As Cianne saw him appear with such grandeur and such effort, he wanted to know how Lise had come to all these things; whereupon he told him how he met those young men in the inn and what they would have done it for a gift, although he the conversation that he had kept them for themselves. Cianne now took every moment too long before he could say goodbye to his brother, so he urged him, he should just go to bed because he would be tired from the trip; He soon took on this extra post, reached also in that inn, and the same young people encountering, he began to chat with them. But when the same youth also asked him what he thought of the month of March, so he did a huge mouth and called out: "Get 'the devil this cursed month, the enemy of syphilis, the anger of the shepherd who vexed the spirit and makes the body sick; given to a month of the reason that if someone something bad will want to say to him, 'Damn you March <A month from its ruinous bustle reflects the adage:> March snow will do the seeds hurt <With! in short, he is a month that it would be a good thing for the world, a blessing for the earth and a cure for the people when his place was deleted from the list of the twelve brothers him. "the March, extending from Cianne such looked wash his head, hiding his resentment, with the intention to repay him for his fine speech well, and wanted to leave as Cianne the next morning, he gave him a good flail, saying to him: "Every time you do something wishest, that is:.> flail, give me a hundred, 'and you'll see things - heart, what do you demand more, "Cianne thanked the young man rushed in full did it and did not rather try until he the flail by home would have , But no sooner had he set foot over the threshold, he stepped into a secluded room where he thought the money he expected from the flail set aside, and said to him: "flail, give me a hundred" But this man was him more than he wished, and played him as a skilled musician such on the face and legs that Lise hastened his brother while shouting. When he saw that the flail inexorably like a wild horse, always ensure belaboured, he finally opened the box and brought him to a halt. And when Cianne questioned by his brother, told him what had happened to him, replied that he could complain about no one but about himself, since he alone would have incurred its Gimpelei this discipline and acted as that camel horns to have wanted and instead be lost nor the ears, but that he should get used in the future to hold his tongue, because they just have been the key of the accident gave him the magazine opened; because he had spoken of those young men good, so it might have the same good fortune become; to speak well of the people was a commodity that nothing would cost, low-maintenance but throw unexpected profit. however, he comforted him and begged him not to seek more wealth than heaven them already granted; for his box-rich way to fill the homes of thirty misers to the edge, and Cianne could freely dispose of his goods, because the sky would be waiting coffers of Bountiful; another brother certainly would give him because of the severity with which he treated him in his distress, hatred have grudge, but he considered that the stinginess of his brother was the favorable wind that drove him into this port; Therefore, he would prove to be recognizable and be inclined to show him his gratitude for the acquired fortune. As Cianne heard these words, he asked his brother for his previous lack of love forgiveness, and by entering into this marriage which they enjoyed a happy life from then on; Cianne but boasted immediately there any thing but good things to, like they still be so bad, because: The Burnt fear the Fire.
the carnation	726	652	German	It was a queen who had sealed our Lord God that she bore no children. Because Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to bestow on her a son or a daughter. Then an angel came from heaven and said, "Do bear, thou shalt have a son with the power of wishing, because what he wants in the world who obtained it. ' They went to the king and told him the glad tidings, and when the time was around, she gave birth to a son, and the King was in great Freude.Nun Every morning she went with the child to the zoo, and washed herself there in a clear Fountain. It happened once, was when the child was a little older, that it was her on his lap and fell asleep. Then the old cook, who knew was that the child had the power of wishing, and stole it, and took a chicken and tore it up and dropped some of its blood on the skirt and the dress. As he carried the child away to a secret location where it soak a nurse had, and ran to the king and accused the queen of having allowed deprive their child of the wild animals. And when the king saw blood on his apron, he believed it and got into such a rage that he had built a deep tower, in which neither sun nor moon, and had his wife put into it, and walled up as they should be imprisoned for seven years without food or drink, and should perish. But God sent two angels from heaven in the form of white pigeons that had to fly twice daily to her and bring her food, but until the seven years were over waren.Der Koch thought to himself, 'the child of wishing, and I am here, it could plunge into trouble me easily. ' So he arose from the castle away and went to the boy, who was so great that he could speak, and said to him 'you want a beautiful castle with a garden, and that goes with it.' And no sooner were the words out of the mouth of the boy, when everything was there what he had desired. Upper one time the cook said to him, it is not good that you're so alone, wish for a pretty girl to society. ' Since she wished the prince brought, and she immediately stood before him, and was as nice as she could paint a painter. Now, the two played together and loved each other heartily, and the old cook went out hunting like a nobleman. but it occurred to him, the king's son might even wish to be with his father, and thus bring him into great distress. And he went out, took the girl aside, and said 'this night when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and shock this knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and tongue of him; and if you do not, you shall lose your life. ' Then he went away, and when he returned the next day, they had not done it, saying, 'Why should I shed blood of an innocent life that no one has offended?' The cook once 'where you do not do it, so dichs costs even your life.' When he was gone, they condescended bring a small doe and let them slaughter, and took heart and tongue, and put them on a plate, and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boys' lie down in bed and pull the blanket over dich.'Da joined the villain in and said, "where is the boy ?, the girl handed him the plate heart and tongue, but the king's son threw off the blanket and said, 'you old sinner, why did you kill me want? I now pronounce thy judgment. You should be black poodle and have a gold chain around his neck, and eat shalt coals that you knocks the flames to the neck. ' And when he had spoken the words, the old man was changed into a poodle dog, and had a gold chain around his neck, and the cooks had to live coals bring up that devoured it that he knocked out the flames from the neck. Now the king's son remained there a short time, thinking of his mother, and whether they were still alive. Finally he said to the girl I want to go home to my own country, will you go with me, I will provide for you. ' 'Oh,' she replied, 'the way is long, and what should I do in a strange land where I am unknown.' Because it was so you will not right, and they do not want to be apart, he wanted her into a beautiful pink, and took her with sich.Da pulled it on, and the poodle had to run along, and moved to his country. Now he went to the tower where his mother confined, and as the tower was so high, he wished for a ladder that reached up to the top. Then he mounted up and looked inside, and cried, "Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still alive or are you dead? ' She answered, "I have just eaten, and am still satisfied, 'and said that the angels were there. Said he, 'I am your dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from the lap. But I'm still alive and I will deliver you soon' Then he descended and went to his father, and had announced as a strange huntsman, if he could have services with him. The king answered yes, if he was skilful and could create his game, he should come; it but had never stopped throughout the district or country. The huntsman said he would create as much game for him as he could possibly use at the royal table. Then he was called all the huntsmen together, they should all go with him into the forest. They came, and out he bade them a big circle close that remained open at one end, and then he turned in and began to be desired. Immediately came two hundred and some piece of venison in the circle run, and the hunters had to shoot it. Since all placed on sixty country carts, and driven home to the King; once he was able to deck his table with game, after he had felt for many years none hatte.Nun the king great joy and ordered, it should the next day eat his entire household with him, and made a great feast. As they were all together, he said to the hunters 'cause you're so clever, you shall sit next to me.' He replied, 'Lord King, Ew. Majesty must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman. ' but the king insisted, saying 'Thou shalt sit by me,' until he did. As he sat there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that only a first of the king's servants would begin her and asked how she was faring with the Queen was going in the tower if they would or probably still alive languishes. As soon as he had wished, the marshal already answered and said, "Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the Queen living in the tower, whether it is probably still alive or perished? ' But the king replied, "She has made me love my son of the wild beasts tear, of which I will not listen. ' Then the huntsman stood up and said, 'gnädigster Mr. father, she is still alive, and I am her son, and the wild animals do not have it stolen, but the bad guy, the old cook, has done that has me when she was asleep, from her arms and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a chicken. ' Then he took the dog with the golden collar, and said 'this is the bad guy,' and had put that he had to eat in the face of all that he hit the flames from the neck coals. Then he asked the king if he wanted to see him in his true form, and wished him back to cooking, he stood immediately, with the white apron and a knife on the side. Be ordered was angry that he was in the deepest dungeon thrown and the king, as he saw him. D the huntsman spoke further, "Father, you want to see the girl who brought me so tenderly and me afterwards should bring their lives, but it has not done, though his own life was at stake? ' The King said 'yes, I will like to see.' The son said 'gnädigster Lord Father, I want you to show in the form of a beautiful flower.' And reached into his pocket and brought forth the pink, and placed it on the royal table, and she was so beautiful that the king had never seen one. Then the son said 'now I will also show in their true form,' and wished her a virgin; as they stood there and was so beautiful that no painter would have beautiful painting können.Der king but sent two maids and two attendants into the tower, to fetch the Queen and bring women to the royal table. But when she was led in she ate nothing, and said, "The gracious and merciful God who has supported me in the tower, I will deliver soon. ' She lived three days and then died happily, and was buried when she, as you followed the two white doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels from heaven, and sat on her grave. The old king let the cook in four pieces tear, but grief consumed his heart, and he soon died. The son married the beautiful maiden, which he had brought as a flower in his pocket, and whether they are still alive, is known to God.
The mermaid in pond	1729	316	German	There was once a miller who led with his wife a hilarious life. They had money and land, and their prosperity increased from year to year too. But misfortune comes overnight: their wealth had increased so did it every year again, and at last the miller could hardly call the mill in which he sat to call his own. He was in great distress, and when he lay down after the day's work, he found no rest, but tossed sorrowfully in his bed. One morning he rose before dawn, walked out into the open and thought it should be easier for him heart. As he was stepping over the mill-dam, just broke the first sunbeam appears and he heard rustling sound in the pond. He turned around and saw a beautiful woman, rising slowly out of the water. Her long hair, which she had taken on her shoulders with her soft hands, fell on both sides down and covered her white body. He saw clearly that it was the mermaid of the pond, and did not fear if he should run away or stand still. But the mermaid let her soft voice heard, called him by name and asked why he was so sad. The miller was at first silent, but when he heard them speak so kindly, he took heart and told her that he had formerly lived in happiness and wealth, but was so poor now that he does not know to guess. 'Be quiet,' replied the mermaid, 'I will make you richer and happier than you have ever been to, just you have to promise that you give me what has just been born in your house.' 'What can it be otherwise, "thought the miller," but a puppy or a kitten?' and told her what she wanted. The mermaid climbed back down into the water, and he hurried consoled and in good spirits after his mill. He still had not reached it, when the maid from the front door and called out to him, he should rejoice, for his wife had given birth to a little boy. The miller stood as if struck by lightning, he saw clearly that the treacherous mermaid known this and had cheated him. Hanging his head, he went up to his wife's bed, and when she asked him 'why are not you glad over the fine boy?' he told her what had happened to him and what he had given a promise of mermaid. 'What helps me happiness and wealth,' he added, 'if I am to lose my child? but what can I do? ' The relatives, who had come thither to wish happiness knew no Rat.Indessen returned happiness in the miller's house again. What he undertook succeeded, it was as if presses and coffers filled by itself and the money multiplied nightly in the closet. It was not long before his wealth was greater than ever. But he could not rejoice over it untroubled, for the bargain he had made with the nix tormented his soul. Whenever he passed the pond, he feared she might ascend and remind him of his debt. he did not let the boy himself go near the water; 'Beware,' he said to him, 'when you touch the water, a hand will rise, seize you and pull you down.' But as year after year went by and the mermaid did not show up again, the miller began to beruhigen.Der boy grew up to be a youth and came to a huntsman teaching. When he had finished learning and an able hunter had become the lord of the village took him into his service. In the village was a nice and faithful girl who liked the hunter, and when his master noticed he gave him a small house; the two were married, lived peacefully and happily, and loved each Herzen.Einstmals the huntsman was chasing a deer. When the beast from the forest into the open turned aside, he pursued it and stretched it finally with a shot down. He did not notice that he was in the vicinity of the dangerous pond, and went after he gutted the animal to wash to the water to his blood-stained hands. Hardly, however, had he dipped, rose up as the mermaid, laughing with her dripping arms around him and quickly went down, that the waves zusammenschlugen.Als it was evening on him and the huntsman did not return home, his wife became afraid. She went out to look for him, and as he had often told her that he would take from the snares of the Mermaid in eight, and dared not venture into the neighborhood of the mill, so she already suspected what had happened. She hurried to the water, and when she found his hunting bag on the banks, as they could no longer doubt of the misfortune. Wailing and wringing her hands she called her beloved by name, but in vain: she rushed over to the other side of the pond, and called him anew: she scolded the mermaid with harsh words, but no answer. The level of the water was calm, only half the face of the moon did not look at her immobile herauf.Die poor woman left the pond. With quick steps without resting, they always circled him again, sometimes in silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes softly sobbing. Last her strength came to an end: it dropped to the ground and fell into a deep sleep. Soon overcame a Traum.Sie increased between large boulders anxiously upward; Thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in her face and the wind tossed her long hair. When she reached the hill, a very different sight presented itself. The sky was blue, mild air, the ground sloped gently downwards and on a green, colorful flowery meadow stood a pretty cottage. She went to it and opened the door, and sat an old woman with white hair, who beckoned to her kindly. At the moment the poor woman awoke. The day had already dawned, and she decided the same, to make the dream sequence. She climbed laboriously up the mountain, and it was all as she had seen in the night there. The old woman received friendly and showed her a chair where she should sit down. 'You have a disaster have experienced,' she said, 'because you sought out my lonely cottage.' The woman told her in tears that had happened to her. 'Cheer up,' said the old woman, 'I want to help you: since you have a golden comb. Harre, has risen to the full moon, then go to the pond, sit down on the shore, and comb your long black hair with this comb. But if you're ready, so he lay down on the shore, and you will see what geschieht.'Die woman returned, but the time to full moon passed slowly. At last the shining disc appeared in the sky, as they went out to the pond, sat down and combed her long black hair with the golden comb, and was ready when they put him down at the water's edge. Not long before it roared from the depths, a wave rose, rolled to the shore and carried the comb away with it. It took no longer than necessary had the comb to sink to the bottom, then the water parted, and the head of the hunter rose into the air. He did not speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful eyes. At the same moment a second wave came rushing and covered the head of the man. Everything was gone, the pond lay peaceful as before, and only the face of the full moon shone darauf.Trostlos returned the woman, but the dream showed her the cottage of the ancients. Again she started the next morning on the way and the wise woman complained her suffering. The old woman gave her a golden flute, and said tarry 'till the full moon comes again, then take this flute, sit on the shore, play a beautiful song on it and when you're done with it, lay it on the sand; you'll see what geschieht.'Die wife did as the old man had said. No sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there was from the depths: a wave rose, pulled up, and led the flute away with it. Soon afterwards the water parted, and not just the head, the man up to half of his body also arose. He spread out his arms longingly towards her, but a second wave came up, covered him and pulled him back hinab.'Ach what it helps me, 'said the unhappy woman,' I loved my only catch sight to turn it back to to lose.' Despair filled her heart anew, but the dream led her a third into the house of the Old. She made her way, and the wise woman gave her a golden spinning wheel, consoled her and said, it is not yet fulfilled, tarry until the full moon comes, then take the spinning wheel, sit on the bank and spin the spool full and when you're done, so the spinning wheel spot close to the water, and you'll see what geschieht.'Die woman obeyed everything. As soon as the full moon showed itself, she carried the golden spinning wheel on the shore, busily spinning was quite filled up the flax to an end and the coil with the thread. No sooner was the wheel standing on the shore, so it was a more violent than usual in the depth of the water, a mighty wave rushed up and carried the wheel away with it. Immediately rose with a water jet, the head and the whole body of the man in the air. He quickly jumped to the shore, grabbed his wife by the hand and fled. But as soon as they had a short distance away, then rose with a frightful roar of the whole pond and flowed into the broad field of tearing force. The fugitives already saw death before their eyes as the woman cried in her anxiety to help the elderly, and at the moment they were transformed, she into a toad, he said. Into a frog The flood, which had reached them, they could not kill, but they tore them apart and carried them far weg.Als the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again, their human form came back. But no one knew where the other was left; They found themselves among strange people who do not know their native land. High mountains and deep valleys lay between them. To get his own life, both had to tend sheep. Long years they drove their flocks through field and forest and were full of sorrow and Sehnsucht.Als spring had burst forth from the earth again, they moved in a day with their flocks, and as chance would have to meet attracted to each other. He saw at a remote mountain side a flock and drove his sheep back to the area. They met in a valley, but they did not recognize him, but they were glad that they were no longer so lonely. Henceforth they each day drove their flocks to the same they did not speak much, but they felt comforted. One evening, appeared as the full moon in the sky and were already at rest the sheep, took the shepherd flute from his pocket and blew a beautiful but sad song. When he finished, he noticed that the shepherdess wept bitterly. 'Why are you crying?' asked he. 'Oh,' she replied, 'so shone the full moon when I played for the last time this song on the flute and the head of my beloved out of the waters.' He looked at her, and it felt as if a blanket fell from his eyes, he recognized his dear wife, and when she looked at him and the moon shone on his face, she recognized him as well. They embraced and kissed, and whether they were happy, no one need ask.
the princess and the Pea	2017	704	German	There was once a prince who wanted to marry a princess. But that should be a real princess. He traveled all over the world to make such a finding, but everywhere there was something missing. Princesses there was enough, but whether they were real princesses he could never find out. There was always something that was not quite right. He came back home and was very sad because he wanted a real princess but haben.Eines evening took a terrible storm on; there was thunder and lightning, the rain poured down, and it was quite appalling. There was a knock at the town gate, and the old king went to aufzumachen.Es was a princess who stood outside at the gate. But as she looked from the rain and the bad weather! The water ran down from her hair and clothes; it ran down into the toes of the shoes and the heel back out. She said that she is a real princess wäre.'Ja, we'll soon find out! ' thought the old queen, but she said nothing, went into the bedroom into it, took all the bedding and laid a pea on the bottom of the bedstead. Then she took twenty mattresses and laid them on the pea, and then twenty eider-down beds on the Matratzen.Hier the Princess above should now all night liegen.Am morning was asked how she had slept. "Oh, very badly!" said the Princess. "I have closed most of the night no eye! God knows what was in my bed. I was lying on something hard, so I that the whole body all brown and I'm blue! It's horrible!" Now they knew that she was a real princess because she had felt through the twenty mattresses and the twenty eider-down beds the pea. So sensitive could be none other than a true Prinzessin.Da the prince took her for his wife, for now he knew he had found a real princess. And the pea was put in the museum, where they can still be seen, if no one hat.Seht stolen, it was a real story!
the Raven	889	401A	German	Once there was a Queen who had a little daughter who was still so young that had to be worn on the arm. At one time the child was naughty, and her mother say what she wanted, it did not keep quiet. Then she became impatient, and as the ravens were flying about the castle, she opened the window and said, "I wish you were a raven and would fly away, I should have some rest." Soon as she said the word, the child was changed into a raven and flew out of her arm out the window. It flew into a dark forest, and stayed for a long time, and the parents heard nothing from her. Then once led a man his way through this forest and heard the raven crying, and went his voice to, and when he came nearer, the bird said: "I am a king's daughter by birth, and am bewitched, but you can deliver me. " - "What should I do?" asked he. She said, "Go further into the forest, and you will find a house, wherein sits an aged woman who will offer thee meat and drink, but you must accept nothing, if you eat something or drink so you fall into a sleep and you do not redeem the garden behind the house is a large heap of tan whereon thou shalt stand and wait for me. for three days. I come every afternoon at two o'clock in a carriage, which is covered only with four white stallions, then red with four and last four black, but if you're not awake, but sleeping, I shall not redeemed. " The man promised to do everything that they had requested. but the raven said, "Oh, I know it already, you will not deliver me, you take something from the woman." And the man promised again, surely he would not touch anything, neither eating nor drinking. But when he came into the house, the old woman came to him and said, "Poor man, what are your jaded, come and refresh yourself; eat and drink." - "No," the man said, "I will not eat or drink." but they left him no peace, saying, "If you will not eat, so does a train from the glass; one is nothing." Since he was persuaded, and drank. He went out in the afternoon at two o'clock in the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven. As he stood there, he at once became so tired, and it could not overcome and lay down a little; but he did not fall asleep. But no sooner had he stretched out, so his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell asleep and slept so soundly that it had nothing in the world can bring. At two o'clock the raven came with four white stallions down, but she was already in deep grief and said: ". I know that he sleeps" And when they came into the garden, he was indeed lying there on the heap of tan and slept. She got out of the car, walked over to him and shook him and called him but he did not wake. The next day at noon, the old woman came again and brought him food and drink, but he did not accept it. But she left him no peace, and spoke to him for so long, until he took a train out of the glass. About two o'clock he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven because he felt suddenly so great weariness that his limbs no longer support him; he could not help, had to lie down and fell asleep. When the raven drove up with four brown horses, she was already in deep grief and said, "I know that he sleeps." They went up to him, but he lay sleeping, and was not to awaken. The next day the old woman said, what's that? He eat and to drink anything if he wanted to die? He replied, "I want to and must not eat or drink." But she put the bowl of food and the glass of wine in front of him, and when the smell of it ascended to him, he could not resist and took a strong train. When the time came, he went out into the garden to the heap of tan, and waited for the king's daughter. when he was more tired than the day before, and lay down and slept as soundly as if he were a stone. At two o'clock the raven came with four black stallions, and the coach and everything was black. but she was already in deep grief and said: "I know he is asleep and can not deliver me." When she came to him, he was fast asleep. She shook him and called him, but she could not wake him. And she put a loaf beside him, then a piece of meat, a third bottle of wine, and he could take as much of everything as he wanted, it was not less. After that, she took a gold ring from her finger and put it on his finger, and was buried her name. Most recently, she put a letter out was written what she had given him, and that things would ever grow, and it was also written, "I see well that you can not save me here, but you want me still redeem, so come woke up to the golden castle of Stromberg, it is within your power, I know certainly. "and how she had given him everything, she got into her car and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.Als the man and saw that he had slept, he was sad at heart, saying, "Certainly now it is passed, and I have not set her free." Because the things he fell into his eyes, which were next to him, and he stood written read the letter in how it had happened. So he got up and went away, and wanted to go to the golden castle of Stromberg, but he did not know where it was. Now he had walked for a long time in the world, he came into a dark forest and walked for fourteen days, and could not find out. And when it was evening again, and he was so tired that he lay down in a bush and fell asleep. The next day he went on, and in the evening wanted to put as he returned to a bush, he heard a howling and crying that he could not sleep. And as the time came when people light the candles, he saw one glimmering, and arose and went after him; as he came to a house that seemed so small because it was a great giant was standing. Then he thought to himself: "If I go in, and the giant sees me, so it's likely cost me my life." At last he dared and approached. When the giant saw him, he said: "It is good that you come, I have not eaten for a long time, I will eat thee for my supper." - "Let's be the better," said the man, "I will not like to be eaten, asking you to eat, so I have enough to make you sick." - "If this is true," said the giant, "so you can stay calm, and I just wanted to consume you, because I have nothing else." Because they did not go and sit down at the table, and took the man bread, wine and meat that was all. "I like me good," said the giant, and ate to their hearts content. Then the man said to him: "Can not you tell me where the golden castle of Stromberg is?" The giant said, "I will look at my map, to all cities, villages and houses can be found." He brought out the map which he had in the room and looked for the castle, but it was not it. "It does not do anything," he said, "I have even greater in my cupboard upstairs maps; we will look," but it was in vain. The man now wanted to go; but the giant begged him to wait a few more days, until his brother came home, who had gone to fetch food. When the brother came home they inquired about the golden castle of Stromberg, he replied. "If I have eaten and have had enough, I want to search the map" Then he went with them up to his chamber, and they searched in his map, but could not find; Then he brought out still older maps, and they did not let on until they found the golden castle of Stromberg, but it was many thousands of miles away. "How am I to get there?" the man asked. The giant said: "Two hours I have time, I will carry you to the neighborhood, but then I have to go home again and suckle the child that we have." So the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues from the castle and said: "The other way you can go alone at home." Then he turned back, but the man went onwards day and night, until he finally came to the golden castle of Stromberg. It stood on a glass mountain, and the bewitched maiden drove in her car around the castle and then went inside. He was delighted when he saw her and wanted to climb up to her, but as he started it, he slipped on the glass again and again down. And when he saw that he could not reach her, he was filled with trouble, and said to himself: "I want to stay down here and wait for them." So he built himself a hut and sat in it for a year and saw the King's daughter driving all day up, but could not get her hinaufkommen.Da he saw from his hut three robbers who were beating, and called out to them: "God with you!" They stopped at the call short when they saw no one, she again began to fight, and that too most dangerous. Then he called again: "God be with you!" Again they stopped, looked round about, because they saw no one, they also drove away again to fight. Then he cried for the third time, "God be with you!" and thought "you have to see what the three projects," went and asked her why she successive losschlügen. One of them said he had a stick; found when he struck resist a door, would spring open; the other said he had found a coat when he put it on, he was invisible; but the third said he had found a horse, a man could ride everywhere, even up the glass mountain. Now they did not know whether to keep things in common, or whether they should separate. Then the man said: "The three things I want you to trade: have money I not, but other things that are worth more, but I previously have to take a test for me to see whether you have told the truth." Because they let him sit on a horse, he hung his coat around and gave him the stick in his hand, and he had it all, they could not see him more. So he gave them some vigorous blows and cried, "Now, vagabonds, you have what you deserve, are you satisfied?" Then he rode up the glass-mountain, and when he got up in front of the castle, it was locked; He gave the floor to the door, and it sprang open. He came in and went up the stairs to the top of the hall sat there had the Virgin and a golden chalice with wine before him. But she could not see him because he had the mantle. And when he came to her, he pulled the ring she had given him the finger and threw it into the cup, it sounded. Then she cried, "This is my ring, so must the man be there, who will deliver me." They searched the whole castle and did not find him, he was gone out, had sat on the horse and thrown off the mantle. When they came to the door, they saw him and cried with joy. As he alighted and took the King's daughter in the arm; but she kissed him and said, "Now you have redeemed me, and tomorrow we will celebrate our wedding."
The carrot	1393	1737	German	Once there were two brothers who both served as soldiers, and was the one rich, the other poor. Then the poor, to escape from his poverty, put his soldier's coat, and turned farmer. He dug and hoed his bit of land, and sowed rapeseed. The seed came up, and as it grew a turnip, which was big and strong, and visibly thicker, and did not want to stop growing, so it that a princess could be called of turnips, for never was such a saw, and will never to be seen again. Most recently, she was so great that it alone stuffed a whole car, and had to pull two oxen to it, and the farmer did not know what to do with it, and would obs his fortune or misfortune. At last he thought 'you sell them what you're going to get big for it, and do you want to eat itself, the small turnips do the same service is best, you bring the king and make him a present of it.' So he placed it on the cart, harnessed two oxen, took it to the court, and gave them to the king. 'What is this strange thing?' said the king, 'I came Many wonderful things to her eyes, but such a monster is not; From what seed that may be grown? or you geräths alone, and you are a child of fortune. ' 'Oh no,' said the farmer, "no luck kid, I'm not, I'm a poor soldier, who because he could no longer support, hung his soldier's coat on the nail, and built the country; I have a brother who is rich, and you, Mr. King, also well known, but I do, because I have nothing, I am of the world forgot. ' Then the king took pity on him and said, "your poverty you shall be relieved and such gifts from me that you probably get your rich brother the same. ' Then he gave him a lot of gold, fields, pastures and herds, and made him filthy rich, so that the other brother's wealth not could be compared with it. When he heard what had acquired his brother with a single turnip, he envied him and thought back and forth like he could also address such happiness. He wollts but start much gescheidter, took gold and horses, and brought them to the king, and thought no other that would make him a much bigger return gift, as would his brother get as much of a turnip, what would it it for as beautiful things do not contribute anything. The king accepted the gift, and said he knew nothing to him again to give the rare and when the big turnip would be better. So the rich his brother's turnip had to put on a cart and let go home. At home he did not know to whom to vent his anger and frustration until he came evil thoughts, and he decided to kill his brother. He hired murderers, who had to face in an ambush, and then he went to his brother and said, "Dear brother, I know of a hidden treasure, we will dig with each other and share. ' The other agreed, and accompanied him without suspicion; but when they came out, the murderers fell on him, bound him, and wanted him hanged on a tree. By being just about sounded that they drove from afar loud singing and hooves of terror in the body, and they put on their neck and head prisoners in the sack, hung on the branch, and fled. but he worked up until a hole in the bag had, which he could put his head. but who came by was not traveling as a student, a young fellow who happily singing his song therefore rode through the forest on the road. As of now saw above that one was passing below him, he cried 'was greeted me at an early hour.' The student looked around on, did not know where the voice came, he finally said, "Who is calling me? ' be in a short time I learned great things, however, are all schools a wind by a small amount, I will have finished learning, descend wiser: there answered from the top 'lift up your eyes, I'm sitting here in the house of knowledge than all men. I understand the stars and sky sign of the winds, the sand in the sea, curing the disease, the powers of herbs, birds and stones. If you were once in it, you would feel what noble things out of the bag of wisdom. ' The student, when he heard all this, was astonished, and said, "blessed be the hour when I found you, I can not even a little go into the sack? ' Above replied as ers not þæt like, 'a little while I want you probably let in for wage and good words, but you have to wait for another hour, there is left a piece that I first learn must.' When the student had a little wait, was it the time too long, and he asked that he still wants to be let in, his thirst for knowledge was so very large. Since rose to the top when he would finally by and said, "so I can from the house of knowledge, you need to let down the rope the bag, then you shall enter. ' So the student let him down, tied the sack, and freed him, he exclaimed, "Now draw me up at once, 'and you want geradstehend intervene in the sack. 'Stop!' said the other, 'Here is how not to,' grabbed him by the head and put him upside down into the sack, fastened it, and drew the disciple of wisdom tree by the rope Windwärts; Then he swung him in the air, and said, "How goes it, my dear fellow? See, already you feel that you wisdom comes, and gaining valuable experience, so perfectly quiet until you become more intelligent. ' He rose to the student's horse, and rode away.
The hurds	1491	1451	German	There was once a girl who was beautiful, but lazy and careless. When she had to spin so it was so displeased that if a little knot in the flax, was it right schlickerte a whole bunch of ripped out and next to the earth. Now she had a maid who was working, examined the discarded flax together, cleaned them, span them fine and left a pretty dress weave it. A young man had wooed the lazy girl, and the wedding was to be held. On the eve the diligent danced in her pretty dress gaily, as saying the Braut'ach, wat dat Mäken jump in mines Slick Erlingen! 'The bridegroom heard and asked the bride what she meant. Then she told him that the girl was wearing a dress from the flax, she had thrown away. As the groom heard and saw how idle and the diligence of the poor girl, let it stand it, went to that and chose her as his wife.
Fair Katrinelje and Pif Paf Poltrie	1249	2019	German	'Good day, Father Hollenthe.' 'Great thanks, Pif Paf Poltrie.' "May I be your daughter get ?, 'Oh, yes, if Mother Malcho (milking cow), Brother High pride, sister setraut and fair Katrinelje wants so kanns happen.' 'Then where's the mother Malcho?' 'She's in the house, milking the cow.' 'Good day, mother Malcho.' 'Great thanks, Pif Paf Poltrie.' "May I be your daughter get ?, 'Oh, yes, if Father Hollenthe, Brother High pride, sister setraut and fair Katrinelje wants so kanns happen.' 'Where is Brother High pride?' 'He's in the room chopping some wood. '' Good day, brother High pride. ' 'Great thanks, Pif Paf Poltrie.' "May I have your sister? ' "Oh, yes, if Father Hollenthe, Mother Malcho, sister setraut and fair Katrinelje wants so kanns happen. '' Where is Sister setraut? '' She's in the garden cutting cabbages. '' Good day sister setraut. ' 'Great thanks, Pif Paf Poltrie.' "May I have your sister? ' "Oh, yes, if Father Hollenthe, Mother Malcho, Brother High pride and fair Katrinelje wants so kanns happen. '' Then where's fair Katrinelje? 'She's in the room counting their pennies.' 'Good day, beautiful Katrinelje. ' 'Great thanks, Pif Paf Poltrie.' "Wilt thou be my darling? ' "Oh, yes, if Father Hollenthe, Mother Malcho, Brother High pride, the sister wants setraut so kanns happen. '' Fair Katrinelje how much you have bares dowry ?, 'Fourteen pennies money, two and a half penny guilt half pound of dried apples, a handful Prutzeln, a handful Wurzelen, un so the watt: is dat nig en guden breeding Schatt '? Pif Paf Poltrie what you can for a trade? are you a tailor? " 'Even much better.' 'A shoemaker ?, "Something better.' 'A farmer who?' 'Even much better.' 'A carpenter?' 'Even much better.' 'A blacksmith?' 'Even much better.' 'A miller?' 'Even much better.' 'Perhaps a broom-maker?' 'Yes, I am, is it not a fine trade?'
The six servants	1279	513A	German	Times there lived an aged Queen who was a sorceress, and her daughter was the most beautiful girl under the sun. but the old man thought to anything, how to lure mankind to destruction, and when a wooer appeared, she said, who wanted her daughter would have been solved as a task, or he would die. Many had been dazzled by the beauty of the Virgin and had actually risked this, but they could not accomplish what the old woman enjoined them, and then there was no mercy, they had to kneel down, and their heads were cut off. A king's son, who had also heard of the great beauty of the Virgin and said to his father: "Let's drag on me, I want to advertise it." "Nevermore," answered the king, "you are going away, so you go to your death." The son lay down and was sick unto death, and was for seven years, and no doctor could help him. When the father saw that all hope was over, heavy heart he said to him, "Go up and try your luck, I know you would not otherwise help." When the son heard this, he got up from his bed and was well and went merrily on their way. It happened when he was riding across a heath that he saw from far away on Earth something like a large haystack, and as he approached, he could distinguish that it was the belly of a man who laid himself down would have; but the stomach looked like a small mountain. The thickness, as he saw the traveler, straightened himself up and said, "If you need someone, take me into your service." The prince replied, "What shall I do with such a big man?" "Oh," said the thickness, "this is nothing, if I stretch myself out, I am three thousand times fatter." "If this is," said the prince, "I can take you, come with me." Since the thickness went behind the prince ago, and after a while they found another man, who was lying there on the ground and the ear had placed on the lawn. Said the prince, "What are you doing?" "I am listening," replied the man. "What are you listening to so attentively?" "I am listening to what precisely itself exactly in the world, because my ears miss nothing, the grass even hear I grow said the prince." Tell me what you hear at the court of the old Queen who has the beautiful daughter? "he replied," I hear the whizzing, striking off a wooer's head the sword. "the prince said:" I can take you, come with me, "they went onwards, and then saw a pair of feet lying there and something. of the legs, but the end could not see them. When they had gone a good distance, they came to the body, and finally to the head. "Oh," said the prince, "what are you a tall rascal!" "Oh," answered the Tall, "that's nothing when I really stretch out my limbs, I am three thousand so long and am greater than the highest mountain on earth. I want you like to serve, if you will accept me. "" Come on, "said the prince," I can make you. "She moved on and found a man sitting by the road who had his eyes tied. The prince said to him, "Have you that you can not see into the light of weak eyes" "no," replied the man, "I can not take off the bandage, because what I look at with my eyes, splits apart, so great is my view , Can you use that, I want you like to serve. "" Come with me, "replied the prince," I can take you. "She moved on and found a man who was lying in the hot sunshine, trembling and shivering all over his body so that he has no term Stood Still. "How can you cold?" said the prince, "and the sun shines so warm." "Oh," replied the man, "my nature is quite a different kind, the hotter it is, the more I freeze, and the frost pierces through all my bones. And the colder it is, the hotter I will. Located in the ice can I's heat and the middle of the fire, the cold not stand. "" You're a strange fellow, "said the prince," but if you want to serve me, come with me. "Then they went ahead and saw a man standing who made a long neck, looked around and language looked over the hills, the king's son. "What are you looking at so eagerly?" the man replied, "I have such sharp eyes that I am the woods and fields, valleys can and mountains look out and by the whole world, "the prince said:". If you want, come with me, because that one was missing me, "Now put the king's son and his six servants into the city where the old queen. lived he did not say who he was, but he said. "will you give me your beautiful daughter, I will accomplish what you set me." The sorceress was delighted that such a handsome youth as this into her net, and said: "Three times I want to give you a task, you redeem them ever membranously, thou shalt husband and master of my daughter be. "" What should be the first? "he asked. "That shalt fetch me a ring, I have the Red Sea to drop." Since the king's son went home to his servants and said: "The first task is not easy, one ring is to be taken out of the Red Sea, way of doing it." Then the man with the bright eyes: "I want to see where he is," looked down into the sea, saying, "There he hangs on a sharp stone." The Tall One carried them, and said, "I wanted to get him well, if I could only see him." "If it's nothing," cried the thickness, lay down and put his mouth to water. As the waves fell into it as into an abyss, and he drank up the whole sea, it was dry as a meadow. The Long stooped a little, and brought out the ring with his hand. Then the king's son rejoiced when he had the ring, and took it to the old. She was astonished and said, "Yes, it is the right ring The first task you've happily solved, but now the second you see is you, there on the lawn in front of my castle, as grazing Three hundred fat oxen that you need with skin.. consume and hair, bones and horns. And down in the basement three hundred barrels are wine, you need to drink up as well, and remains of the ox hair and the wine a drop left, so mine is forfeited your life "The prince said:". May I invite no guests to this ? Without society tastes no meal "The old woman laughed maliciously, and replied:".. A allowed to you invite you to for you to have companionship, but no "Since the prince went to his servants and said to the Stout" today Singin ' his guest and eat as you once. "as the Stout one and ate the three hundred oxen that leaving one single hair, and asked if nothing but the breakfast was there. but the wine he drank straight from the casks without . he needed a glass, and drank the last drop down from the nail was when the meal ended, the prince went to the old man and told her that the second task would be solved They marveled, and said:. So far it has not yet "brought but it is one task still remains, "and thought, 'You shall not escape me, and wilt not keep your head." Tonight, "she said," I will bring my daughter to you into your room, and you shall with your arm Envelope ingen. And if you sit together there, so beware that you do not fall asleep. I'm twelve o'clock strike, and she is no longer in your arms, you have lost, "the prince thought. The task is easy, I will most certainly keep my eyes open, but he called his servants, told them what the old man had said, and said. "who knows what's behind it for a ruse, caution is good, keep watch and ensures that the maiden does not go out of my room" broke When the night, the old woman came with her daughter and led them into the arms of the king's son, and then the long wrapped round the two in a circle, and the thickness turned to the door, so that no living creature could enter As they sat both., and the Virgin did not speak, but the moon was shining through the window on her face that he could see her marvelous beauty. he did nothing but look at them, was full of joy and love, and there was no weariness in his eyes. This lasted until eleven o'clock, accused as the old one spell over all that s he fell asleep, and at the moment the maiden was carried away. Now they slept hard until a quarter to twelve, when the magic lost its power, and all awoke again. "Oh, misery and misfortune," said the prince, "now I am lost!" The faithful servants also began to lament, but said the Horcher: "Be quiet, I want to listen," he listened for a moment, and then he said. "She is on a rock three hundred leagues from hence, bewailing their fate You alone can help Langer, if thou wilt stand up, so you're there with a few steps. " "Yes," answered the Tall, "but the one with the sharp eyes must go with me, that we may destroy the rock." Since the Tall One took the eyes associated with, and at the moment, how a hand turning around, they were on the enchanted rock. He soon reverted to the length of the other, the blindfold, but look round, and the rock shivered into a thousand pieces. Since the Long took the maiden in his arms, carried her back in a second, then fetched the same rapidity his comrades, and before the clock struck twelve, they all sat as before, quite merrily and happily. When it struck twelve, the old sorceress came slipped, made a mocking face, as if to say, "Now he is mine," and believed her daughter were sitting three hundred leagues in the rock. But when she saw her daughter in the arms of the king's son, she was troubled, saying, "There is one who knows more than I do." But she could not object and had to give him her daughter. And she said in her ear: "Shame on you, that you should obey common people, and you can not choose a husband to your favor." As the proud heart was the Virgin with anger met and plotted revenge. She left the next morning three hundred wince bundles of wood and said to the king's son, the three tasks would be solved, but it would not be his wife rather until one would be willing to sit down in the middle of the wood, and bear the fire. She thought that none of his servants would burn for him and for love of her he himself would get into it and then they would be free. But the servants said: "We have done something except the Frosty One, which must also due to" put him in the middle of the pile of wood and set fire to it. As the fire began to burn and burned three days had eaten up all the wood, and when the flames had burnt out, the Frosty stood among the ashes, trembling like an aspen leaf, and saying "such a frost I could not stand my whole life long, and if it had lasted much longer, so I was petrified. " Well no escape was to find more, the beautiful maiden had to take for a husband the unknown youth. But when they went to the church, the old woman said: "I can not bear the shame," and sent her warriors after them, which should cut down all who opposed them, and bring back her daughter. but the Listener had sharpened his ears and heard the secret discourse of the ancients. "What do we do?" He said to the fat man, but knew what to do once or twice spat behind the carriage some of the sea water from which he had drunk, that there was a large lake, which the warriors were caught and drowned. When the sorceress the hearing, she sent her mailed knights, but the Listener heard the rattling of their armor and tied to one's eyes, which looked the enemies a bit sharply, as they sprang to pieces like glass. Now they went on undisturbed, and had been blessed than the two in the church, the six servants took leave, and said to their master. "Your wishes are fulfilled you have us no longer necessary, we will go ahead and try our luck. half an hour before the castle was a village near which a swineherd tended his flock as they came, he said to his wife. "You know quite who I am? I'm not a prince, but a swineherd, and with the flock there, that's my father. The two of us have to work also, and help him beware. "Then he went with her to the inn, and secretly told the landlord, in the night to take away her royal garments. So when she awoke in the morning, she had nothing, and the hostess gave her an old coat and a pair of worsted stockings, same time seemed as if it were a great gift, and said. "If not your husband would be if I had not given it to you" because she thought he really was a swineherd, and tended the herd with him and thought.. I've earned my haughtiness and pride that lasted eight days when she could not take it anymore, because the feet had become her sore Then came a few people and asked if she knew who her husband was, "Yes," she answered, "he is a swineherd, and has just gone out to drive with ribbons and lace a little trade." and they said, "just come with us, we you want to lead to him, "and they took her up to the castle; and how they came into the hall, there stood her husband in their robes. but they did not recognize him until he fell on her neck, kissed her and said, "I have suffered so much for you, since you also should suffer for me." Now the wedding was first celebrated, and it told, wanted, he would have been there.
The six swans	470	451	German	There once a king was hunting in a great forest and hunted a wild after so eager that no one could follow him by his people. When evening came he stood still and looked around, he saw that he was lost. He sought a way out, but could not find one. Then he saw an old woman with a nodding head coming towards him; but that was a witch. "Lady," he said to her, "not can you me the way through the forest to show?" "Oh, yes, Lord King," she answered, "I can well, but it is a condition there when you do not fulfill, so you will never get out of the forest and you have it die of hunger. "" What is this condition? " asked the king. "I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as beautiful as you see one in the world will find you can, and probably deserves to be your wife, you want to make the queen for a wife, so I you the way out of the forest. "the king in fear of his heart agreed, and the old woman led him to her house, where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She received the king as if she had been expecting him, and he saw clearly that she was very beautiful, but she did not please him, and he could not look at her without secret horror. After he had lifted the girl on his horse, the old woman showed him the way, and the king came back into his royal palace where King celebrated wurde.Der the wedding had been married before and had by his first wife, seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved more than anything in the world. Because he feared that the stepmother does not want to treat them well and do them not harm, he took them to a lonely castle which stood in the middle of a forest. There was so hidden, and the way was so difficult to find that he had not found himself, if he is a ball of yarn would not have given wonderful properties a wise woman; when he threw it down before him, it unrolled himself from himself and showed him the king went Weg.Der but often also that the queen noticed his absence to his dear children; she became curious and wanted to know what he did out there creating all alone in the forest. She gave his servants a lot of money, and who betrayed the secret to her and told her about the ball, which alone could point the way. Well, she could not rest until they had brought out where the king kept the ball, and then they made little white silk shirts, and since they had learned the art of witchcraft from her mother, she sewed a charm inside. And had ridden once when the king to hunt, she took the little shirts and went into the forest, and the tangle showed her the way. The children who saw them coming from a distance someone who thought their dear father came to them, and jumped at him with joy. Then she threw over each one of the little shirts, and how that had touched their bodies, they were changed into swans, and flew over the forest away. The queen went home very pleased to go and believed her stepchildren to be, but the girl you had not run out with her brothers, and she knew nothing about him. The next day the king went to visit his children, but he found no one but the girl. "Where are your brothers?" asked the king. "Ah, dear father," she replied, "are continuing and have me left alone," and told him that it had seen from her window, like his brothers had flown away as swans over the forest, and showed him the feathers that they had in the yard to drop and it had gleaned. The king mourned, but he did not think the Queen had done this wicked deed, and as he feared that the girl would also robbed him, he would take it away with. But it was afraid of the stepmother and begged the king that there remain only the night in the forest Castle dürfte.Das poor girl thought: My stay here is over, I will seek to go and my brothers. And came as the night, escaped and went straight into the forest. It went on all night and the next day until it could go no longer in a continuous fatigue. When she saw a wild hut, climbed up and found a room with six little beds, but it did not dare to lie down in one, but crept under one and lay on the hard ground and wanted the night as bring. But when the sun was going down soon, it heard a noise and saw six swans come flying in at the window. They sat down on the ground and blew at each other, and blew all the feathers off, and their swan skin stripped off like a shirt. Then she looked at the girl and recognized her brothers, was glad and crept out from under the bed. The brothers were not pleased less than they saw their little sister, but their joy was short-lived. "Here your staying can not be," she said to him, "this is a robbers when the come home and find you, they kill you. ' "Can not you protect me?" asked the little sister. "No," they replied, "because we can take off our swan skin just a quarter of an hour every night and have our human form at this time, but then we are again transformed into swans." The little sister wept and said, "Could be because not redeemed their" "Oh no," she answered, "the conditions are too hard You can not speak for six years and not laugh and have six little shirts in the period from. star flower sew. If a single word out of your mouth, so all work is lost. " And when the brothers had the speaking, the quarter hour was over, and they flew as swans back to the window hinaus.Das girls but made a firm decision to redeem his brothers, and even if it cost his life. It left the hut, and going in the middle of the forest and sat down on a tree and there passed the night. The next morning we went out and gathered asters and began to sew. Talk could with no one, and laugh it did not like; It sat there and saw nothing but her work. When she had already spent a long time there, it happened that the king of the country was hunting in the forest and its hunters to the tree came on which the girl was sitting. They called to her and said: "Who are you?" but there was no answer. "Come down to us," they said, "we will do thee no harm." It shook merely with his head. As they pressed with questions, she threw them his gold necklace down, hoping they would satisfy. but they did not let down, as it gave them his belt down, and when even this did not help his garters, and could gradually everything she had on and without, so that there is nothing left but her smock retained. but the hunters did not let Reject thus, climbed the tree, lifted the girl down and took it from the König.Der king asked, "Who are you what are you doing on the tree?" But it did not answer. He asked it in all the languages ​​he knew, but it was silent as a fish. but because it was so beautiful, so was the king's heart stirred, and he took a great love for him. He did it on his cloak, took it in front of him on his horse and brought her to his castle. Since he left to do to him rich clothes, and her beauty shone as bright as day, but it was to bring out a word of it. He sat there at the table to his side, and his modest mien and his modesty pleased him so much that he said: "This desire to marry me and no other in the world," and after a few days he married ihr.Der but King had a wicked mother who was dissatisfied with this marriage and spoke ill of the young queen. "Who knows where the girl is here," she said, "can not speak: she is a king not worthy" than a year when the Queen brought the first child into the world, it took the old man away and smeared her in sleep the mouth with blood. As they went to the king and accused her, she was a man-. The king would not believe it and was not suffering that was being done her an injury. But she sat resistant and sewed to the shirts and caring for nothing else. The next time, when she again gave birth to a beautiful boy, exercised the wrong mother used the same deceit, but the king could not decide to attach their speeches faith. He said: "She is too pious and good that they could do such a thing, they would not be dumb, and could defend themselves, their innocence would come to light." But when the third time took away the old the new-born child and the queen accused, put forward the no word in their defense, so the king could not help but they handed over to the court, and she was sentenced to suffer death by fire. When the day came, where the judgment was to take place, there was at the same time in which they are not talking about the six years around the last day and was not allowed to laugh, and she had delivered her dear brothers from the power of the spell. The six shirts were ready, only that there was a lack of the last of the left sleeve. As she was led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her arm, and when she stood up, and the fire was about to be fired, so they looked around, there were six swans through the air thus drawn. She saw that her deliverance was near, and her heart stirred in Freude.Die swans rushed to her and sank down so it that the shirts could throw; , and how they were affected by it, the swan's feathers fell off, and her brothers stood before her and were fresh and beautiful; only the youngest was missing his left arm, and he had it a swan's wing on the back. They embraced and kissed, and the queen went to the king, who was very upset and began to speak and said, "Dearest husband, now I may speak and you reveal that I am innocent and falsely accused," and told him about the fraud of the ancients, who had taken away her three children and hidden them. Since they were brought to great joy of the king and the angry mother was bound for punishment to the stake and burnt to ashes. But the king and queen with her six brothers lived many years in happiness and peace.
The seven Ravens	241	451	German	A man had seven sons, and still no daughter, however much he wished for finally gave him his wife again good hope of a child, and came into the world, it was a girl. The joy was great, but the child was sickly and small, and should have the emergency baptism because of his weakness. The father sent one of the boys in haste to the spring to fetch water for the baptism The other six went with, and because everyone wanted to be when scooping the first, so they dropped the pitcher into the well. There they stood and did not know what to do, and no one dared home. When she still did not return, the father grew impatient, and said, "Certainly they have forgotten it again about a game, the wicked boys." He became afraid, the girl would die without being baptized, and in his anger cried. "I wanted the boys were all turned into ravens" No sooner was the word finished speaking, he heard a whirring over his head in the air, looked up and saw up seven coal-black ravens and davonfliegen.Die parents could the curse not take back more, and so sad it over the loss of their seven sons, they consoled themselves but to some extent by their dear little daughter, who soon, and more beautiful every day was. Did not know for a long time again that she had had brothers, for her parents were careful not to mention her until she heard talk of a tag of about the people of himself, the girl was certainly beautiful, but actually to blame for the misfortunes of his seven brothers. Then she was much troubled, and went to his father and mother and asked if it would have had as brothers, and if they had gotten to. The parents now dared not conceal the secret longer, but said it was the will of Heaven undoing and his birth had only been the innocent occasion. But the maiden took it to heart daily, and thought it would redeem his siblings again. It had no rest or peace until she set out secretly, and went into the wide world to trace out her brothers and set them free, let it cost what it wanted. It took nothing with her but a little ring from his parents as a keepsake, a loaf of bread for hunger, a little pitcher of water against thirst, and a little chair for Müdigkeit.Nun went there all the time, far, far end of the world. Since it came to the sun, but it was too hot and terrible, and ate little children. Hastily she ran away, and ran to the moon, but it was far too cold, and also awful and malicious, and when he saw the child, he said, "I smell human flesh." Since it went swiftly away, and came to the stars, which were kind and good, and everyone was sitting on his special stool. But the morning star arose, and gave him drumstick of a chicken, and said. "If you do not have the legs, you can not unlock the glass mountain, and in the glass mountain are your brothers" The girl took the drumstick, wrapped it carefully in a cloth, and went away again, until it came to the glass mountain. The gate was closed and it did take out the drumstick, but when she undid the cloth, it was empty, and she had lost the good star. What was she now? His brothers wanted to save, and had no key to the glass mountain. The good sister took a knife, cut off one of her little fingers, put it into the gate and closed happy. When she had gone, met him a dwarf, which said: "My child, what are you looking for?" - "I'm looking for my brothers, the seven ravens," she replied. The dwarf said, "The lord ravens are not at home, but you want to wait so long here until they come, enters." Thereupon the little dwarf carried the ravens' dinner in, on seven little plates, and in seven little glasses, and from each plate and the sister ass a morsel, and from each little glass she drank a SchIückchen; in the last little glass but it let drop the ring which she hatte.Auf taken even hear it in the air a whirring sound and a Geweh, then the little dwarf, "the lord ravens are now flying home." When they came, wanted to eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. Then one after the other: "Who has been eating off my plate Who has drunk out of my little glass That was a human mouth?". And when the seventh came to the bottom of the cup, rolled against the Ringlein. As he looked at it and realized that it was a ring of father and mother, and said, "God grant that our sister may be here, so we shall be free." As the girl who was standing behind the door watching, heard that wish, she came forth, and as all the Ravens got their human form again. And they embraced and kissed each other, and went joyfully home.
The seven Swabians	1134	1321	German	Once seven Swabians were together, the first was Herr Schulz, the second Jackli, the third, Marli, the fourth of the Jergli, the fifth, Michal, the sixth Hans, the seventh Veitli; all of which had set out to kill seven to traverse the world to seek adventure and to accomplish great deeds. but that they were also armed with hand and sure sies looked good to show that although they allowed to make only one, but very strong and long skewer. This Spiess bundled them all seven together on, in front of the boldest and bravest that had Herr Schulz was his, and then the others followed one after the other, and Veitli was the letzte.Nun it happened when she one in Heumonat a tag long journey had gone well up to the village still had a good deal where they had to stay overnight that not far flew at dusk on a meadow a big Ross beetle or hornet of them behind a bush, and hummed. Herr Schulz was startled that he almost spit would be dropped and broke him the cold sweats all over. 'Hark listens,' he called to his companions, 'God, I hear a drum!' Jackli who kept the tables behind him, and I do not know what was that smell in the nose, said, "something is present, no doubt, for I taste powder and matches. ' the stem at these words the Lord hub Schulz to take the flight, and in a trice jumped over a fence, but as he just jumped on the tines of a rake which had been left by the haymaking there, it struck against his face and gave unwashed him a shock. 'O wei wei o,' cried Herr Schulz, 'take me prisoner, I resulting, I resultant me !, The other six were jumping all over the other one near, and shouted' you surrender, I surrender too If you surrender, I surrender too. ' Finally, there was like no enemy to bind and take them away, they realized that they were deceived: and so the story would not come to the people, and they would not fools and ridiculed, they conspired with each other as long as keep silent it until an unexpectedly mouth auftäte.Hierauf they moved on. The second danger that they experienced, but can not be compared with the first. After several days she wore her way through a fallow field, sat there asleep rabbit in the sun, ears stretched out in the air, and had the great glassy eyes stand rigid. Because they were terrified at the sight of the cruel and savage beast, and they advice on what to do would be the least dangerous. Because they wanted to escape was to get the monster followed them and devour them all with skin and hair. So they said, "we have to pass a large and dangerous struggle, freshly begun is half done! ' summarized all seven of the tables' Herr Schulz in front and Veitli back. Herr Schulz wanted to spit still persist, but Veitli was behind become quite brave, wanted to break loose and rief'stoss in every Swabian name, else I wish that you'd erlahme.'Aber Hans knew how to meet, saying 'chattering good at element, you snatches always bischt the letscht the Drachehetze.'Der Michal rief'es is missing nit to a hair' it ischt probably the devil gar.'Drauf came to the Jergli the series, the sprach'ischt he nit it so ischts was Muter or the devil Stiefbruder.'Der Marli had a good idea there and said to the Veitli'gang, Veitli, gang, you transition ahead, i will dahinte heard before di stahn.'Der Veitli but not on it and Jackli sagte'der Schulz, who has the first to be, because he deserves the honor allei.'Da took Herr Schulz, a heart, and said gravitätisch'so attracts because heartily to battle, thereto can be seen brave Leut. ' Then they went all together set on the dragon. Master Schulz crossed himself and prayed to God for assistance, but how all this would not help and he came closer and closer to the enemy, he screamed in great fear "Oho! hurlehau! hau! hauhau !, of which awakened the hare, startled and jumped quickly away. When Herr Schulz saw him so field of battle, he exclaimed full Freude'potz, Veitli, lueg, lueg 'what ish it? the Ungehüer ischt a Has.'Der Swabian allies but was looking for more adventure, and came to the Mosel, a mossy, still and deep water, it is not much bridges, but it is must be run over in ships at several places. Because the seven Swabians did not know this, they called a man who accomplished across the water to his work, as one might come over yet. The man understood because of the distance and their language is not what they wanted, and asked to be Trie Risch 'wat? wat !, As said Herr Schulz, he spoke no different than "Wade, wade through the water, 'and beginning because he was the first to make their way and go into the Mosel. Not long before he sank into the mud and into the driving deep waves his hat but the wind drove over to the other side, and a frog sat down beside it, and croaked "Wat, wat, wat. ' The other six side heard that and said, 'our comrades, Master Schulz is calling us, he can wade across, why can not we?' Jumped it all together in a hurry, drowned in the water and so that a frog of all six gave their lives, and no one came back home from the Swabian allies.
The seven rinds	3401	501	German	All praised unanimously the proposal Menecas who had told this tale in such a graceful manner that it has taken place in the so far away things the eyes of the audience on the most lively vorführte; such that Tolla it was very jealous and felt the most violent desire to surpass Meneca by far, which is why, after they cleared his throat first, so started: There are probably, I think, not a single saying that does not either entirely or is at least half true, and who therefore has said, "the Happy nothing make of it and he Shah 'no matter how ugly," certainly knew what goes on in the world, or perhaps he had the story of Antonio and Parmiero read, which states: "a bit of luck is better than all the beauty and all skill," and the daily experience proves it so that this world is a true reflection of Cockaigne, where those who work the most, earned the least, and the best come off, which can be about anything gray hair grow and quietly waits to see if he fly the roast pigeons in the mouth or not so that it must be obvious blind, and that the gifts and Happiness did not give fast galleys, but be won with ordinary rowing boats, as you will hear the same this. There was once a poor old woman who went begging with the distaff in hand, and the people on the street bespuckend, door to door, and there drinking by fraud and cunning half the year and eat, so she made some pitying, gullible women know, that they wanted to make a soup for their half-starved daughter, and got that way seven pork rind together, they brought home, and with an apron full of chips that they aufgeklaubt on the road, the daughter gave so they cook the rind, while they went away again to beg by some gardeners a few cabbage leaves and then make a tasty soup. The daughter then took the rinds, scorched from the hair, put it in a pot and put them to the fire. But no sooner had they started to cook, so it also began the mouth to water; because of the upward rising smell was too fierce challenge in the field of appetite and a subpoena for the purpose of information before the tribunal of the palate, such that, after long resistance, incited by the steam of the pot, driven by the natural gluttony and gnawing of the hunger contrived by the throat, finally tasted a little bit that it tasted so good that she said to herself: make "Bange does not apply; now I'm in the process; may go as they want to go now; it's just a rind, which is the will to say? I have enough to pay fur on his back to the rinds. "And as she said this, she swallowed the first, and as they drive the stomach with ever greater violence, they also took the second, then they beknabberte the third, and so they plastered finally gradually getting one after the other, all seven. After she had but carried out this terrible prank and, reflecting on their offense, gained the certainty that the rinds would dearly her, she resolved to deceive the mother an X for a U, so the sole section of an old shoe in seven strips and put them into the jar. Meanwhile, the mother returned with a bunch cabbage stalks home, she cut to even the slightest bit of losing it, all the roots together in pieces, and when she saw the pot in full boil, threw them into it together with a piece of Schmer that a coachman at the smearing of a car left to keep and had given her as alms. Then she covered a rag over an old chest of poplar wood, took out a knapsack two pieces dried up bread, picked up from the bowl board a wooden bowl, cut the bread into it and poured then the cabbage with the leather pieces about it. But as soon as she started to eat, she realized at once that she had no teeth and that the shoemaker pigskin were transformed by a new Ovidian metamorphosis into a buffalo hide; Therefore, she turned to her daughter and said, "You've got played me a nice trick, you fucking man! What kind of cheese you gave me because here in the soup done? Is my stomach an old shoe that you want patching it with pieces of leather? - Right now you confess to me what went on there, or it would be better for you if you were never born, because no bone in my body I will let you all but "Saporita lay down now, although initially on Denial, by the threats of the ancients. finally put in fear, she pushed all the blame on the steam of the pot, which they had seduced to this dirty trick. Now that the old man her food looked spoiled in this way, they seized last a broomstick and began to such him to swing that they drive left Saporita more than seven times, and spoke again, and they all blindly always ensure belaboured. The cries of her daughter but resigned a merchant who has just passed away, and into the house, and as he saw the anger of the ancients, he tore her broomstick from his hand and said, "What has he done the poor girl that you in such a way they wish beaten to death? This means punish or take his own life? Did you perhaps made the loved one or has vomited you the money box? ? Not you ashamed you to mistreat the poor thing so relentlessly "-" You do not know what they did to me, "replied the old woman; "Sees the shameful nickel, how poor I am, and yet they do not return to it, but I want to ruin by the doctor and pharmacist; because although I have forbidden her now, to work hard in this hot season so, so that they do not as sick as I have nothing to feed them, that rebellious thing has this morning fully spun me despite seven spindles ., at the risk, should drop and as a result a few months to be bedridden for weakness "By but the merchant, this all sounded, he thought that the industriousness of this girl could make the happiness of his house being, and therefore said to the ancients: "Give up your anger; because I want to free yourself from this danger, marry your daughter and bring them to my house, where they shall live like a princess, I, thank God, feed my own chickens, masts my pig, my dovecote have and can not turn around in my house, so full it is; because - without Beschreiung let it be said! - I scouring of grain, boxes of flour, jars of oil, pots and bubbles full of lard, the nails full of bacon, pot boards full of dishes, large barn wood, whole mountains of coal, a closet full laundry and a bed like a king, especially such a large income on interest and rent that I can make a living as a gentleman; Also I make me some dozen ducats at the fairs, so that when it goes on like this, I'll be a rich man soon. "When the old woman this so unexpected luck saw before him, she took Saporita by the hand and gave it as it is the traditional habit and custom in Naples, the merchant with the words: "Take her out here you have it as yours for all time, God may give you health and beautiful children," Then hugged the merchant Saporita, led them in! his house and the time could not wait until the new week began. Therefore, once appeared Monday, he got up early, went to the market where farmers hawk their wares, and bought twenty Gebund flax, which he then took her home and Saporita handed, saying: "Here you can spin as much as you feel like have and do not need to fear being hindered again by such a crazy fool like your mother, who broke every rib, because you vollspannst the spindles; for I will give you my heart on the contrary, for every dozen spindles a dozen kisses and for each strand of yarn. So work your heart's content, and when I return from the fair, which will be in about twenty days of the case, I hope to find these twenty Gebund flax spun; then thou shalt also from me a beautiful corsage of red cloth covered with green velvet Accept a gift "-" Just wait, "replied quietly Saporita," you are enormously surprised on the wrong track and you'll tremendously. if you ever think to wear a shirt from my hands work, you have to reckon with the host. Because for me you just come to the right! - Can witches I about that I have to spin twenty Gebund flax in twenty days? Get the cuckoo, because you were born the hour! But you just wait always; for thou shalt yarn not before Nimmermehrstag complete Best! "Meanwhile, her husband was gone, and Saporita well leckermäulig as work-shy, now did nothing other than that she took aprons full of flour and jug full of oil and pancakes and pies baked to which they till late evening nibbled on and on like a mouse from early morning and like a fish ate. But when was the time where her husband would return home, they began to look inward and consider what would a pagan event he do if he should but find the flax untouched, the box and pitchers empty. therefore she took a long pole, wrapped about a whole Gebund flax with all tow and all fibers, then put a pumpkin on a large fork, and after they tied the rod against the railing of the roof, she began to those grandmother of all spindles from deigning roof, which served her a cauldron macaroni broth as a water bowl, and while she spun as fine as if they wanted to make Schifftaue, she played every time she wet her fingers made, with the passers Carnival, that is, they injected them on. By chance it happened but now that some fairies passed by the so large in this strange spectacle delight found that they almost burst out laughing, she is why the spinner wished that all flax, which she had in the house, on the spot not only should turn into yarn, but even in finished and bleached canvas, which came at once, so that Saporita was swimming in a sea joy at the sight of this unexpected happiness. So that they would not molested in the future from her husband with such work, she poured herself a measure nuts to bed and then lay down as soon as she saw return those home into what she started to whimper and so back and her to throw that it crushed the nuts and it seemed as if her cracked ribs in the body. So when her husband asked her how she were, she responded with a weak and broken voice: "I can not find worse me, dear husband; because no bone in his body has remained with me all, it seems to you a little, twenty Gebund flax in twenty days since spinning and even to turn it into canvas? Just go, go, dear man, you have no human heart in the body, mind and you have not much in the skull; But when I'm dead, so I will not born anew, so you get me not even to such horses work approach; . Because I am not inclined to make as much spindles full, abzuspinnen the spindle of my life "when her husband heard these words, he began to caress her, and said," God forbid that I should lose you; because I love you that is woven out loud stimuli, more than all the tissues of the world; and now I realize how right did your mother in punishing you for your ceaseless work if you zusetzest your health it; drum is only good cheer, dear wife, I'm going straight to the doctor; for you shall again be healthy, if it should cost me an eye. "And as he said this, he went even in a hurry on to get to the championship Catruppolo, during which time Saporita ate up all the nuts and shells to threw out the window. As soon as the doctor came and felt her pulse, looked closely at her face, took the chamber pot in inspection and the chamber pond had smelled, he concluded with Hippocrates and Galen from all symptoms that their evil proceeded from too much blood and too little work; But the merchant, who gave this statement for a great inconsistency, put the doctor a ducat in his hand and sent him easily back home. Although he wanted to get even another doctor, but Saporita told him he should just leave it; because the mere sight of the first would have completely cured; what her husband hugged her and told her that she did not work hinfür, but rather should rather maintain in the best way; because it would not be possible to plant wine and cabbage on a spot and: You can not serve two masters at the same time.
The seven pigeons	3405	451	German	The story of the two pie was so that they lick, in fact, for all a filled cake she settled taste wonderful gets a hand to it. But when Paola was preparing to tell theirs, the command of the Prince of Medusa, which all took away the language was so that she started so to say: He who does good experiences good; Officiousness is the catch of friendship and the bond of love, and who does not sow, not reap as Ciullo has also shown in a Voressen of Example I but you want to serve up a dessert, if ye want to remember that it is " About table, "Lend me say little therefore a short time a sympathetic ear. I will also plead to heaven, that he let you grow your ears and you listen to them more enjoyable and pleasant things may you. It was back in the area of ​​Arzano a brave woman who every year promoted a son to light, so that their number had risen to seven and they resembled the Syrinxpfeife the god Pan, whose seven tubes one is always smaller than the other , And when they had escaped the children's shoes, and said to her mother Janet Ella when she was once again in good hope: "Give probably eight, dear mother, we say to thee; if you now not finally a daughter bring to so many sons into the world, so we are determined to make our way and how lost and leave to go out into the world. "As soon as the mother heard these unfortunate speech, so she asked the heavens, but discourage their sons from this decision and to protect them from the loss of such seven gems of how their children were. So when the mother of the hour of her delivery was near, their sons said to her, "We, dear mother, are we now to embark on that heap or hill that is here just about, and if you bring forth a son, so put an inkwell together with the spring to the window, but if a girl, so put out a spoon and a rocking; because if we see the latter character, so we return and spend the rest of life beneath your wings, in the opposite case, however you like us just always forget; . Because then our staying is no longer "But as soon as the children had left the house, it added the sky that Janet Ella gave birth, so that they immediately said, a pretty daughter to the midwife that she should be the sons of the prearranged signal; However, this was stunned so and bewildered that she put the inkwell and the spring to the window. At the sight of this sign, the brothers took her legs over the hump and went until they after three years of wandering in the forest came where the trees to the music of a river that used the stones as tools aufführten a Blütenreigen. In this forest but the dwelling of a wild man, whose wife had gouged out his eyes in sleep and had become the enemy of women therefore such that he ate all he could get was. And when the seven young men exhausted from the trip and almost dead arrived from hunger at the home of the wild man, they besought him that he still wants to give mercy a morsel of bread to them what those displaced that he would give them all a living, if they wanted to serve him, and that they would have nothing to do but that he should watch each one after a day like a dog. This offer was exactly what the young men, so they took it at once and entered the service of the wild man who memorized their names and soon Giangrazio called, soon Cecchitiello soon Pascale, soon Nuccio, now Pone, soon Pezzillo and soon Carcavecchia ; for thus were called the brothers, whom he instructed a room in his house and gave them so much that they could live on it. Meanwhile, the sister grew up, and when she heard that her seven brothers had gone through an oversight her mother into the world and never again something of themselves had let hear they put it into his head to visit them, and so much was her mother in the ears until they, stunned by the everlasting entreaties, gave her a pilgrim costume and led them. The daughter now went without stopping anywhere, and on, and they asked every moment, who would have seen seven brothers, and as long as they wandered about until they finally learned at an inn where they were. Once they now the way that the forest had to say leave, she pulled away again, reaching one morning when the sun with a penknife the radiation auskratzte the blobs made of the night on the paper of the sky, to the house of the wild man of where her brothers realized with much joy and that writing things confounded that had treacherously written so much suffering for them. but after she proved her sister thousandfold caresses, she advised her absolute silence to keep in her room, so that the wild man do not see them, and also that it of everything they eat, and the cat in the room was, should make a piece, otherwise they would do something to her any harm. Cianna (this was the name of the sister) wrote this advice in the book of her heart and always shared honestly with the cat by average everything in detail and with the words: "This for me and for you," the cat their conscientiously metered portion handed. However, it came to pass one day that were gone when the brothers in the service of the wild man on the hunt, they delivered the sister of a bag of peas to a boil and this same, unfortunately, among them found a Haselnußkern when reading that the stumbling block was for its peace; because, as they ate up the core, without giving the cat the half of it, they jumped fully displeasure about it on the stove and pissed so long on the fire until it went out. By now Cianna saw this and did not know what to do, she left against the advice of their brethren the room, entered the room of the wild man and asked him for some fire, whereupon the latter, a woman's voice hearing, once said, "Good day, neighbor, waiting a little, did you find what you seek. "and so saying, he seized a grindstone, it smeared with oil and began to sharpen his tusks. Cianna but which saw how badly she had arrived, took fire, ran back into her room and locked the door behind him by also cross bars, chairs, bedsteads, chest, stones and what humanly nor in her room was, vorschob. Once the wild man had sharpened his teeth, he ran to the room of the brothers, and he found it closed, he began to happen on the other hand with their feet to einzurennen them. Meanwhile, the brothers came home, and by heard this tumult, and heard that the wild man called them traitors because they made her room whereabouts of his enemies, Giangrazio began, the oldest and wisest of all, when he saw how bad things were, so to speak: "we know nothing of what is going on here, and it is quite possible that the woman cursed room, while we were on the hunt, come to our office. Since she has but entrenched within, so come with us; . Because we want to lead you so that you will catch them without it can defend itself "Then they took him to a deep, deep ditch, then gave him a shove and threw him down; then they took a shovel, which they found on the ground, and covered it completely with soil. After she had her sister called to open the door, they washed their efficient head for having acted against their advice and had exposed to such a risk; but in the future they should be more careful and take good care, near the place where the wild man would be buried, plucking grass; otherwise they would turn into seven doves. "Behüt 'heaven that I you should do this," said Cianna what they put in possession of the house and all of the wild man things and began to cheerful by wanted to wait until the winter might pass in order to then, when the sun of the earth gives a green, embroidered with flowers garb than joy gift upon taking possession of the house "to the bull," that is, if the sun into the sign of the bull takes to make their way and return to their homes. Now it came to pass one day, had gone when the brothers into the forest to fetch wood and to protect thus against the cold, which increased from day to day that a poor walkers arrived at the house of a monkey, the sitting on a pine tree, made a teasing gesture and for a fruit of that tree was thrown at her that made him such a huge dent that the poor fellow screamed as he put on a spit. In this noise Cianna left the house, and full of compassion with him she pulled quickly from a rosemary bush that had grown out of the grave of the wild man, a few leaves off, from which she made with chewed bread and salt paving what she gave him a breakfast and then released him. While you now, the brothers awaiting set the table, suddenly appeared seven doves, who said to her: "How many times better it would have been, one would you cut your hands, you originator of all our misfortunes than that you abpflücktest the accursed rosemary and we stürztest in such great suffering. , Have you eaten cat brain, sister that you is so vanished our advice entirely from memory? - Now we are transformed into doves and exposed to the clutches of the consecrations, sparrow hawks and hawks; now we are comrades of coots, snipe, goldfinches, tree hacker, Jay, owls, magpies, jackdaws, crows, starlings, grouse, lapwings, beach runners, coots, black grouse, blackbirds, thrushes, finches, wrens, woodpeckers, linnet, Siskins, warblers , crossbill, flycatchers, crested larks, plovers, diver, wagtails, robins, bullfinches, sparrows, ducks summit, thrushes, wood pigeons and bullfinches. Once upon a clever trick; now we can at least return to our home, to then let us catch with nets and lime sticks! To cure a pilgrim's head, you broke seven brothers his neck; because for us is not a life, if you do not auffindest the mother of time and you can by it say what to do for us. "Cianna stood there petrified and asked at last her brothers because of their oversight pardon by promising, long travel about the world until she auffände the dwelling of those old; at the same time they put their brethren to the heart, as long as they would be absent, always stay in the home so that they do not resist leading a disaster. She then went on his way and wandered about everywhere, without ever tiring; for though they went on foot, so it served but the desire to help their brothers when Gaul, with whom she made three miles an hour. At last they came to a coast where the sea a schoolmaster whipped like the cliffs with his Wellenrute, because they would not respond to the questions it addressed to her, and saw a large whale, who spoke to her: "What are looking ? you, my beautiful child, "what Cianna replied:" I'm looking mother's home time "-" do you know what you do shalt "said the whale.?. along "Go always on this bank, and at the first river that you encounter, then go again upstream, then you will find that will show you the rest of the way someone. But do me a favor and please if you found them on my behalf that she wants me to do Old specify a means, I can safely accompanied swim without bumping often on rocks and fallen onto the sand. "-" just let me make, "said Cianna, and warmly thanking the whale for the way he her show she began along pull always on the shore until they finally arrived after a long journey to the river, like a fiscal Commissioner large sums of silver money handed in to the bank of the sea, which she always went upstream to him and finally arrived on a beautiful Au, which believed to be the same in her starry mantle with flowers heaven. There she met a mouse said to her, "Where are all alone, beautiful child," what Cianna replied:. "I'm looking the mother of time" - "You're to go very far," said the mouse, " but only the courage not lose; Everything has an end; go just keep going on those mountains, which can be the title> Highness <passed as the rulers of the plane; there you will again receive information about what you want to know. But if you do at the house which you sought out, anlangst, so I do a favor and please the good old woman to tell you how we mice it to start, to free us from the tyranny of cats; you will show me by a great service, and I will always be grateful to you. "Cianna promised to do her this favor and made his way to those mountains which were indeed very close but not impossible to achieve seemed. Finally, however, she reached for them and sat down wearily on a stone down where they saw an army of ants continued created a large amount of grain supplies and one of which turned to Cianna and she asked, "Who are you and where are you going ? "to which Cianna, who was polite to everyone, said,". I am an unhappy girl and must necessarily seek the mother of time the house "-" go further and further, "said the ant," because where these mountains flatten into a large level, you will receive further information. Do us a favor but to learn, looking from the Old as we ant it to start, something to live longer than now; because it seems to pile up my great inconsistency in the earthly bustle, so many supplies of food for such a short life, which, like the light of a juggler, middle goes out in the best. "-" Be calm, "said Cianna," I you'll have to repay your kindness. "and away pulling over the mountains, they came to a beautiful hall, on the soon met them after a large Zirneiche that was a monument high antiquity and the fruit of the poor girl who was content with little, such as confectionery tasted, but even a morsel the prehistoric world this sorrowful era giveth in memory of the lost happiness. The tree now formed a mouth from its bark and a tongue from the marrow and said to Cianna: "Where so sad, my child? Come under my shadow and rest in. "Cianna but thanked him schönstens and declined his kind invitation because she would hurry and had to see the mother of time. When the tree heard this, he began again: "You're not very far from your goal, because you'll be moved no more day, so you'll see on a mountain in a house and you find looking for. But if you're as friendly as beautiful, so trouble yourself to learn how to begin to regain my lost honor, I even used to feed the making, but now only mast for pigs deliver. "-" About Lasse me this concern, "said Cianna," for I will strive to be you complacent. "Then they moved on, and walked without having to treat each rest until she reached the foot of a saucy mountain, with its tip the clouds was driving in the face. There they met an old man who, tired of the way had been placed in a barn and when he saw Cianna she once as the recognized who had cured him of the bump. When he heard what she was looking for, he told her that he the rent for the piece of land that he cultivated so far, convey to the time and that the time would be a tyrant that all things have seized around the world and ask of all, but especially by the people of his age, tribute; but because he received from Cianna once such a friendly service, so he wanted her now repay him a hundredfold by some good advice about the arrival in this mountain; would do it though suffering, they are not even up to accompany, since his age, as he said, was likely intended, downwards as climb and thus compel him to stay that mountain at the foot in order, with the accountants of time settle his bill namely the sufferings, hardships and illnesses of life and to pay the debt of nature; However, he gave her this advice, saying, "Now hearken well, my pretty child, and lose a word of what I'm telling you now. You'll namely at the summit of this mountain an immense house find the edification no one remembers; the walls have fallen, rotten the reason the doors cracked, outdated equipment and the house fall into disrepair all in a word; on one side you will broken columns, statues and smashed on the other otherwise in good condition considered above a door in a divided field emblem with a snake biting its own tail, a deer, a crow and a phoenix. Once you have entered, you will also on earth filing, see saws, sickles, hip and hundreds kettle full of ash and name on it, as on jars in a pharmacy, which state: Corinth, Sagunto, Carthage, Troy, and a thousand other names cities that have gone to pieces and kept the ash time as trophies of their actions. Now if you come to this building, so hide yourself away until you see beyond the time occurs without hesitation in the house where you will find a hochbejahrte old whose chin touches the earth, and their humps up in the sky ranges, while the hair like the tail of a white horse her cover the heel; their faces but whose folds are stiffened by the starch of time, like a ribbed collar. This old now sits on a clock standing on a wall, and since their brows are so long that they cover their eyes, it is you can not see. Once you're but occurred rapidly take the weights of the clock, and then ask the old woman with a loud voice that they should fulfill what you ask of it; after which it is immediately summon her son, that he may come and may consume you; but since the watch, on which it sits, the weights are missing, so will not be able to go to her son and therefore be forced to grant you what you ask. However, do not trust any oath, which she does, if they do not swear by the wings of her son; then you can believe her and do what she tells you; for then you will have your wishes fulfilled see. "After he said this, the arms fell back and broke up like a dead body is brought out of a catacomb to daylight. Cianna collected then the ashes, a flagon of mingled tears into it, then dug a grave and buried the remains of the departed by she performed a prayer for peace and quiet for his soul; then she got up the hill, where they completely lost their breath and waited until the time came out, which was an old man with enormous long beard, wearing a very old coat to which over and over slips of paper with the names of many were sewn people; He also had big wings and flew so fast that Cianna lost him soon from her face. Now entered the house with his mother and had at the sight of the old box smile; but then she suddenly grasped the weights and said to the ancients what they ask what it let out a loud cry and summoned his son, but Cianna said to her, "If you run with your head against the wall, you get certain yet . not to see your son as long as I hold the weights "When the old woman saw that nothing could be done, they began to flatter Cianna and say; "Let the weights go, my daughter, and did not prevent my son in its course, which has done no mortal on earth to this day; let go, so true you God help; . For I swear by the Scheidewasser my son, with whom he gnawed everything, nothing to do you harm "-" You lose your words, "said Cianna; "You must give me more insurance companies give if you want me to let go of the weights." - "I swear it by the teeth, all earthly things gnaw," said that, "that I'm going to tell you everything you desire. "-" This is nothing, "said Cianna," for I know that you want to betray me. "-" Well, "the old woman said," I swear by the wings that fly everywhere that I you'll prove more good than you imagine, "What Cianna let go of the weights and the Old kissed the smelling of mold and stinking of mildew hand, so that the old man was pleased with the courtesy Ciannas and said to her." Hide yourself behind that door, because if my son comes, I will let me tell him what you want; but when he goes away again, because he never stays quiet stand on one place, leaving the house quickly and make not a sound; because he's such a glutton that he did not spare his own children, and if he has nothing, he eats itself up and then comes back again to the fore. "No sooner had done Cianna how the Old bade her so and that was already fast, high and easily approached, gnawed everything that presented itself to him, even the mold on the walls, and was about to fly away again when the old woman asked him after what they heard from Cianna, and him in milk with which she nursed him, implored to respond precisely to everything they wanted to know from him what the son answered her after much pleading: the tree can reply that he will never be respected by the people, as long as he holds treasures buried under its roots, the mice that they will never be in front of the cat safely if they are not a clip to the leg tie her to listen to her when she comes; the ants that they will live a hundred years, when they can give up flying because like ants near death, they take wing; the whale that he should be in good spirits and keep the dolphin to friends as he when served him as a leader, would never be stranded; and the pigeons that if they sit on the column of wealth, they "According to regain its former shape. These words began the period resume their usual course, and Cianna, taking from the Old farewell, down from the mountain to the level down. Meanwhile, the seven doves her sister were always followed, and finally arrived at the foot of the mountain, they woselbst, tired from the long flight, all down put on the horns of a dead ox, and barely her feet had touched them when they and their former youthful figure recovered. Even with wonder here about they heard from her sister the response time and now saw that the horn is a symbol of abundance and the hint of the time column of wealth on which withdrew them and the sister with the greatest joy the same way the Cianna had made on the journey. By once again came to the oak tree and he told what the time said in regard to his, so the tree asked them to dig up the treasure beneath it, as this occasion was that his acorns would not respected as before. Therefore, the brothers dug with a spade, they found in a garden, until they found a big pile of gold coins, which they distributed among themselves and sister into eight parts, so that they can continue to create comfortable. When she tired but after some time of the trip and the load of gold had gone to sleep next to a fence, they were of some robbers who passed by there and saw are the poor rogues with their heads on the towels full of money, with hands and feet tied to trees, to which those relieved them the spears, and made off, but the bound man began to complain not only about as rapidly gained as zerronnenen treasure, but also because of their life because they, deprived of all hope for help, in danger were either too soon die of hunger or to satisfy the hunger of any wild animal. While they were so lamented their sad fate, the mouse, after hearing of the notice of the time as a reward for the received service the cords with which she saw tethered those appeared gnawed and put them in freedom. When they had gone on a piece, she also met the ant, and after they heard the Council of the time, she asked Cianna what they had because they looked so pale and dejected; therefore Cianna told her what had happened to her, and the trick played her the thieves what the ant replied: "Just be calm; for I am inclined to prove myself grateful for the resulting service. Know namely that while I was carrying a load grain in the ground, I noticed the place where those bloodhounds hid the stolen property; because they have created some caves beneath a ruined building in which they drag out their prey; as they are now just now extended to a new company, I will show you the place and lead you, so that ye can regain yours. "After that, she made her way to some collapsed houses and showed the brothers receipt to the cave from the Giangrazio who had descended as the bravest of all and in all, they had found stolen gold, it soon brought out again, after which they went to the sea shore and there encountered the whale, which they made the by the time the father of all advice given Council informs rushed. While she spoke so of their journey and all their adventures, they suddenly saw the thief rabble that their trail was followed up armed to the teeth in the distance appear so that they cried out at the sight: "Woe to us, this time we are completely and hopelessly lost; because there the rogues come armed, and should we pull the wool over my eyes! "-" Be without fear, "said the whale," for I can not and you will save from your distress, to give you the love that you give me all were proven. So rises on my back and be assured that I will bring you to a place of safety. "As the siblings looked the enemy in the neck and the knife to the throat, they boarded the whale, who immediately moved away from the cliffs and finally arrived at the height of Naples; but as the sisters did not dare to land there because of the shallows, they asked the whale: "Where now will ye that I stop you? "Rejoined What Giangrazio" on the coast of Amalfi See to prefer fish, whether the could be avoided;? ! I want to go to any of these places like the land, for it is said> At Vico read: "March, grab you," Say to Castellammare, "go to the devil" the scoundrels to Sorrento you never begrudge good;! the villains I quite hate there to mass of the heart. ' "To them now want to drive, the whale turned and headed for the" los salt rock "on which he dropped her off and from where they are, which was passing through the first fishing boat, they brought on shore, after which they returned fresh and healthy and rich to the delight of their parents in their home and here by the love which Cianna proved to them a happy life led, which testified to the truth of the old word: You do good if you can, and then do not think more to it.
the Star Money	1462	779	German	There was once a little girl who had died father and mother, and she was so poor that it had no more room to live in, and no crib had to sleep in, and finally nothing more than the clothes was wearing and a piece of bread in his hand, which had given him a compassionate heart. but it was good and pious. And because it was so abandoned by the world, it was trusting in the love God out into Feld.Da he met a poor man who said, "Oh, give me something to eat, I'm so hungry." She reached him the whole piece of bread and said, "God bless thee," and moved on. As a child came moaned and said: "It freezes me like my head, give something I can cover it to me." So she took off his cap and gave it to him. And when it was gone for a while, she met another child who had no jacket and was frozen with cold as it gave it her own; and further, one begged for a frock, and she was also out of it. At last she got into a forest and it had already become dark, there came another, and asked for a smock, and the good little girl thought, "It's dark night, no one sees thee, you can probably your shirt to give away," and pulled the shirt off and gave it also hin.Und as it was so and nothing had dropped to even the stars from the sky, and were all bare Taler; and whether it gave away equal to her smock, so it was a new one, and that was the very finest linen. Then she gathered together the money into this, and was rich for his life.
The Dove	3384	310	German	as had been the story of Antonella's completed and, lively praised for their beauty and grace, and because they could be for a respectable girl from such a good example, Ciulla began, which now made the series as follows: Who by birth a prince is, must not behave like a Straßenbube; the nobles must be no bad example to the poor; because of the large donkey learns to eat the little straw. Therefore, it is no wonder that it sends to the sky else suffering the bushel, as happened to a prince who was even close to losing his life. Once there was about eight miles from Naples near the swamps a forest of fig and poplar trees on which Although the sun always shot down their arrows, which they never could penetrate. In this forest now stood a dilapidated cottage, inhabited by an old woman who was as poor rundown of teeth to be rich in years and as high by its hump than in its outer layer. She had hundreds of wrinkles on the face, much more but had her purse; for although shone on her head a lot of silver, they had not the sixtieth part of a guilder in order to do something beneficial, so they begged around in the straw huts of the neighborhood, to prolong their lives. By but one now cares more likely to give a big bag of gold nowadays a sly spy as a needy poor a threesome, they had many a day walking around before they together got a dish Bean, and that at a time when in that area, such abundance ruled that only a few houses were familiar with the size of their inventories. However, since an old boiler not for bumps and holes, an old horse not for flying, a fallen tree not ax blows and who has the damage does not need to take care of ridicule, so it happened that, as even the poor woman was after she had previously read out their beans and put in a pot on the window starting to gather up in the woods a few Reiser for cooking, in the period of their absence the king's son, named Nard'Aniello, which is currently in the hunting was, passed by at the home of the elderly and standing the pot at the window, great desire was to become a main fun by namely proposed to his companions to determine a reward for him who target the most correct and the pot with a stone would just meet in the middle of what they actually began to use the innocent pot as a target, and after three or four litters of the prince, who had taken him by the genauesten, the Price carried off. However, the old man came straight back in time where those just continuing went, and when she saw this great evil, she began to behave as if possessed and exclaim: "Let him praise his arm now and boast that he the pot has encountered this wanton Bock, son of a bitch, whose bones may never come to rest, this simple-minded farmer who has sown my beans so unseemly time. If he but also with my need no spark compassion has had, he would have to take at least to itself regardless, the coat of arms of his house not as defiling and what others hold so high in honor, does not want to drag itself into the mire ! Neither let him just always go; because on my knees and made innerster soul I implore the heavens, that he might fall in love with the daughter of any witch who martere him in every possible way and torment; that the law in such a way zusetze him that he lament is alive than dead, and that he, captivated by the beauty of the daughter and the mother's magic, could never escape, but angebannt stay or rather Bursting, exposed to the torments of those ugly harpy the give him their orders with the dick in his hand and cropping the bread with reluctance, such that it is more than a hundred times the beans beseufze he me now scattered on the ground. "the curses of the old woman now immediately got wings, with which they flew straight into the sky, so that in spite of the proverb: "the curses of Frau'n are without power, traun" and that other: "Cursed horses thrive best," she nevertheless brought the prince into such a gravy! that he thereby almost whistled from the last Loche. There were namely passed less than two hours, so he lost his way in the forest of his people and met a beautiful damsel, examined which snails and jokingly said to them: "Snail, snail, strings, show your fours, if I do not show me your four I'll throw you in the ditch, eat you the ravens. "When the prince that closet of the greatest treasures of nature, this bank of the richest deposits of heaven, this arsenal of the most terrible forces Cupid saw appear before him, he did not know how it was done, and by eyes rays fell of that round crystal face on the scale of his heart, he ignited over and over in such a way that it turned into a brick furnace in which the bricks of the plans for construction of the building were fired his hopes. But Filadora (this was in fact the name of the maiden) was not much better off, as the Prince, who was a very nice young man, her once the heart through and pierced so that both begged with his eyes for pity one another, and even if their tongues had the pips, yet their eyes were like the trumpeters of the Town Hall tower by announcing the mystery of the soul loud. Having now for some time had as viewed with the tan in the throat, without being able to express even a mortal word, he turned finally to tap the voice, and spoke thus: "On what area has sprung this flower of beauty? From what sky this rosewater Grace is rained? From which slot this treasure of grace is come to light? O happy forests, its enviable groves which you inhabit of this glory, will illuminated by this illumination of love festivals! O groves and forests where no rods to dust broom, no crossbeams to the gallows, no lids to commodes, only doors to the temple of beauty, bars are cut into the apartment of the Graces and shafts to love arrows. "-" Enough, my lord, "said Filadora," maketh not me blush; because your virtues, not mine properties deserve this lobreiche inscription that her me now all were dedicated; and I am a woman, which measures yourself, and do not want another berthing a scale on me. The way I but am beautiful or ugly, black or white, thin or fat, plump or turned, grumpy like a witch or friendly as a fairy, cute as a doll or hideous like a dragon, so I'm quite to your command, because your beautiful male figure pierced my heart and your princely mien has penetrated me from one to another side so that I on for ever slave surrender myself to you from this moment as tied. "These were now but no words, but trumpet blasts which all invited the prince to the board of the joys of love, or rather called him with a tutti on horseback to plunge into the battle of love, and although he saw given themselves a finger of accommodation by, he took but the whole hand and kissed the ivory fishhook who had snatched away his heart so that Filadora at the ceremony of the Prince got a face like a gossip Rose or rather like the color board a painter by the fact saw a mixture of the red lead of shame, the white lead of fear, the verdigris of hope and the vermilion of desire. But just Nard'Aniello wanted to speak even when his speech was interrupted him, because now no wine enjoyment without yeast of displeasure, no fat broth wont even have to be of pleasure without scum of anger in this life; for while he was just in the best middle, suddenly appeared the mother Filadoras, so ugly witch that nature seemed to have created all ailments for the model. Her hair resembled a broom of butcher's broom that is not to every one going around to clean the homes of soot and cobwebs, but rather those who saw him to flogged with fear and terror; her forehead was a Genoese grindstone on which they sharpened the dagger of fear with which they pierced the heart; the eyes were like comets, the tremors of the legs, freezing cold of heart, Horror vorherkündeten of mind, the horror of the soul, piercing of the body; by their faces they spread tremors through her eyes scared by their movements terror, by their words dismay. Its mouth was studded with tusks, like that of a wild pig as big as a maw gaped like the one the caliber stirred, slobbering like a mule; in a word, from head to toe you could see a bottom line of ugliness and a whole hospital of infirmity, so that the prince must have surely sewn into any amulet doublet that he did not lose consciousness at the sight. This witch now grabbed him by the neck called and: "Heda, this is not for you, you arch-rogue, you scoundrel, you thief" - "self Schelmin even a thief," said the prince, "pack you old hag!" and was about to draw his sword, which was a real damascene blade, but he stopped solidifies like a sheep that saw the wolf and neither move nor can bleat so that it performed like a donkey by the halter from the Old to her house was she woselbst, at the gateway, said to him: "Work me just so like a dog, or you will die like a pig; and the first performing I dig this piece of land here next to this house to and besäe me then; see but that you can handle; because when I come back tonight and work do not find all done, I'll eat you up "; then she added to her daughter that she should pay attention to the economy, and then went to a coven in the woods. As soon as Nard'Aniello found himself in such a sad situation, he began to bathe his face in tears flows and cursing his fate that had plunged him into so great misfortune. On the other hand, it comforted Filadora and told him to be of good cheer; because she wanted it even risk their lives to help him; he should not complain about his fate, which brought him to a place where he'd loved so much, and he had her love just not very reciprocate because he is showing so much desperate about this event, said what the prince " did not it I grieve that I have risen from the horse on the donkey, the royal palace with this dog hole, the magnificent banquets with a piece of bread, the crowd of servants with drudgery and the scepter swapped with a grave log, nor that I which set I armies in terror, see now frightened by such an ugly scarecrow me; because all my misfortune I would consider to be a great happiness, if you're just with me and I can revel in your sight; but what pierced my heart is that I dig and I must spit into their hands, and what is worse, I should work, what a team oxen in a day would not be able to earn; but if I tonight have my stint not behind me, your mother eats at me, and it is not me so much pain, my leaving miserable body than me to part with your beauty. "While he spoke, poured from him sigh not "faith, my precious life that you have to work on another ground as the garden of love; shock and tears as tons but Filadora dried his face and said, do not fear that my mother was bowed you just a hair on your head, but lean not only on Filadora and was completely without worry because knew that I possess magical powers and make coagulate water and can darken the sun; . It enough and listen to complain, but be merry and joyful, for tonight the piece of land will be plowed and sown without anyone stir a hand "When Nard'Aniello this hearing, he replied:" And if you , can o beauty of the world, as you say, conjure why we do not adopt as quickly away? Because I want you in my father's house hold like a queen, "to which Filadora replied:" A certain influence of the stars for now prevents the execution of this Council; . However, it will soon pass and be our happiness at hand "With these and a thousand other love talks the day passed, and came back as the witch, she called the daughter of the street and said," Filadora, but let me your hair down ! "For since the house had no stairs, so she always rose to the braiding the daughter up. Once Filadora heard the voice of the mother, she made her hair and let it down, by building a golden staircase so for a heart of gold on which hurried the old woman immediately climbed into the garden; when they found him but ordered she was beside himself with astonishment by it seemed impossible that such a delicate young man that hand work should have done. Hardly the sun but was kicked out of the house the next morning to make some movement because of brought in the rivers of India rhinitis, including the witch went away again and gave up Nard'Aniello until the evening six shocks wood, dedicated were in a basement, four times split fertigzuhauen, otherwise she would chop him like bacon and then take him to dinner as Karbonade to himself. Nearly the prince had died in every publication of this decree in shock, so that Filadora so deathly pale seeing cried out to him, "Friend, what you're a coward! Egg my God, I do believe you will do even more fear in the pants! "-" And it seems to you that a little thing, "said Nard'Aniello," from now until the evening six shocks wood by split four times fertigzuhauen? Woe is me, rather I will right through cleaved to the throat to fill this unfortunate witch! - Fear nothing found, "said Filadora," because without that you give yourself the slightest effort, you will properly split the wood at the proper time "" ; but now is only frohauf and not split my soul with your actions. "When the sun closed the store of its rays, and the darkness did not sell any more light, so even the old woman returned, deigned rich ordinary ladder, climbed up and by she found ready carved the wood, she took a suspicion that perhaps her daughter would offer her this checkmate. Therefore, she said on the third day, to make the third attempt at the Prince that he should clean their cistern of a thousand tons of water because they wanted to fill the same fresh; but in the evening he would be ready, otherwise she would turn him into sauce or meatballs. Then went the old woman, and Nard'Aniello began again to wail until Filadora which saw the plight grew and the old man was so foolish to complain the poor fellow with such great suffering and burdens, finally said to him, :; "Be quietly If only the time is over, which my art occurs retardant in the way we want, even before the sun says, 'I express myself <to this house!' I commend myself <say!. This much is certain, my mother to evening found the nest empty today, but I will then go with you and share your skills alive or dead. "As the prince heard these words, broke his feelings out, and so much easier when he before fear was almost cracked, and Filadora embracing, he exclaimed: "you, my dearest are, the guiding star of my tormented by storms boat, you are the rest of my hopes" As soon approached the box, dug Filadora in the garden, under which is an underground passage was a hole in the ground, and then both went in the direction to Naples on the way. But when they arrived at the Grotto of Pozzuolo, Nard'Aniello told Filadora: "It's not good, my dear, that I'll take you to walk and in this costume in the palace; Therefore, wait for me in this inn; because I return very soon with horses, carriages, servants, clothes and other stuff like again. "Filadora therefore remained, but he himself continued his way to Naples. Meanwhile, the old man came back home, and there Filadora did not respond to their usual reputation, so she took suspicion rushed into the woods and went there a long pole to which it then like a cat at the window upstairs and climbed into the house. Having now this inside and out and up and down searched everywhere and no one had found, she finally noticed the hole, and once they perceived that this culminated in the open, she sat with rage and not a hair on his head, and they both the daughter cursed as the prince and the sky pleaded that in the first kiss, the lover of her daughter was receiving, he wants to forget entirely. However, we want to let the old woman say their wicked Paternoster and return to the prince, who in the royal palace, woselbst to him had believed to be dead, Touching, the whole house in an uproar continued by counter hurried same all the inhabitants of him and cried out: "Oh welcome, welcome, welcome a thousand times! There he is alive and well! As we look forward to seeing him back with us, "and a thousand other words of love more. The mother came to meet him, rushed down to the half staircase, it embraced in the most friendly and exclaimed, "My dear son was, my jewel, my eyeball, where are you? Why have you waited so long and we, however, can die of fear "The Prince did not know what to say because he did not want to tell her the gehabten suffering?; hardly but the mother had kissed him with oblivion bring lips, so all he had happened to vanished in the same instant by the curse of the witch, his memory. So when the Queen went on and said that she wanted to see him married, lest he should think it further to go hunting and spend his life in the woods, he replied without hesitation: "Well, so be it! I am willing to do everything that my wife's mother wants, "so that they cried out with joy:" God bless you, my dear son, "It was so fixed that within four days his bride, a lady from! the region of Flanders, who had come recently to Naples should be fed, during which time great feasts and banquets were prepared. Meanwhile Filadora felt the greatest anxiety about the so-long absence of the prince, and as they got wind of the festivals, of which the rumor spread everywhere, so she took one evening the servant, who was already gone to bed, the clothes from his bed, pulled them on and take them their own behind, she made her way to the town and the royal Palace, woselbst the cooks who needed help during the time of the festivities, they took as a kitchen boy in service. And when the morning of the day set was published and it made out the sun on the bank of the sky by nature, had been identified with light sealed trading license for the sale of secret funds for strengthening the eyes, even the bride with timpani and trumpets reached into the palace at what so soon the feast was done and the guests sat down to dinner. but by the Seneschal, among other dishes, which flocked numberless, broached a great English pie which Filadora personally liked eight, flew at once such a beautiful dove from the same show that zuzulangen guests forgot and with astonishment watched the wonderful cute animal that the groom in a plaintive voice thus addressed: "Have eaten thou cats brain, o Prince, that you have so quickly forgotten the love of Filadora? Are you the services that they bestowed upon you, disappeared as quickly from memory, ingrate? Repay you as the benefits that you receive from her, feeling Loser? Has not freed you from the clutches of the witch, you saved your life and to throw yourself? Now is this the reward that you erweisest the unfortunate for the heart intimate love they set for you by the day? Yes, just say However, they may go their way; just always say that she should be pass their thoughts! Woe to the woman who trusts the words of the men! Because despite their promises they only prove cruelty services they reward by ingratitude and benefits by oblivion. So also hoped the unfortunate woman to live as your wife with you under the same roof, but now you say:> A cottage on <; she thought she had already won the game and now faces without audit; she thought to possess your hand and must now pull instead with a long nose! But go just getting back, forget your obligations deny your fault, but like the curses which has launched the unfortunate soul from the depths of you, meet you in full measure! You will then become aware of what it means to betray a lamb to deceive a girl to ensnare a poor innocent by playing her such a rogue trick and write their memory into the stack of memory, while the yours in the flesh it her heart is buried, she will walk in the dust as they carry you on their hands, and her zuwendest your rear, while they serve you like a servant! But if the sky is not affected by the star, if the gods are not the bunghole have plugged their ears so they have the injustice done you probably see, and then, when you suspect it least of the threat and the blow, the lightning and the thunder, the fever and diarrhea at the same time coming! But enough, let you just always taste just always revel too, live you have a good day, make you with your bride funny; because the poor Filadora, gnawing on the breadline, you will release the field, so you can splurge with your young woman in abundance and delight and joy! "- After the pigeon said these words, she flew out the window as soon addition, that she was like the wind disappeared. The prince remained when he heard these pigeons sermon sitting petrified until he finally asked where the pie would come, and learned of the Seneschal that a kitchen boy, the one adopted in the urgent need, would have caused them. So soon this had to appear before the prince, and barely Filadora had stepped in front of them, so she threw herself at his feet and called only the words out under a stream of tears: "What have I done wrong," The Prince, who by the violence? Beauty Filadoras and the obligation recalled by the power of the curse that was upon him again that he had gone in the face of his lover before the Tribunal Cupid, she lifted immediately from the floor, made her sit down beside him and then told his mother detail with such great gratitude he Filadora owed and what they did for him and what he promised her and how she earned all-pity, so that the mother, who had no other good on earth as her son, said to him: "do what you think fit, if only the honor of this virgin, I chose you as his wife, does not suffer and do not withhold consent. "-" do not worry, "then said this, because to tell the truth, I would be very reluctant to remain here; since this matter but of course is just what they me, I will return with all due respect to my dear Flanders and the grandfathers of the cups to visit again, from which we are accustomed to drinking in Naples, where I an associated lamp to light thought and above the lamp looked almost extinguished my life. "full of the greatest joy you now offered the prince on a ship and support, then left immediately Filadora dress like a princess and from the repealed board the musicians come, and then the dance began and continuously until the evening lasted. However, when the earth had completely enveloped in mourning because of the funeral of the sun and the candles were lit, one suddenly heard a loud blades, so that the prince said to his mother: "It will probably be some pretty masquerade in honor of the feast; my faith, the Neapolitan Cavaliers do not know how to behave and see if it does not, the money! "Now, while all expected in this opinion on what was to come, appeared suddenly middle of the room a hideous grimace that no three feet high, but thick served as a barrel and, hintretend before the prince, said to him: "Know Nard'Aniello that your loose pranks and your bad behavior have brought upon you all the suffering you endured so far. but I am the spirit of those old woman which thou didst break the pot and is therefore died of hunger, so I cursed you, that you want to fall into the clutches of a witch, and my curses were heard; by the power of this beautiful fairy, but you 'Escape from that hardship and danger, the witch while about you a new curse uttered that you forget at the first kiss that you empfingest, Filadora; so that they really disappeared your memory when your mother kissed you. but now I curse you again that you ever beans, you sow in the ground in front of eyes have mayest by, like those of the carob, buck horns grow up you from them! "So saying disappeared, the shape such as mercury without even leaving the slightest trace; but the fairy, who looked pale Prince at these words, saying his courage one, saying to him: "Fear not, my dear man, this is idle talk, there's nothing behind it, and leave you only at me!" after she had said this and finished the feast, she went with her groom to bed, and to the issued of the newly promised fidelity document to give a greater force, he asked her a still from the former troubles increased the current joys, so that they recognized the touchstone of experience how true the word is: Past sufferings seasoning current pleasures.
The four skilful brothers	1229	653	German	It was a poor man who had four sons, and when they were grown, he said to them, 'love children, you now have to out into the world, I have nothing that I could give you; makes you up and goes into the distance and learn a trade, and see how you can make your. ' Since the four brothers took their sticks, bade farewell to her father and moved in together out of the gate. When they had traveled for some time, they came to a crossroads that led to four different areas. Here, since the eldest "said we must separate, but on this day four years, we will meet each other again at this spot and versuchen.'Nun in time our luck everyone went his way, and the eldest met a man who asked him where he was getting at and what he was about. 'I want to learn a trade,' he replied. Then the man said, "Come with me and become a thief. ' 'No,' he replied, 'that applies to no more reputable trade, and the upshot is that one has to swing on the gallows.' "Oh," said the man, 'from the gallows you need not fear; I will merely teach you how you get such things as no man can get, and where you no one comes to the track.' Since he was persuaded, was with the man, a skilled thief, and so dexterous that before him nothing was certain what he wanted again. The second brother met a man who did the same question to him what he wanted to learn in the world. 'I do not know yet,' he replied. 'Then come with me and be an astronomer. Nothing better than that, it is hidden a nothing' He let the fallen and was such a skillful astronomer, and his master, when he had finished learning and wanted to move on, gave him a telescope and said to him, 'so you can see what is happening on earth and in the sky, and can you anything remain hidden. ' The third brother took a hunter in training, and gave him all that belongs to hunting, such excellent instruction that he became an experienced hunter. The master gave him at parting a rifle and said, "It will never fail, what you aim at grain that you make sure. ' The youngest brother also met a man who spoke to him and inquired what his intentions. 'Would you not like to be a tailor ?,' That I do not know, 'said the youth,' sitting doubled up from morning to night, the way Herfegen with the needle and the iron I do not mind. ' 'Eh, what? "Replied the man,' you're talking about how dus understand with me you would learn a very different kind of tailoring, which is respectable and proper, sometimes very honorable. ' Since he was persuaded, called and learned the art of the man from the foundation. When they parted, the man gave a needle and said, 'so you can sew together whatever is given you, it was as soft as an egg or as hard as steel; and it will all become one piece that no seam will see ist.'Als the appointed four years were over, were the four brothers at the same time arrived at the cross roads, embraced and kissed each other, and returned home to their father. 'Well,' said the latter happily all, 'you has the wind blown back to me?' They told him what had happened to them, and that each had learned his own. Now they were sitting just in front of the house under a large tree, the father said, 'I will put you to the test and see what you can.' Then he looked up and said to his second son 'top of the top of this tree between two branches of a book Finkennest, tell me how many eggs there are in it ?, The astronomer took his glass, looked up and said, "There are five.' The father said to eldest, "Fetch the eggs down without the bird sitting hatching them is disturbed. ' The skillful thief climbed up and took the bird, which saw nothing of it and sat quiet, the five eggs under him away and took her father down. The father took them, put on each corner of the table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman 'you shoot me with a shot of the five eggs in two in the middle.' The hunter laid out his gun and shot the eggs, as the father had desired, all five of them, in one shot. He had certainly from the powder, which shoots around the corner. 'Now comes the turn to you,' said the father to the fourth son, 'you sew the eggs together again, and the young birds that are inside it, in such a way that they are not hurt by the shot.' The tailor brought his needle and sewed them as his father had requested. When he was done, the thief had the eggs back to the tree bear the nest and the bird without him noticing something inferior again. The animals she brooded completely, and after a few days the young ones crept out, and they had where they were sewn together by the tailor, a red line round their Hals.'Ja, 'said the old man to his sons,' I need you praise to the skies, you have used your time and learned something Righteous: I can not say of you deserves preference. apply if you have but an early opportunity to your art That will be sichs. ' Not long after that great uproar in the country, the king's daughter had been kidnapped by a dragon. The king was day and night in worry and had proclaimed that whosoever brought her back should have her to wife. The four brothers said to each other 'that would be an occasion where we could let us see,' wanted to pull together and free the princess. 'Where she is, I soon want to know, "said the astronomer, and looked through his telescope and said," I see her already, she is far away from here on a rock in the sea, and next to her the dragon, which they guarded.' So he went to the king and asked for a ship for himself and his brothers, and sailed with them over the sea until they came to the rock. The king's daughter sat there, but the dragon was lying in her lap and slept. The huntsman said, "I can not shoot, I should kill the beautiful maiden at the same time. ' 'So I will try my art, "said the thief crept up and stole it from under the dragon, but so quietly and dexterously, that the monster never remarked it, but on snoring. They hurried joyfully with her on board ship, and steered out into the open sea but the dragon, who had not found the princess when he awoke, after them and snorted through the air. As he hovered over the ship and wanted to condescend the hunter shouldered his gun and shot him in the heart. The monster fell down dead, but was so large and powerful that it shattered the whole ship in falling. They caught happy a few boards and swam about the wide sea. There was again great need, but the tailor, not idle, took his wondrous needle, and sewed the boards with a couple of big bites in the rush together, sat on it and gathered all the pieces of the ship. Then he sewed these so skillfully together that in a short time, the ship was ready to sail again and they go home happy konnten.Als the king saw his daughter, was great joy. He said to the four brothers, "One of you should have to wife, but which is, makes of you. ' Since a violent dispute arose among them, because everyone made claims. The astronomer said, "if I had not seen princess, all your arts would have been useless, so she is mine. ' The thief said, "What would have helped seeing if I had not got her away from the dragon, so she is mine. ''. The huntsman said, "were you were still and the princess of the monster torn, it would not hit my ball so she is mine. ' The tailor said, "and I had not sewn by my art the ship again, you were all drowned miserably, so she is mine. ' And the king took the saying, "Each of you has an equal right, and as all the Virgin can not have it no one should have of you, but I want to give everyone a reward, half a kingdom. ' The brothers were pleased this decision and said, "It's better this way than that we should be at variance. ' Since each received half a kingdom, and they lived with their father in the greatest happiness as long as it pleased God.
The true bride	1774	510A	German	There was once a girl who was young and beautiful, but his mother had died him early, and the stepmother did him all life wretched. When they told him to work, she might be ever so heavy, so it indefatigably, and did what lay in his power. But it could so that the heart of the evil woman did not stir, she was never satisfied, always, it was not enough. Depending diligent it worked, the more was he hung up, and she had no other thought than how they impose on him an ever greater burden and make life quite sour wollte.Eines day she said to him, "Since you have twelve pounds springs, which thou shalt abschleissen, and if you're not so evening finish today, so expect a good beating for you. Do you think you could lounge around all day? " The poor girl sat down to work down, but the tears flowed him while on the cheeks, because it saw clearly that it was impossible to come to work in a day to an end. If it was lying a heap springs in front of him and sighed or suggested in his anxiety hands together, they flew away, and she had to go back and pick up again begin. Then she put her elbows on the table, put his face in his hands and cried, "because no one is on God's earth that will pity me?" By heard a gentle voice saying: "Be comforted, my child, I have come to help you. " The girl looked up, and an old woman standing beside him. "Only Trust me on what pushes you." She touched the girl-friendly by the hand and said, As she spoke so warmly, so told her the girl of his sad life that would be placed on the other it a burden and no longer could come to an end with the discontinued operations. "If I evening'm not done these feathers today, so I propose the stepmother; she has threatened me, and because I know she keeps her word. " Her tears again began to flow, but the good old woman said. "Do not worry, my child, rest of you, meantime I will do your work" The girl lay down on his bed and soon fell asleep. The old woman sat down at the table on the springs, ugh! as they flew off the quills, she with her withered hands barely touched. Soon she was done with the twelve pounds. When the girl awoke, were large, snow-white heaps piled up, and everything was neatly cleared the room, but the old man was gone. The girl thanked God and quietly sat until evening came. Since the step-mother came in and was amazed at the accomplished work. "See, awkward creature," she said, "what can be done when one is busy? If you had something else can not make? But as you sit and put his hands in the lap. " When she went out, she said. "The creature can eat more than bread, I have to hang up her harder work" The next morning she called the girl and said, "You're a spoon so I draw from the large pond is. in the garden And if you're so in the evening did not come to the edge, so you know what takes place. " The girl took the spoon and saw that it was full of holes, and if he would not have been, it would never have thus exhausted the pond. It went right to work, knelt on the water, the tears fell, and drew. But the good old woman appeared again, and when she learned of his cause grief, she said: "Take heart, my child, go into the thicket and lie down to sleep, I want to do your work on." When the old woman was alone, she only touched the pond; like a mist the water rose into the air, mingling with the clouds. Gradually the pond was emptied, and when the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither, she saw only the fish, which floundered in the mud. She went to her step-mother and showed her to the work would be finished, "You should be ready for a long time," she said, and was pale with anger, but she meditated something new aus.Am third morning she said to the girl. "There in the plane you must build me a castle, and in the evening it must be done. " wants to "How can I complete such a great work?" "I endure no opposition," cried the stepmother, "you can with a perforated spoon empty a pond, so you can build a castle Today: The girl was frightened and said. I refer, and if something is missing, it was the least of food and wine, so you know what you to come. " She drove away the girl, and when it came to the valley, so that the rocks were superimposed piled; with all his force could not even move the smallest. She sat down and cried, but it was hoping for the support of the good old man. She left not long in coming, came and comforted him a "Lie down only there in the shade and sleep, I will soon build you the castle If it makes you happy, so you can even live in it.." When the girl was gone, the old woman touched the gray rocks. They began to rise, came together and stood there as if giants had built the wall; on these the building arose, and it was as if countless hands were working invisibly and placing one stone upon. The ground rumbled, large pillars rose from himself into the air and stood side by side in order. On the roof, the tiles laid themselves, and was as it Noon, already the great weather vane spinning like a golden Virgin with fluttering garments on the top of the tower. The interior of the castle was completed by the evening. How it started the old woman, I do not know, but the walls of the room were covered with silk and velvet, embroidered chairs were there, and richly ornamented arm tables of marble, crystal chandeliers hung from the stage and were reflected in the smooth floor; green parrots sat in gilded cages and strange birds who sang lovely; everywhere was something to behold, as if a king as feed sollte.Die sun was just setting, when the girl awoke and contrary shone the glow of a thousand lights. With quick steps it came up and stepped through the open door into the lock. The staircase was covered with red cloth and the golden balustrade beset with flowering trees. When she saw the splendor of the room, it was like standing solidified. Who knows how long she might have stood there if it is not the thought had come to the stepmother. Oh, it spoke to himself when they would be satisfied at last, and I no longer wanted to make a misery life. The girl went and showed her that the castle would be ready. "I will move," she said, rising from her seat. When she entered the castle, they had to hand over his eyes met, she dazzled the Shine. "You see," she said to the girl, "how easily you's become, I would have thee shall something harder." She went through all the rooms and felt in all corners if anything was wanting or defective, but she could discover nothing. "Now we want to go down," she said and looked at the girl with malicious eyes on, "food and wine has yet to be examined and have you forgotten so thou shalt not escape your punishment something." But the fire was burning on the stove, in the pots cooked the meals, divide and shovel were leaning and placed on the walls of the bare dishes of brass. Nothing was missing, not even a coal box and the water bucket. "Where is the entrance to the basement?" called her. "Where that is not filled with plenty of wine barrels, it will cost you will fare badly." They even raised the trap-door and descended the stairs, but she had hardly made two steps before the heavy trap door, which was ajar, down. The girl heard a scream, the door quickly picked up to her to come to the rescue, but she was brought down, and there found her lifeless on the floor liegen.Nun the magnificent castle belonged to the girl all alone. It did in the first period did not find in his good fortune, beautiful clothes hung in the closets, the chests were filled with gold and silver, or with pearls and precious stones, and it had no desire to, it could not fulfill. Soon, the call went from the beauty and richness of the girl through the entire world. All day made themselves free, but no one liked her. Finally the son of a king who knew how to touch her heart came, and she became engaged to him. In the castle garden was a lime tree, under which they were sitting one day together, when he said to her: "I want to go home and obtain my father's consent to our marriage, I ask you to wait for me here under this lime tree, in a few hours I'm back. " The girl kissed him on his left cheek, and said, "loyal Stay me and let yourself another of no kiss on this cheek I will wait here under the lime tree, until you come back.." The girl remained under the Linde sit until the sun went down, but he did not return. She sat three days from morning till evening and was waiting for him, but in vain. When he was on the fourth day still not there, they said, "Certainly he meets an accident, I will go out and look for him and not likely to come back until I have him found." She grabbed three of their finest clothes together, one embroidered with bright stars, the second with silver moons, the third with golden suns, tied a handful of gems in her shawl and arose. She asked everywhere for her betrothed, but no one had seen him, no one knew about him. Far and wide she wandered through the world, but they did not find him. Last she hired herself to a farmer as a shepherdess and buried her dresses and jewels beneath a Stein.Nun she lived as a shepherdess, tending their flock, was sad and full of longing for her lover. She had a calf that accustomed her to him, fed it out of hand, and if they said, "calves, calves, kneel, do not forget your shepherdess again, as the prince forgot the bride, who was sitting under the lime-tree, "so the little calf knelt down, and she by her gestreichelt.Als she had lived alone and sorrowful a few years, then spread throughout the country the rumor that the king's daughter wanted to celebrate their wedding. The road to the city went to the village past where the girl lived, and it came to pass, as they once drove out their flock that the groom passed by. He sat proudly on his horse and did not look at her, but when she looked at him, she recognized her beloved. It was as if she cuts a sharp knife in the heart. "Oh," she said, "I believed him true to me, but he has forgotten me." The next day he came along the road again. When he was near her, she said to the little calf "calf, calf, kneel, do not forget your shepherdess again, as the prince forgot the bride, who was sitting under the lime-tree." When he heard the voice, he looked down and reined in his horse. He looked the shepherdess in the face, then put his hands over his eyes as if he were trying to remember something, but he quickly rode on and soon disappeared. "Oh," she said, "he does not know me more," and her grief was always grösser.Bald it should be a big party to celebrate at the court of the king three days, and the whole country was invited to it. Now I will try to the last, thought the girl, and when evening came, she went to the stone under which she had buried her treasures. She took the dress with the golden suns, put it on, and adorned with precious stones. Her hair, which she had hidden under a cloth, tied them up, and they fell in long curls at her down. So she went to the city and was in the dark of no one noticed. When she entered the brightly lit room, all started back in amazement, but no one knew who she was. The king's son went to meet her, but he did not recognize her. He led her to the dance and was so charmed with her beauty that he no longer thought of the other bride. When the feast was over, she disappeared into the crowd, and hastened before daybreak in the village where she shepherds her dress again anlegte.Am next evening she took the dress with the silver moons, and put out a crescent of gems in their hair. When she appeared at the festival itself, all eyes were turned upon her, but the King's son hastened to meet her, and very full of love, he danced with her alone, looking no more. Before she left, she had to promise him that last night again they appeared for the festival kommen.Als for the third time, she had the star-dress which sparkled her steps at each, and hair and belt were starred with jewels. The prince had been waiting for her and pushed his way up to her. "Just tell me who you are," he said, "I feel as if I had known you a long time." "You know not," she replied "what I did when you shoot least from me?" As she stepped up to him and kissed him on his left cheek; at the moment something like scales fell from his eyes, and he recognized the true bride. "Come on," he said to her, "I can not stay here no longer," took her hand and led her down to the carriage. When the wind would be biased to the horses rushed to the miracle Castle. Even from afar shone the lighted windows. As they drove past at Linde, swarmed countless glow-worms in it, she shook its branches and sent their scents down. On the steps flowers were blooming out of the room echoed the singing of foreign birds, but in the hall the whole court was assembled, and the priest waited for the groom to marry the true bride.
the mermaid	755	313A	German	A brother and sister were playing by a well, and they were thus playing, they both flopped into it. As was down a mermaid, who said, "Now I have got you, now you shall work for me!" And led her away. She gave the girl dirty tangled flax to spin, and drag it had water in a hollow barrel, but the boy should cut down a tree with a blunt ax, and nothing to eat they got a rock-hard dumplings. Since the children were last so impatient, that they waited until one Sunday was the mermaid in the church, and ran away. But when church was over, saw the mermaid that the birds were flown, and followed them with great leaps. but the children saw her from afar, and the girl threw a brush behind her, which was a big brush mountain with thousands and thousands of spikes, over which the mermaid had to climb with great toil; but at last she got over. As the children saw the boy threw behind him a comb which made a great ridge mountain with a thousand times a thousand teeth, but the mermaid did hold on to and at last crossed over. Then the girl threw a mirror behind Windwärts which was a Spiegelberg, who was so smooth, so smooth that they could not possibly have it. Then she thought, 'I will go home quickly and fetch my ax, and in half cut the Spiegelberg.' But until it came back and the glass had hewn, the children were already far escaped, and the mermaid had to return to her well checks.
The white snake	166	673	German	It is now a long time ago there lived a king whose wisdom throughout the country was famous. Nothing was hidden from him and it was as if news would occurred from the most secret things through the air it. but he had a strange custom. Every noon when removed everything from the board and no one was more present, a trusty servant had to bring a dish. She was covered, however, and the servant did not know themselves what lying on the dish, and no man knew, because the king did not cover more, and did not eat it until he was all alone. This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant who took away the dish, the curiosity that he could not resist carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door, he lifted the lid on and when he saw that a white snake lying on the dish. At the sight he could not stop to taste it the pleasure; he cut down a little bit and put it in his mouth. No sooner had it touched his tongue, he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside his window. He went and listened, and then realized that it was the sparrows who were chattering together, and all sorts of related what they had seen in the fields and woods. The enjoyment of the snake had given him the ability to verstehen.Nun the language of animals it came to pass that on that very day the queen fortkam her most beautiful ring and on the intimate servant who had access everywhere, suspicion fell, he stole him. The king let him come and threatened with angry words, if he knew not to call the offender until tomorrow, he should be considered guilty and executed. It did not help that he protested his innocence, he was having no better answer dismissed. In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were sitting at a flowing water peacefully side by side and rested, they were making with their beaks smooth and held a private conversation. The servant stopped and listened to them. They told where they would today all herumgewackelt tomorrow and what would have for good food found them. Since a peevish said, "I is a little heavy on the stomach, I have swallowed a ring which lay under the Queen's windows in haste with." Then she seized the servant at the collar, carried her into the kitchen and said to the cook: "Schlachte but this off, it is well-fed." - "Yes," said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; "Has spared no effort to fatten themselves and have long been waiting to be roasted to1." He cut off her head, and was excluded as it, the ring of the queen found in her stomach. The servant could prove his innocence before the king now easily, and to make amends for the wrong, he allowed him to ask a favor, and promised him the greatest honor place he is at his court wünschte.Der servant all struck out and only asked for a horse and travel money. For he loved to see the world and go about a little. When his request was granted he set out on the way and one day came to a pond over, where he saw three fishes that had caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Though it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must perish so miserably. Because he had a compassionate heart, so he dismounted from his horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They quivered with delight, put out their heads and shouted to him: "We will remember you and you retaliate's that you have saved us!" He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard at his feet in the sand one vote. He listened and heard, like an ant king lamented: "If we were only people with the clumsy animals from the womb, and me occurs stupid horse, with his heavy hoofs my people without mercy!" So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to him: "We will remember you and reward you" The path led him into a wood, and there he saw a raven father and a bad mother, standing by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. "Away with you, you Galgenschwengel!" they shouted, "we can not make you sick, you're big enough and you can feed yourself." The poor boy lay on the ground, flapping their wings, and crying: "We helpless children, we should feed ourselves and can not fly What we are left with no choice but to die of hunger here!" Since the good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword and left it to the young ravens to feed. Then they came hopping, satisfied their hunger, and cried, "We will remember you and reward you" He now had to use his legs, and had gone as he long way, he came in a big city. There was great noise and crowd in the streets and was a made for horses and known: the king's daughter wants a husband who wanted to but to apply for her hand must perform a hard task, and if he does not happy there, he had forfeited his life. Many there had already tried, but in vain their lives to it. The young man, when he saw the King's daughter was blinded by her great beauty so that he forgot all danger, went before the king and he became a freelance meldete.Alsbald led out to the sea and before his eyes thrown a golden ring. Then the king this ring from the seabed told him to bring out again, and added, "If you come back in the air without him, and you will again and again precipitated, until you perish in the waves." All the people grieved for the handsome youth and then left him alone by the sea. He stood on the shore and wondered what he should do. Then he suddenly saw three fishes come swimming, and there were no other than that which he had saved his life. The middle held a mussel in its mouth, which it laid on the beach at the feet of the young man, and when he picked it up and opened, the gold ring was in it. Full of joy he brought him to the king and that he would grant him the promised reward expected. The proud princess but when she heard that he was no match for her, scorned him, and required him first to perform another task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten sacks of millet in the grass. "The need morrow morning before the sun comes out, have picked up," she said, "and it is a must not a grain." The young man sat down in the garden and considered how it would be possible to solve the problem; but he could think of nothing, sitting there sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, to be led to death. But when the first rays of sunlight shone into the garden, he saw all the ten sacks filled well stand side by side, and not a single grain was missing. The ant-king had arrived with its thousands and thousands of ants in the night, and the grateful creatures had read the millet with great diligence and collected in the bags. The princess herself came into the garden down and was amazed that the young man had done, she had given him. But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said, "Does he have solved both problems, so it should not rather be my husband until he has brought me an apple from the tree of life." The youth did not know where the tree of life was. He got up and wanted to go forever, as long as his legs would carry him, but he had no hope of finding him. When he had wandered through three kingdoms came one evening to a wood, he sat down under a tree to sleep. Then he heard a noise in the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time three ravens flew down to him, sat on his knees and said. "We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving when we had grown big, and heard that you were seeking the golden apple, we are the sea flew to the end of the world, where the tree of life stands, and have brought you the apple. " Full of joy, the young man made his way home and the beautiful princess took the Golden Apple, which now had no more excuses left. They cut the apple of life and ate it together. Since her heart was filled with love for him satisfied, and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.
The white bride and the black	1289	403	German	A woman went with her daughter and stepdaughter across field to cut food. Since God came as a poor man came to them and said, 'where the road leads to the village?' 'If you want him to know,' said the mother, 'as it seeks itself, "and the daughter added," did you worry that you will not find it, take a guide with.' But the step-daughter said, "Poor man, I will take you, come with me. ' Because God was angry about the mother and daughter, they turned their backs, and wished that they should be black as night and as ugly as sin. The poor stepdaughter but God was gracious and went with her, and when they were near the village, he said a blessing over her and said 'you pick from three things, and I will grant you.' Then the girl said, "I would like to be as beautiful and pure are like the sun; ' and instantly she was white and beautiful as the day. 'Then I want a purse have, would never grow empty;' the gave her the good Lord also said, 'the best do not forget.' Said she, "I wish for the third eternal kingdom of heaven after my death. ' That became her well granted and so God departed from ihr.Als the stepmother and her daughter came home and saw that they were both as black as coal and ugly, the stepdaughter but white and beautiful, wickedness increased in her heart yet higher, and they had nothing else in mind than how to do her an injury. But the step-daughter had a brother named Reginer whom she loved very much and told him everything that had happened. Reginer said once to her, "Dear sister, I will take thy likeness, so I see you always before me, because my love for you is so great that I would always look at you. ' And she answered, 'but I beg you, let no one see the picture.' So he painted his sister and hung the picture in his room on; but he lived in the king's castle, because he was his coachman. Every day he walked in front of it and thanked God for the happiness of his dear sister. But just the king, in which he served, his wife had died, who had been so beautiful that you could not find that it resembled, and the king was in deep grief. The court servants noticed, however, that the coachman stood daily before this beautiful picture, jealous of him and reported it to the king. Since this left put the image in front of him, and looked as if it in all his late wife was like, was even more beautiful, he fell into mortal. He left the driver in front of him, and asked, whom the portrait. The coachman said it was his sister, and the king decided to take no other than this to wife gave him a carriage and horses and splendid gold clothes and sent him forth to fetch his chosen bride. How Reginer arrived with the message, a delighted his sister, the black alone was jealous about happiness, angry at all masses and speech bubble h to her mother 'now what help all your arts because you can not give me such happiness . ' 'Shut up,' said the old woman, 'I will soon divert it.' And by her arts of witchcraft, she so troubled the driver's eyes that he was half-blind, and the whites she stopped the ears that she was half deaf. Then she got into the car, first the bride in her noble royal apparel, then the step-mother with her daughter, and Reginer sat on the box to drive. As they were traveling for a while, the Kutscher'deck called you to my sister that rain wets not you that wind pollinated not you, that you asked nicely fine kommst.'Die king bride 'What is my dear brother?' "Ah," said the old woman, 'he said, you should take off your golden dress and give it to your sister.' Then she took it to off, and put the blacks who gave her for a shabby gray gown. They drove onwards, and a little while called the brother abermals'deck you to my Schwesterlein'dass rain wets not you, that wind is not pollinated you and asked you nicely fine kommst.'Die king bride 'What is my dear brother ? ' "Ah," said the old woman, 'he said, you ought to take off your golden hood and give your sister.' As they took off the hood and put it on her and sat in mere hair. They drove onwards: turn over a while the Bruder'deck called you to my sister that rain does not nässtdass wind pollinated not you you, and you fine beautiful kommst.'Die king bride asked, "What is my dear brother? ' "Ah," said the old woman, 'he said, you look out of the carriage. " They drove straight on a bridge over a deep water. How, then got up the bride and leant forward out of the car because they encountered the two beyond that they fell into the water in the middle. When she was sunk at the same moment climbed a snow-white duck from the water table, and swam down the river. The brother had observed nothing of it and drove the car, until they came to the court. And he brought the king the Black as his sister, and thought she really was, because there it cloudy in the sight was, and he saw the golden garments glittering. The king, as he saw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride, he was very angry, and ordered to throw the coachman in a pit, which was full of adders and vipers. The old witch but knew the king but to flatter and carried their art seemed his eyes to blind that he kept her and her daughter, so she that he tolerably well and he really with her verheiratete.Einmal evening, while the black bride the king sat on the lap, a white duck came up the gutter to the kitchen and said to swim Küchenjungen'Jüngelchen, do I fire my feathers an'dass warm kann.'Das did the kitchen Young and made it a fire on the hearth: then came the duck and sat down next to it, shook himself and brushed the feathers with its beak cope. As she was sitting and enjoying herself, asked sie'was is my brother Reginer? 'The kitchen boy antwortete'liegt in the pit gefangenbei adders and with Schlangen.'Fragte they weiter'was is the black witch in the house?' The boy answered ' sitting warmins king Arm.'Sagte the Ente'dass God have mercy! 'and swam by the sink hinaus.Den following evening she came back and did the same questions and the third night also. Since it was no longer the kitchen Young have the heart, went to the King and discovered him everything. The king but it wanted to see anoint, went the other night, and as the duck thrust her head in through the sink, he took his sword and cut through her neck, as she was at once the most beautiful girl, and exactly like the picture that had made the brother of her. The king was full of joy; and as she stood there quite wet, he caused splendid apparel and let them so clothe. Then she told him how she by fraud and falsehood had been cheated and at last thrown down into the river; and her first request was that her brother should be brought forth from the snake cave. And when the king this request was fulfilled, he went into the chamber where the old witch sat, and asked, "What deserves that and do that? ' and told him what had happened. Since she was so blinded that they did not notice anything and said, "deserves to be stripped naked and put into a barrel with nails, and that biases the barrel a horse and the horse sent all over the world. ' All this was done to her and her black daughter. The king married the white and beautiful bride, and rewarded her faithful brother, and he made him a rich and distinguished man.
The worn-out shoes	1269	306	German	Once there was a king who had twelve daughters, each one more beautiful than the other. They slept together in a room where their beds stood side by side, and in the evening when they were in them the King locked the door and locked it. But when he unlocked the door in the morning, he saw that their shoes were worn out with dancing, and no one could get out, as had happened. Then the king let proclaimed that whosoever could discover where they danced at night, which should be one of them choose to wife and after his death the king, but who came forward and had not discovered it within three days and nights, which would be life forfeited. Not long before a king's son came forward and offered to undertake the enterprise. He was well received and evening out in a room that was joined to the dormitory. His bed was placed there, and he should have eight, where they went and danced; and so they could not drive secretly or go away to a different place, the room door was left open. The prince grew heavy as lead, but his eyes and he fell asleep, and when he woke in the morning, they were all twelve had been to the dance, for their shoes were standing there with holes in the soles. The second and third night we went no different, and since it was his head off without mercy. There were many afterwards and reported to the enterprise, but they had to leave all their lives. Now sichs contributed to that a poor soldier, who had a wound, and could no longer serve, was on his way to the town where the King lived. There he met an old woman who asked him where he was going. 'I know myself not right,' he said, and added in jest, 'I would have like to discover where the princesses danced their shoes, and then to be king.' 'That's not so difficult,' said the old woman, "you do not have to drink that you brought the evening the wine, and have to do when you're fast asleep. ' Then she gave him a cloak, and said 'if you put on that, you are invisible and can steal after the twelve then.' As the soldier had received this good advice, thing in earnest, he summed up that a heart, went to the king and declared himself a suitor. He was as well received as the others, and were done to him royal clothing. In the evening at bedtime he was in the hall out and wanted to leave when he to bed, the eldest came and brought him a cup of wine: but he had tied a sponge under his chin, left the wine in there running, and drank a drop. Then he lay down, and when he had lain a while, he began to snore as fast asleep. The twelve princesses heard that daughters laughed, and the eldest said, "who would also be able to save his life. ' After that, she got up, opened cabinets, chests and boxes, and brought out pretty dresses dressed themselves before the mirrors, sprang about and looked forward to the dance. Only the youngest said, "I do not know you are looking forward, but I feel very strange happens to us certainly a misfortune. ' 'You're a goose, "said the eldest,' always afraid. Did you forget how much the king's sons have already come here in vain? the soldiers I'd not even need to give a nightcap, the clown would not wake up. ' As they were all finished, they looked after the soldiers, but he had closed his eyes and did not move, so they felt quite safe to be. The eldest then went to her bed and tapped it; it immediately sank into the earth, and they went through the opening down, one after another de r 'the oldest ahead. The soldier who had all seen with, did not hesitate long, hung his cloak, and went behind the recent down with me. In the middle of the stairs he trod a little on her dress; frightened 'what is it and called that? who is pulling my dress? ' 'Do not be so silly! "Said the eldest," you are caught on a hook.' They went way down, and how they were down, they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees, as were all the leaves of silver and shone and glistened. The soldier thought, "I Get a landmark take, 'and broke a branch less: up driving a huge crash from the tree. The youngest cried out again 'it is not right, you heard the bang?' But the eldest said, "The gun fired for joy, because we have got rid of our prince so quickly. ' They came out into an avenue where all the leaves of gold, and lastly into a third where they were of bright diamonds here but the oldest remained: both he broke a branch from where it crashed every time that the youngest started back in terror , they were salutes. They went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve little boats, and in every boat sat a handsome prince who had been waiting for the twelve, and each took one too, but the soldier sat down one with the most recent. Then the prince said, "I do not know. the ship is now much harder, and I have to row with all my strength, if I am to get it. ' 'What should cause that, "said the youngest," but the warm weather, I feel very well so hot.' Beyond the lake stood a splendid, brightly-lit castle, from which resounded the joyous music of drums and trumpets. They rowed over there, entered, and each prince danced with his sweetheart; but the soldier danced with them unseen, and when a cup held with wine, drank it from him that it was empty when she brought it to her mouth; and the youngest was alarmed at this, but the eldest always brought to silence. They danced there till three o'clock in the morning when all the shoes were danced and had to stop. The princes rowed them across the water back, and the soldier sat down this time vornen the eldest. On the shore they took leave of their princes, and promised to return the following night. When she reached the stairs, the soldier ran ahead and lay down in his bed, and heraufgetrippelt slow and tired as the twelve came, he was already snoring so loudly her that she could hear them all, and they said, 'before we are sure . ' They took off their beautiful dresses out, they took off the worn-out shoes presented under the bed and lay down. The next morning the soldier did not say anything, but watch the wonderful goings even with, and walked the second and third night again. There was anything like the first time, and each time they danced and were broken up shoes. The third time but he took to the landmark with a cup. When it came the hour when he should answer, he took the three twigs and the cup, and went to the king, but the twelve stood behind the door and listened for what he would say. When the king did the question "Where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes at night? ' he answered, with twelve princes in an underground palace, "and related how it had happened, and brought out the tokens. And the king left his daughters, and asked them if the soldier had told the truth, and when they saw that they were betrayed and denied nothing worked, they had to admit everything. Then the king that he would have to wife asked him. He answered, "I am no longer young, so give me the eldest." Since the wedding was celebrated on the same day, and promised him the kingdom after the king's death. But the princes were bewitched for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve.
The two brothers	577	567	German	Once there were two brothers, one rich and the other poor. The rich one was a goldsmith and evil-hearted; The poor one supported himself that making brooms, and was good and honorable. The poor had two children, who were twin brothers and as like a drop of water another. The two boys went into the rich man's house and received to and sometimes some food from the waste. It happened that the poor man when he went into the forest to fetch sticks, saw a bird which was quite golden and beautiful as him never a had come in mind. He picked up a stone, threw at him and struck him happy; but it was only a golden pen down, and the bird flew away. The man took the feather and carried it to his brother, who looked at her and said, "It is pure gold," and gave him a lot of money. The next day the man climbed into a birch tree and wanted to cut off a couple of branches. When the same bird flew out, and nachsuchte than the man he found a nest, and an egg lay in the fact that was of gold. He took the egg home and brought it to his brother, who again said: "It is pure gold" and gave him what it was worth. At last the goldsmith said, "The bird itself I should like to have at home." The poor man went for the third time in the woods and saw the golden bird sitting on the tree again. Then he took a stone and threw it down and carried it to his brother, who gave him a big pile of gold for it. Now I can help me, he thought, and went contentedly home. The goldsmith was crafty and cunning and knew what that was for a bird. He called his wife and said: ". Roast me the gold bird, and take care that nothing comes off it, I would like to eat it all myself" The bird, however, was that those who ate of it, every morning was no ordinary, but so wonderful kind heart and liver a gold piece under his pillow. The woman made the bird ready, put it on a spit and let him fry. Now it happened that while he was standing by the fire and had to leave the woman on the other work because out of the kitchen, which ran in two children of the poor broom-maker, stood by the spit and turned it round several times. And when that very moment two little bits of the bird fell down into the pan, said one of them: "We want the couple bit eat, I'm so hungry, it's no one notice it." Since both they ate the piece; but the woman came to see that they ate something and said, "What you ate?" - "A few pieces that have fallen out of the bird," they answered. "That's been the heart and liver, said the woman, quite frightened, and her husband nothing missing and not evil was, they killed a young cock, heart and liver took out and put it to the golden bird. When it was ready, she wore him to the goldsmith, who consumed it all alone and no choice left the next morning, however, as he reached under his pillow and thought bring out the gold piece was as little as otherwise found one the two children but did not know what they are for. . had become good fortune next morning when they arose, something fell on the ground and rang the bell, and when they lifted up there were two gold pieces they brought her father, who was surprised and said. "How could that have happened ? But when they next morning again found two, and so every day he went to his brother and told him the strange story. The goldsmith at once knew how it had come, and that the child's heart and liver of the golden bird had eaten, and to take revenge and because he was envious and hard-hearted, he said to his father: "Your children are with the evil in the game that gold does not take, and will not tolerate it longer in your house, because he has yet to bring power over them and can yourself to destruction! " The father feared the Evil One, and so heavy it to him arrived, he nevertheless led the twins out into the woods and left her there with a sad heart. Now the two children ran about the forest and sought the way home, but could not find him, but got lost and on. At last they met with a huntsman, who asked, "Who owns her children" - "We are the poor broom-maker's boys," they answered and told him that her father no longer in the house would want to keep, because every morning would be a gold coin under her pillow. "Well," said the hunter, "that is nothing so bad if you only righteous remains rather you shall be lazy." The good man because he liked the children and he himself had none, so he took her to the house and said, "I am your father and you big draw." They learned with him in hunting, and the piece of gold which each of them found when he picked up on them when they need it in the future. When they were grown up, she took her foster father one day in the forest, saying, "Today you your test shot should do so I can set you free talk and hunters." They went with him to lie and waited a long time, but there was no game. The hunter looked above him and saw a covey of wild geese in the shape of a triangle fly, as he said to one: ". A decreased Now shooting from every corner" He did it, and thus accomplished his trial shot. Soon after, another chain came flying and had the shape of the digit two; because the hunter was called the other also from every corner bring down one, and scored his trial shot too. Now, the foster father said: "I speak to you free, ye are learned hunter!" Then the two brothers went together into the forest, counsel each other and planned something. And when they had the evening sat down to eat, they said to their foster father, "We will not touch food, or take one bite before you grant your us a request." He said, "What is your request?" They replied, "We have now finished learning, we must try in the world, allows us to go away and walk." Then the old man said with joy: "You talk like brave huntsmen, that which you desire my own desire was, go forth, all will go well." ate it and they drank together happily. When the appointed day came, their foster father gave everyone a good gun and a dog and let every one of his saved-up gold pieces take as much as he wanted. Then he accompanied them part of the way, and when he left he gave them a bright knife, and said, "When did you cut again, this good cheer knife at a crossroads in a tree, it can be one if he comes back, see how it his absent brother has been issued for the side to which it is extended, will rust if he dies but as long as he lives, will remain bright. " The two brothers went still farther onwards, and came to a forest, so great that they herauskonnten impossible in one day. So they passed the night in and ate what they had put in their hunting bags; but they were also the second day and did not get out. Since they had nothing to eat, so one of them said: "We have to shoot something else we shall suffer hunger," loaded his rifle and looked around. And came running as an old hand, he put on, but the hare cried, "Dear huntsman, let me live, I will give you two boy." Sprang instantly into the thicket, and brought two cubs; But the little creatures played so merrily, and were so great that the hunters could not bring myself to kill them so they kept to himself, and the little hares followed on foot. Soon after, stole a fox over, they were just going to shoot, but the fox cried, "Dear huntsman, let me live, I also want to give you two boy." He also brought two little fox, and the hunters they might not kill, gave they hare to society, and they followed them. Not long before a wolf strode out of the thicket, the hunters made ready to shoot him, but the wolf cried, "Dear huntsman, let me live, I will give you two boy." The two young wolves did the hunters to the other animals, and they followed them. Then a bear came who wanted to trot about a little longer and said, "Dear huntsman, let me live, I will give you two boy." The two young bears were added to the others, and there were already eight. Finally, who came? A lion came and shook his mane. But the hunters did not let frightened and aimed at him; but the lion also said: "Dear huntsman, let me live, I will give you two boy." And he brought his boys, and now the huntsmen had two lions, two bears, two wolves, two foxes, and two hares, the followed them and served. Meanwhile, was not appeased their hunger, they said to the foxes ". Hark ye, make us something to eat, you are] a cunning and devious" They replied, "Not far from here lies a village where we have some chicken have brought; the way there, we want to show you." Then they went into the village, bought something to eat and let their animals provide food and then moved on. The foxes knew very well about the area where the chicken farms were, and the hunters were able to guide. Then they went around for a while, but could find no situations where they had stayed together, they said: "There is no other way, we must separate." They divided the animals, so every a lion, a bear, a wolf, a fox and a hare got. Then they said goodbye, brotherly love promised themselves to death, and stuck the knife that they sent with her foster father, in a tree; after which one, the other moved to east to west. But the youngest came with his animals in a city that was completely covered with black crape. He went to an inn and asked the host if he could accommodate his animals. The landlord gave them a stable where was the wall a hole; because the hare crept out and fetched a cabbage, and the fox fetched himself a hen, and when he had devoured that got the cock as well. but the wolf, the bear and lion because they were too big, could not get out. As they left the host carry you where just a cow lying on the grass that they sattfrassen itself. And had seen as the hunter for his animals, he asked the innkeeper why the town was thus hung with black crape. The host said, "Because tomorrow will be our king's only daughter to die." The huntsman asked: "Is she sick unto death?" - "No," replied the host, "she is vigorous and healthy, but it must d o c h die." - "How is that?" asked the hunter. "Outside of the city is a high mountain, by a dragon that needs all years lived a chaste virgin who, otherwise he devastated the country. Now all the maidens have already given up, and there is none left but the king's daughter, yet no grace, it must be handed to him, and this will happen tomorrow. " The huntsman said, "Why will not kill the dragon?" - "Oh," replied the host, "so many knights have tried, but all of them lost their lives, the king who conquers the dragon, promised his daughter in marriage, and he shall inherit the kingdom after his death." The hunter said nothing more, but the next morning took his animals, and with them ascended the dragon mountain. There stood above a small church, and on the altar were three full cups, and with the inscription: Who empties the cups will become the strongest man on earth and will lead the sword which is buried before the threshold. The huntsman did not drink, went out and sought for the sword in the ground, but could not budge it. So he went and drank the cup and was now strong enough to take the sword, and his hand could quite easily wield it. When the hour came when the maiden the dragon was to be delivered, they accompanied the king, the marshal, and courtiers. From afar she saw the huntsman on the dragon's hill, and thought the dragon standing there waiting for her, and would not go up, but at last, because otherwise the whole town would have been lost, she had to do the heavy gear. The king and courtiers returned home full of grief, the king's marshal, however, was to stand still, and see all from a distance. When the princess came to the mountain top, not stood the dragon, but the young huntsman, who comforted her one and said he wanted to save her, led her into the church and locked her in. It was not long, came thither with great the seven-headed dragon. When he perceived the huntsman, he was astonished and said: "What have you creating here in the mountains?" The hunter replied, "I want to fight with you!" Said the dragon, "Many knights have left their lives here with you I will be ready," and breathed fire out of seven jaws. The fire should burn the dry grass, and hunters should in the glow and the steam suffocate, but running up the animals came and went from the fire. Then the dragon went against the hunter, but he swung his sword that sang in the air, and hit him three heads. Then the dragon grew right furious, rose into the air, spewed flames of fire over the huntsman and lunged at him, but the hunter drew his sword again and cut off three more heads. The monster became faint and sank down and wanted to get rid of the hunter, but he hit him with his last strength its tail off, and because he could not fight anymore, he called up his animals who tore it to pieces. When the fight was over, the hunter joined the church and found the king's daughter lying on the ground, as she had lost the sense of fear and terror during the contest. He carried her out, and when she regained consciousness and opened his eyes, he showed her the torn kite and told her that she was now delivered. They rejoiced and said: "Now you're going to be my dearest husband, for my father has promised me to him who kills the dragon." Then she took off her necklace of coral, and divided them among the animals in order to reward them, and the lion received the golden palace of it. Her handkerchief but, in her name, she gave to the hunter who went and cut the dragon's seven heads, the tongues, wrapped it in the cloth and preserved them carefully When that was done, because it from the fire and the battle faint and weary was, he said to the maiden: "we are both so dull and tired, sleep a little, we full." Then she said "yes," and they settled on the earth, and the huntsman said to the lion, "Thou shalt keep watch, that no one surprises us in his sleep" And both fell asleep. The lion lay down beside them to watch for; but he was also tired of the fight that he called to the bear and said, "Lie down next to me, I must sleep a little, but if anything comes, waken me!" Since the bear beside him lay, but he was also tired and called the wolf and said, "Lie down beside me, I have to sleep a little, and if anything comes, waken me!" Since the wolf lay beside him, but he was tired and he called the fox and said, "Lie down beside me, I have to sleep a little, and if anything comes, waken me!" "Lie down near me, I must sleep a little, and if anything comes, waken me!" Then the fox lay down beside him, but he was tired and called the hare and said Then the hare sat down next to him, but the poor hare was tired and had no one he could call in the police station, and fell asleep. Because now the King's daughter, the huntsman, the lion, the bear, the wolf, the fox and the hare, were all fast asleep. but the marshal, who had by far should look as if he did not fly away with the Virgin the dragon and everything was quiet on the mountain, took courage and went up. Since lay the dragon hacked and torn on the ground and not far from the king's daughter and a huntsman with his animals that were sunk in a sound sleep. And as he was wicked and godless he took his sword and cut off the huntsman's head and took the maiden in his arms and carried her down the hill. Then she awoke and was startled, but said the Marshal, "You are in my hands, thou shalt say that I was the one who killed the dragon." - "I can not," she replied, "it was a huntsman with his animals who did it." Then he drew his sword and threatened to kill them if they obeyed him not, and so compelled her that she promised. Then he took her to the king, who knew not to take for joy when he saw his dear child alive, he believed torn by the dragon. The marshal said to him: "I have killed the dragon and the maiden and the whole kingdom as well, therefore I demand her as my wife, as was promised." The king said to the maiden: "Is it true what he says?" - "Oh yes," she replied, "it must be true enough, but I think I made that the wedding is only a year and a day celebrated," for she thought to hear something of her dear hunter in time. On the dragon's hill but still the animals were beside their dead master and slept. Since a large Hummel came and the rabbit sat on the nose, but the hare wiped with his paw, and went back to sleep. The Hummel came a second time, but the hare again rubbed it off and slept on. She came for the third time and stabbed him in the nose that he woke up. As soon as the hare was awake, he roused the fox, and the fox, the wolf, and the wolf the bear and the bear the lion. And when the lion awoke and saw that the maiden was gone, and his master was dead, he began to roar frightfully and cried, "Who has done the Bear, why did not you wake me?" The bear asked the wolf, "Why did not you wake me?" And the wolf the fox, "Why did not you wake me?" And the fox the hare, "Why did not you wake me?" The poor hare did nothing to answer alone, and the blame could not get on it. They wanted to attack him, but he asked, saying, "Bring me not to, I will bring our master to life again I know a mountain, a root grows, who placed in the mouth, which is of all disease and all. wounds healed. But the mountain lies two hundred hours from here. " "Bring In twenty-four hours you need to be back and, hurrying and the root." The lion Since the hare sprang away, and in twenty-four hours, he was back and brought the root with. The lion put the huntsman's head back, and the hare placed the root in his mouth, and immediately everything united together again, and the heart beat and life returned. As the hunter was startled awake when he did not see the maiden, and thought you must have gone while I was sleeping, to get rid of me. The lion had sat in the great haste his master's head upside, but who did not realize it because of his melancholy thoughts about the King's daughter. But at noon, when he wanted to eat something, he saw that the head toward the back was to him, could not understand it and asked the animals what had happened to him in his sleep? Since the lion told him that they had fallen asleep from fatigue, and on awakening they found him dead with abgeschlagenem head, the hare would have brought the root of life, but he held in the haste head upside; but he wanted to make up for his mistake. Then he tore the huntsman's head off again, turned him around, and the hare healed it with the root. But the hunter was sad, moved about the world and let his animals dance before people. It happened that he came straight course of a year back in the same city where he had saved the princess from the dragon, and the city was this time quite hung with red cloth. Then he said to the host: "What does that say Last year the town was covered with black crape, what means the red cloth to today?" The host answered, "Last year was our King's daughter be handed over to the dragon, but the marshal fought with him and killed him, and there will be celebrated tomorrow their marriage; it was the city at that time with black crape for mourning and today hung with red cloth for joy. " "Believe it well, landlord that I want to eat bread today from the king's table here with him?" The next day, where the wedding should be, the huntsman said at noon to host - "Yes, said the host," I want to still hundred gold pieces for it put that this is not true "The hunter took the bet and put a bag with as much gold pieces Then he called the hare and said," Go! , my dear runner, and fetch me some of the bread, eating the king! "Now was the hare in the least, and could no other again apply, but had himself to his feet do. Why, she thought, when I so alone jump through the streets, as the butchers' dogs will be after me. as it thought that is what happened, and the dogs came after him and wanted him to mend his good skin. but he sprang away, you have not seen! and took refuge in a sentry box, without the soldier aware of was. Then the dogs came and wanted it to come out, but the soldier did not understand fun, and struck them with the butt that they ran away yelling and howling. realized as the hare that the air clean was, he jumped to Castle in and straight to the King's daughter, sat down under her chair, and scratched at her foot. She said, "Will you go!" and thought it was her dog. The hare scratched for the second time on foot, and she again said: "Do you want to continue" and thought it was her dog. But the hare let not be misled and scratched for the third time. As she looked down and knew the hare by its collar. She took him on her lap, carried him into her chamber and said, "Dear Hare, what do you want?" he replied: "My Lord, who killed the dragon, is here and has sent me to ask for some bread as it eats the king. "She was full of joy and had the baker summoned, and ordered him to bring a loaf such as ass king The little hare." But the baker must to me likewise carry it thither, so my butchers' dogs do nothing "The baker wore. it to the door of the inn Then the hare got on his hind legs, took the loaf in his front paws and brought it to his master Then the huntsman spoke to him.. "Behold, sir host, the hundred pieces of gold are mine." the host was astonished, but the huntsman went on to say. ". Yes, sir host, the bread if I had, but now I will eat of the king's roast" the host said, "I'd like to see," but bet he wanted . not scoring the hunter the fox and said, "My little fox, go and fetch me some roast meat such as eating him the King!" the red fox knew the better, and went on the corners and through the angle without him a dog saw sat under the princess's chair scratched her foot and. Then she looked down and nd recognized the fox by its collar, took him into her room and said, "Dear fox, what do you want? he replied: "My Lord, who killed the dragon, is here and has sent me to ask for some roast meat such as eating him the king." As they left the cook brought, who had a roast as it ate the king, and to carry the Fox up at the door. Then the fox took the dish, waved away with his tail the flies which had settled on the roast, and then brought it to his master. "Behold, sir host," said the huntsman, "bread and meat are here but now I will also have proper vegetables' eat as it eats the king." Then he called the wolf and said, "Dear Wolf, go thither and fetch me vegetables such as the King's eat!" Then the wolf went straight to the castle, because he was afraid of no one. And when he came into the princess's room, he twitched at the back of her dress that she had to look around. She recognized him by the collar and took him to her room and said, "Dear Wolf, what do you want?" he replied: "My Lord, who killed the dragon, is here, I am to ask for some vegetables as it eats the king." As they left the cook come, prepare the needed some vegetables as ass of the king, and had it for the wolf to the front door wearing because it the wolf took off the dish, and carried it to his master. "Behold, sir host," said the huntsman, "now I have bread and meat and vegetables', but I will also eat sweets as it eats the king." He called the bear, and said: "Dear Bear, you like licking anything sweet, go and bring me sweets, how it eats the King" Then the bear trotted to the palace and went to him everyone out of the way. But when he went to the guard, they presented their muskets, and would not let the royal castle him. But he lifted himself up and gave with his paws left and right a few slaps in the face that the whole watch broke up, and then he went straight to the king's daughter, stood behind her, and growled a little. Then she looked behind and saw the bear and told him go into her room and said, "Dear Bear, what do you want?" he replied: "My Lord, who killed the dragon, is here, I am to ask for some confectionery, how it eats the king." As they left the confectioner come, who had to bake confectionery such as the King's ass and take the bear out of the door. Since the bear first licked up the comfits which had rolled down, then he stood upright, took the dish and brought it to his master. "Behold, sir host," said the huntsman, "now I have bread, meat, vegetables and confectionery factory, but I will drink wine also, as is drunk by the King!" He called his lion to her and said, "Dear Lion, you drink you still like a frenzy, go and fetch me some wine such as is drunk the king!" Then the lion strode across the street, and people were running in front of him, and when he came to the police station, they wanted to bar the way, but he yelled once, they all ran away. Then the lion went to the royal apartment and tapped his tail at the door. Since the king's daughter came out and almost frightened by the lion; but she knew him by the golden lock of her necklace and told him to go to her room and said, "Dear Leo what you want.?" He answered, "My master, who killed the dragon, is here, I will ask for some wine such as is drunk by the King." As they left the cup-bearer, who was to give the lion some wine like water it the king. The lion said: "I will go and see that I get the right." So he went to the butler down, and when they were below, he wanted this tap of the ordinary wine like that drank the king's servants; but the lion said, "Stop I want to try the wine first," drew half a measure and swallowed it down at. "No," he said, "that's not right." The butler looked at him askance, but went and wanted to give him out of another barrel which was for the King's marshal. The lion said: "Stop, let me try the wine," drew half a measure and drank it, "which is better, but still not right." Since the cup-bearer grew angry and said, "What do such a stupid cattle to understand the wine!" But the lion gave him a blow on the ear that he rudely fell to the ground. And when he had got up again, he conducted the lion quite silently into a little cellar where the king's wine was, no one else got to drink from. The lion first drew half a measure and tried the wine, he said, "That may be of the right," and told the cupbearer fill six bottles. Now they came up, but when the lion came from the basement to the outside, he swayed back and forth and was a little drunk, and the butler had to give him the wine to the door wearing. Then the lion the Henkelkorb took in his mouth and brought it to his master. The huntsman said: "Behold, sir host, here have I bread, meat, vegetables, confectionery and wine, as it has the king, now I want to keep dine with my animals," and sat down, ate and drank and gave the hare, the fox, the wolf, the bear and the lion also on eating and drinking and was in good spirits, for he saw that the king's daughter still loved him. And when he meal was held, he said: "Sir host, now have I eaten and drunk, as the King eats and drinks, and now I will go to the King's court and marry the king's daughter asked the host." How shall this be because she already has a husband and celebrated the marriage today "as the hunter pulled the handkerchief that had given him the princess on the dragon mountain and were where the seven tongues of the beast wrapped, and said:" this to me is to help what I hold in my hand "as the host saw the cloth, and said." If I do anything, I do not believe that, and house and yard will probably dransetzen "the hunter but took a bag with a thousand gold pieces. put it on the table and said, "I put it!" Now the king at the royal table to his daughter: "What do all wanted the wild animals that have come to you and turn in my lock and out? "she replied," I can had 's not say, but sent back and let get the master of these animals, you will do well. "The king sent a servant to the inn and had invited the stranger, and the servant came just bet the hunter with the host , And he said, "Behold, sir host, now the King sends his servant and let me invite, but I do not go that way." And the servant said: "I will ask the Lord King that he sends me royal apparel, a carriage with six horses, and servants to me aufwarten.- When the king heard the answer, he said to his daughter:" What should I do? "she said:" Let him bring as he calls it, you will do well "then the king sent royal apparel, a carriage with six horses, and servants to wait on him as the hunter saw them coming.. he said. "Behold, sir host, now I am fetched as I desired it," and pulled the royal garments, took the handkerchief with the dragon's tongues and went to the king as he saw coming the king, he said to his daughter: "How can I meet him?" she replied: "Go out to meet him, so you will wohltun.- when the king came to meet him and took him in, and his animals followed. The king gave him a seat near himself and his daughter, the marshal was sitting on the other side as a groom; but no longer knew him. Now just the seven heads of the dragon were on display, and the king said: "The seven heads has cut off the marshal the dragon, so I give him my daughter to wife." Then the huntsman stood up, opened the seven mouths, and said: "Where are the seven tongues of the dragon?" Since startled the marshal was pale and did not know what to answer, he finally said in fear: "Dragons have no tongues." The huntsman said, "Liars ought to have none, but the dragon's tongues are the sign of victory," and wrapped the towel because they were all seven in it, and he put each tongue in the mouth, which it belonged, and it was a perfect fit. Then he took the cloth. in which the name of the princess was embroidered, and showed it to the Virgin and asked her who she would have given it. She replied, "To him who killed the dragon." And then he called his animals, to each collar and the lion took the golden castle, and showed it to the maiden and asked to whom it belonged. She answered, "The necklace and the golden castle were mine, but I divided them among the animals who helped to conquer the dragon." The huntsman said, "When I get tired I rested from the battle and sleeping, the marshal came and cut off my head Then he carried off the king's daughter and given, it was he who had killed the dragon; and. that he lied I prove with the tongues, the cloth and the collar. " And then he told how had healed by a wonderful root him his animals and that he would be long drawn around one year with them and finally come here again, where he learned the deception of the Marshal by the narrative of the host. Then the king asked his daughter: "Is it true that this man killed the dragon?" She replied. "Yes, it's true now I reveal the wicked deed of the marshal, as it has come to light without my connivance, for he wrung to mention me promise why but I have endured me that only in year and a day the wedding was to be celebrated. " And the king left twelve councilors call that should talk about the Marshall judgment, and ruled that he would have to be torn apart by four oxen. The marshal was therefore directed the king but his daughter gave the hunter and appointed him governor of the whole empire. The wedding was celebrated with great joy, and the young king left his father and foster father brought, and loaded them with treasures. The host, he also did not forget and let him come in and said to him: "Behold, sir host, the king's daughter I married, and his house and yard are mine." The host said: "Yes, according to justice." But the young King said, "It is going to grace house and yard to keep it, and the thousand pieces of gold I give more to him now were the young king and the young queen of good things and lived happily together, he often went out.. was out hunting because it was a delight, and the faithful animals had to accompany him but it was close to a forest, from which it was said that he was not safe., and only it, so he did not come out easily . but the young king had to chase it great pleasure., and let the old King have no peace until he allowed him. Now he rode out with a large escort, and when he came to the forest, he saw a snow-white doe in and said to his people, "wait here until I come back, I want to chase that beautiful creature," and rode him into the woods, and only his animals followed him people halted and waited until evening, but he did not come. again. As they rode home and told the young n Queen: "The young King had followed a white doe in the enchanted forest and did not come back." She was in great concern to him. But he was always after the beautiful game and could catch up never; if he thought it was shot right, he saw it again in the far distance jump, and finally it disappeared altogether. Now he realized that he had penetrated deep into the woods, picked up his horn and blew, but he got no answer, because his people were not able to hear. And there also broke the night, he saw that he could not get home that day, dismounted, went to a tree a fire and wanted to stay there. As he sat by the fire, and his animals were lying down next to him, him behold, he heard a human voice; He looked around, but could not notice. Soon after, he heard a groan as if from above, he looked up and saw an old woman sitting on the tree, moaned on and on: "Hu, hu, hu, making me freeze!" He said, "Come down and warm yourself if freezes you. ' But she said: "No, your animals bite me." He answered, "They hurt you, old mother, do come down." But she was a witch and said, "I will throw down a wand from the tree, if you they thus on the back beat, they hurt me. "Then she threw him a small wand down, and he struck them with it once they lay still and were turned to stone. and was as the witch from the animals, she leapt down and touched also him that fear and anxiety of the queen was with a rod and turned him into stone. Then she laughed and dragged him and his animals into a ditch, where already several were of such stones. but when the young king did not come back ever larger . Now came to pass that had traveled just at this very time the other brother, who gen in separating East, arrived in the Kingdom. He was looking for a service and found none, was then pulled around back and forth, and had his animals dance leave. As he remembered, e r once wanted to look at the knife that they had encountered during their separation in a log to find out how he was his brother. When he got there, his brother's side half-rusted and half she was still blank. He was afraid and thought, my brother must be a great misfortune happened to, but maybe I can save him, for half the knife is still bright. He and his animals traveled towards the west, and when he came to the gate, kicked him guard against and asked if they should report his wife him, the young queen was feared for a few days in great anxiety about his absence and he would be killed in the enchanted forest. The sentries, indeed, thought no otherwise than he was the young king himself something like he saw it, and was running behind him the wild animals. Because he realized that his brother was talk, and thought: It is the Bete, I give myself out for him, so I can rescue him more easily. So he let himself go with the lock and received was with Big joy of the guard. The young queen indeed thought that he was her husband, and asked him why he had stayed away so long. He replied, "I was lost in a forest, and could not, he was more likely to back out in the evening in the royal bed, but he laid a two-edged sword between him and the young Queen me you did not know what you mean, should.. but did not dare to ask, since he stayed a few days and explored meanwhile everything as it was related to the enchanted forest, he finally said. ". I must hunt there once" the king and the young queen, it wanted to persuade him . but he insisted and went forth with a great accompaniment When he came into the forest, fared like his brother, he saw a white hart and said to his people: "Stay here and wait until I come back, I want the beautiful Wild hunt, "rode into the woods, and his animals ran after him. But he could not catch the doe and got so deep into the woods that he had to stay in it. and when he had lighted a fire, listening to e r wailing above him: "Oh, oh, oh, how cold I" Then he looked up and it was sitting same witch in the tree. Said he: "When will freeze you, so come down old mother, and warm yourself." She answered, "No, your animals bite me" And he said, "They will not hurt you" Then she cried. "I will throw down a wand to thee, if you beat it, so they do nothing to me" As the hunter heard this, he could not believe the old saying, "My animals do not beat me, Come down, or I'll get you." Then she cried, "What do you want well you do me anything?" He answered: "Are not you coming, I shoot you down." Said she, "Shooting just before your balls I'm not afraid." Then he aimed, and shot at her, but the witch was proof against all leaden bullets, and laughed that it rang, and shouted: "You shalt not hit me." The hunter knew, tore three silver buttons off his coat and invited them into the bush, because the other hand was their art for free, and losdrückte than him, she fell once with a scream. Then he set his foot on her and said: "Old witch, if you do not confess matter where my brother is, I will seize you with both hands and throw you into the fire!" Who you know in great fear begged for mercy and said, "He and his animals lie in a vault." Then he compelled her to go thither, threatened her and said, "Old monkey, now you're making my brother and all the human beings lying here alive, or you come into the fire!" She took a wand and touched the stones, because his brother was alive with animals, and many others, merchants, craftsmen, shepherds, stood up, thanked him for their deliverance, and went home. but the twin brothers, when they saw each other again, kissed and were heartily glad. Then they seized the witch, bound them and put them into the fire and was burned as she, as the forest opened of its own accord, and was light and clear, and you could see the royal palace on three hours' journey. Now the two brothers went home together and told each other on the way their fates. And the youngest, said he was in the king's place Mr throughout the country, said the other, "That I remarked very well, because when I came to town and was considered for you, because I came all the royal honor the young. Queen took me for her husband, and I had to eat at her side, and sleep in your bed. " When the other heard that, he was so jealous and angry that he drew his sword and his brother's head. When he was lying but dead, and he saw the red blood flowing, he repented most violently. "My brother delivered me," he exclaimed, "and I killed him for that!" and wailed loudly. Then his hare came and offered to pick up from the root of life, ran away and brought them there in time, and the dead man was brought back to life, and knew nothing of the wound. Then they moved on, and the youngest said, "You look like me, have royal apparel on as I do, and the animals you still follow me, we will go in by opposite gates, and at the same time arrive from two sides in the aged King.. " So they parted, and the old king came at the same time the guard of the one and the other, and announced, the young king with the animals had returned from hunting. The King said: "It is not possible, the gates lie quite a mile apart." But while the two brothers came from two sides in the courtyard inside and both mounted the steps. Then the king said to his daughter, "Say which is thy wife: It looks exactly like the other, I can not know?." Then she was in great distress, and could not say at last she remembered the necklace which she had given to the animals, sought and found on the lion, her golden palace. Then she cried gleefully, "who is followed by this lion is my true husband!" Then the young King laughed and said: "Yes, that's right," and they sat down together to table, ate and drank and were merry. In the evening, went to bed when the young king, his wife said: "Why did you put these last nights always a double-edged sword in our bed I thought you were going to kill me?". Because he realized how true his brother had been.
The Twelve Apostles	1910	766	German	It was three hundred years before the birth of Christ the Lord, there lived a mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needy that she did not know how she was to get them longer life. She prayed to God daily that he would grant that all her sons with the promised Savior on earth were together. When her necessity became still greater she sent to her bread to seek a in the world after another to. The eldest was called Peter, who went out and had gone far, a whole day's journey, when he came to a large forest. He sought a way out, but could not find one and lost his way deeper and deeper; same time felt such great hunger that he could scarcely stand. Finally, he was so weak that he had to lie and believed to be close to death. Suddenly there stood beside him a little boy who shone and was so beautiful and kind as an angel. The child clapped his hands that he look up and it had to look at. Then he said, 'why are you sitting there in such trouble?' "Ah," answered Peter, "I am going about the world seeking bread, that I can still see the promised dear Savior; this is my biggest wish.' The child said, "Come with me, and thy wish shall be fulfilled. ' He took poor Peter by the hand and led him between some cliffs to a large cave. When they entered it, everything was shining with gold, silver and crystal, and in the middle stood twelve cradles next to each other. As the little angel, "Lie down in the first, and sleep a little, I will rock you. ' Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him for so long, until he fell asleep. And as he slept, the second brother also ushered in by his guardian angel came and was like the first lulled to sleep, and then the others came after the other, until all twelve lay there sleeping in the golden cradles. But they slept three hundred years, until the night in which the Savior of the world was born. Then they awoke, and were with him on the earth, and were called the Twelve Apostles.
The twelve brothers	86	451	German	Once there was a king and a queen who lived happily together and had twelve children, but were all boys. Then the king said to his wife: "If the thirteenth child you bring into the world, is a girl, the twelve boys shall die, so that his wealth is great and the kingdom to her alone." He also left twelve coffins make, which were already filled with shavings, and in each lay the dead pillows, and had put them in a locked room, then he gave the Queen the key and bade her, no anything about it to sagen.Die mother but sat now all day and mourning, so that the smallest son, who was always with her, and whom she had named the Bible Benjamin, said to her: "mother, why are you so sad?" - "Dearest child," she answered, "I can not tell thee." But he let her have no rest until she went and unlocked the room, and showed him the twelve with shavings coffins ready filled. Then she said: "My dearest Benjamin, these coffins had let others do your father for you and your eleven brothers, for if I bring a girl to the world, you are all to be killed and buried in it." "Weep not, dear mother, we want to help forward and go hence." And as she wept while she was saying this, the son comforted her and said, And she said. "Go with your eleven brothers out into the forest, and one sit constantly on the highest tree which can be found, and keep watch, looking towards the tower here in the castle SIGN LANGUAGE I have a little son, I will Attach a white flag, and then you may come back;. I bear a daughter, I will hoist a red flag, and then fly hence as quickly as you can, and God forbid you every night I will get up and pray for you in winter that you can at a fire to warm yourself in the summer that you may not faint in the heat. "After she had blessed her sons therefore, they went out into the forest. They each kept watch in turn, sat on the highest oak and looked towards the tower. were eleven days had passed and the turn came to Benjamin, when he saw that a flag was being raised. It was not the white, but the blood-red flag that they should die preached all. When the brothers heard this, they were angry and said, "Should we sake of a girl suffer death We swear that we will avenge ourselves where we find a girl, his blood must flow!.." Then they went deeper into the forest, and in the midst of it, where it was the darkest, they found a little bewitched house that was empty. They said: "We want to live and you, Benjamin, you are the youngest and weakest, you shall stay at home and keep house, we others will go out and get food." Then they went into the forest and shot hares, wild deer, birds and pigeons, and was what to eat, which they took to Benjamin, who had to make them cope so they could satisfy their hunger. In the little house they lived together ten years and the time was not them lang.Das daughter that her mother, the queen was born, was now grown up, was good of heart, and fair of face, and had a golden star on her forehead , Once, as a great washing, she saw twelve men's shirts and asked his mother: "Who owns these twelve shirts for the father they are far too small?" She answered with a heavy heart: "My dear child, belonging twelve brothers." The girl said, "Where are my twelve brothers, I have never heard of them?". She replied, "The God knows where they are, you're wrong about the world.." So she took the girl and closed him the room and showed her the twelve coffins with the shavings, and the dead pillow. "These coffins," she said, "were intended for your brothers, but they went away secretly before you were born were," and told him how everything had happened. Then the girl said, "Mother, do not cry, I will seek to go and my brothers." So she took the twelve shirts and went forth into it, and straight into the great forest. She walked the whole day and in the evening she came to the bewitched house. Then she entered it and found a young boy, who asked, "Where are you from and where are you going?" and was surprised that she was so beautiful, and wore royal garments, and had a star on his forehead. She replied, "I am a princess and am seeking my twelve brothers and wants to go, the sky is blue so far, until I find them." She showed him the twelve shirts which belonged to them. Then Benjamin saw that it was his sister, saying, "I am Benjamin, your youngest brother." And she began to cry with joy; and Benjamin, and they kissed and embraced each other with great love. After this he said: "Dear sister, it is still a reservation there, we had agreed that every girl who met us should die because we had to leave a girl our kingdom." She said, "I will willingly die, if I can deliver my twelve brothers." - "No," he replied, "You shall not die, sit beneath this tub until our eleven brothers come, and I will be with them already agreed." So she did; and when it was night, the others came from hunting, and their dinner was ready. And as they sat at the table and eating, they asked, "What's new?" Said Benjamin, "Do you know anything?" - "No," they answered. He continued, "You have been in the forest and I have stayed at home, and yet knows more than you." - "Tell us then," they cried. he replied: "Do you promise me also that the first girl who meets us, not to kill?" - "Yes," they all cried, "she shall have mercy, only do tell us!" And he said, "Our sister is here," and lifted up the tub, and the king's daughter came forth in her royal garments with the golden star on her forehead, and she was beautiful, delicate and fine. Since all rejoiced, and fell on her neck and kissed her and had her heart lieb.Nun she stayed at home with Benjamin and helped him with the work. The eleven went into the forest and caught game, deer, birds and pigeons, so they had to eat, and the sister and Benjamin took care that it was prepared. She searched the wood for cooking and herbs for vegetables, and put the pans on the fire so that the dinner was always ready when the eleven came. She held otherwise order in the house, and covered on the little pretty white and pure, and the brothers were always contented and lived in great unity with ihr.Auf a time the two had home had prepared a beautiful food, and how they were all together they sat down, ate and drank and were full of joy. but it was a little garden belonging to the bewitched house wherein stood twelve lily flowers, which are also called students. Now she wanted her brothers have a pleasure plucked the twelve flowers, and thought on the food to give each one. As she had but dropped out of flowers, at the same moment the twelve brothers in twelve ravens were transformed and flew over the forest gone, and the house with the garden was gone. There was now the poor girl alone in the wild forest, and when she looked around, it was an old woman next to him, saying, "My child, what have you done Why did not you leave the twelve white flowers are the? were your brothers, who are now on getting into ravens. " The girl said, weeping: "Is there no way of delivering them?" - "No," said the old woman, "there is none, must not speak all over the world as one, but that is so hard that you therefore do not release it will, because you have seven years be silent and do not laugh, and you speak a single word, and lacks only an hour of the seven years, all is in vain, and your brothers will be killed by one word "then the girl said in his heart:". I know certainly that I mean brothers revenues, "and went and sought a high tree and seated herself in it and span, and neither spoke nor laughed. Now it came to pass that a king was hunting in the forest, who had a great greyhound which ran to the tree where the girl was sitting on it, jumping around, screaming and barking at her. Then the king came by and saw the beautiful princess with the golden star on her forehead, and was so charmed with her beauty that he called to ask her if she would be his wife. She did not answer, but nodded a little with his head. As he climbed up the tree himself, carried her down, placed her on his horse and led her home. Since the wedding with great splendor and joy was celebrated; but the bride neither spoke nor laughed. When they had lived a few years happily together the king's mother, who was a wicked woman, began the young queen to slander and said to the king: "It is a common beggar girl you've brought you, who knows? what drives them secretly wicked tricks. If she is dumb and can not speak, they could still laugh once, but who do not laugh have a bad conscience. " The king wanted to first do not believe it, but the old woman urged this so long, and accused her of so many evil things, that the king let himself be persuaded and it became a death verurteilte.Nun in the yard lit a big fire in which she was to be burned , And the king stood above at the window and looked on with tearful eyes, because he still had so much. And when she was tied to the stake already and the fire was licking at her clothes with its red tongue, the last instant of the seven years had just passed. Then a whirring let himself heard in the air, and twelve ravens came flying and falling down. And how they touched the earth they were her twelve brothers, whom she had redeemed. They tore the fire asunder, extinguished the flames, set their dear sister free, and kissed and embraced them. But now that she could open her mouth and speak, she told the king why she had been dumb, and had never laughed. The King rejoiced when he heard that she was innocent, and they were now living together in unity until their death. The wicked stepmother was brought to trial and put into a barrel that was filled with boiling oil and venomous snakes, and died an evil death.
The twelve hunters	642	884	German	There was once a king's son who had a bride and loved her very much. When he had sat happily with her, and all because the news came that his father lay sick unto death and asked to see before its end it. Then he said to his beloved, I must now go and have to leave you, I give you a ring as a remembrance of me. When I am king, come back and I'll pick you home. ' So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was dangerously ill and near death. He said to him, "Dear son, I wanted to see you before my end again, I promise to marry you according to my will, 'and he named a certain princess who was to become his wife. The son was in such trouble that he did not think what, but said, "Yes, dear father, your will is to happen, 'and the fact that the king closed his eyes and starb.Als son proclaimed king and the mourning period had passed, he had the keeping promises, he had given his father, and had woo the princess, and she was promised to him. The sound of his first bride and fretted about the infidelity so much that she nearly died. Then her father said to her 'dearest child, why are you so sad? What do you wish you, that you shall have. ' She thought for a moment, then said, "Dear father, I wish for eleven girls, face, figure, and exactly the same to me. ' The king said, 'wenns possible, your wish will be fulfilled,' and let in all his realm looking for so long, were found to eleven virgins, his daughter, face, figure, and completely gleich.Als they came to the princess, let make these twelve hunters dresses, one as the other, and the eleven maidens had to put on the huntsmen dresses, and she pulled herself to the twelfth. Then she took leave of her father, and rode away with them and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so much. Then she asked whether he required any huntsmen, and if he did not want to take all of them into his service. The king looked at her and did not recognize her; but as they were such handsome fellows, he said yes, he would take it gladly; and since they were the twelve huntsmen Königs.Der King but had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew all concealed and secret. It happened that one evening he said to the king, 'you think you have twelve huntsmen?' 'Yes,' said the king, 'are twelve huntsmen.' The lion continued, 'you're wrong, are twelve girls.' The King said 'That can not be true, how will you prove that to me?' 'Oh, let only scatter peas in your antechamber, "answered the Lion," and then thou shalt see. Men have a firm step, and when they walk over peas none of them stir, but girls trip and skip, and drag their feet, and rolling the peas. ' The king liked the advice well, and he let the peas streuen.Es but was a servant of the king, who favored the huntsmen, and when he heard that they should be put to the test, he went and told them all again and said, "the lion wants to make the king, you are girls. ' As he thanked the king's daughter and said to her maidens 'you do on violence and step firmly on the peas.' And when left the next morning to call the twelve hunters to the king, and they came into the hall where the peas were lying, they stepped so firmly on them and had such a strong, sure walk, that not even a rolled or moved. Then they went away again, and the King said to the lion 'you lied to me, they walk just like men.' The lion said, "They have known that they should be put to the test, and have done violence. Let bring only once twelve spinning wheels into the hall, they will come here and will enjoy it, and that is what no man. ' The king liked the advice, and he let the spinning wheels into the hall stellen.Der servant but DERS honestly meant by the hunters went and found them to stop. Then said the king's daughter, when they were alone said to her eleven girls 'you doing violence and do not look round at the spinning wheels.' How, then sent for his twelve huntsmen next morning the king, they went through the ante-room and never once looked at the spinning wheels. Then the king again said to the lion, "Thou hast lied to me, they are men, for they have not looked at the spinning wheels. ' The lion replied, "They have known that they should be put to the test, and violence have done. ' The king wanted the lion no longer glauben.Die twelve hunters followed the king to the chase, and he had the longer the better. Now it happened that, when they were once on hunting, news came that the king's bride was approaching. When the true bride heard that, her tats hurt so much that it almost broken her heart, and she fell fainting to the ground. The king said to his dear huntsman something had happened, ran to him and he wanted to help and pulled the glove off. Then he saw the ring which he had given to his first bride, and when he looked into her face, he recognized her. Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and when she opened her eyes, he said, "you are mine and I am yours, and no one in the world can change that. ' but to the other bride, he sent a messenger and let ask them to return to their kingdom because he had a wife, and who had just found an old dish, the new did not need. Then the wedding was celebrated, and the lion came back into favor, because he had told the truth.
Doctor Know	935	1641	German	There was once a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with two oxen a load of wood into town and sold it for two dollars to a doctor. When the money was paid to him, the doctor just sat at the table; when the peasant saw how he ate and drank well, and the heart went after him, and he would have liked to have been a doctor. So he stayed there awhile, and finally asked if he also could become a doctor. "Oh yes," said the doctor, "that is soon." - "What do I have to do?" asked the farmer. "In the first place you purchase a Abecebuch so one where forward a rooster in it; second, turn your car and your two oxen into money, and get you clothes and whatever else pertains to medicine; thirdly, you let a sign painted with the words: I am the doctor Know 'and nail leave that up on your doorstep! " The farmer did everything as it was made to feel it. When he had doctored people awhile, but not much was stolen a rich, great lord's money. Since he was told by the Doctor Know who would have lived in such and a village, and know where the money would become of her. So the Lord let his car hook, drove out to the village, and asked him if he was the Doctor Know. Yes, he would. He should go along and create the stolen money back. Oh, yes, but Grethe, his wife also would have to. The Lord was satisfied and let them both into the car sit, and they drove away together. When they came to the nobleman yard, the table was laid; he should sit down and eat. Yes, but his wife, Grete, too, he said, sitting down with her at the table. Now the first servant with a bowl of fine food arrived, the farmer met his wife and said, "Grete, that was the first," and said it was he who first meal would bring. But the servant said he had wanted to say: This is the first thief; and because he actually was so, he was terrified, and he said, out to his comrades: "The doctor knows everything, we arrive ill, he said I would be the first." The second did not want in, but he had yet. So when he went in with his dish, the farmer met his wife said, "Grethe, that is the second." This servant was afraid, and he made that he got out. The third's was no better; the peasant again said, "Grethe, that is the third." The fourth had to carry in a concealed bowl, and the Lord told the doctor that he should show his skill, and guess what was beneath but there were crabs. The farmer looked at the dish, did not know how to help themselves, saying, "Ah, poor Crabb!" "Because he knows it, now he also knows who has the money." As the Lord heard this, he called The servant but looked terribly uneasy, and he blinked at the doctor, he wants to come out again. Therefore he went out, they confessed to him all fours, they had stolen the money; they wanted's quite willing to give out and to do so if he did not want him betray a heavy sum; they were doing otherwise to the neck. They led him to the spot where the money was hidden. With this the doctor was satisfied, went back inside, sat down at the table and said, "Lord, now will I search in my book where the gold is hidden." The fifth servant but crept into the stove to hear if the doctor knew more. but the sass and pitched his Abecebuch on, flipping back and forth and looked for the cock. Because he could not find it immediately he said, "You're in it and also have to figure out." Since thought of in the stove thought that meant jumping out in terror and cried, "The man knows everything." Now the Doctor Know showed the count where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received from both sides much money in reward, and became a famous man.
sleeping Beauty	480	410	German	Before time was a king and a queen who said every day: "Oh, if only we had a child" never had one. But it happened to, sitting as the queen once in the bath, that a frog from the water to the land, saying, crawled to her, "Your wish shall be fulfilled, before a year passes, you will give birth to a daughter." What the frog had said, this happened, and the queen gave birth to a girl who was so beautiful that the king knew of joy not to have a big party and hired. He invited not only one of his relatives, friends and acquaintances, but also the wise women, so that they hold the child and were weighed. There were thirteen of them in his kingdom, but because he had only twelve golden plates for them to eat, so had one of them at home bleiben.Das feast was celebrated with all splendor, and when it was over, the wise women gifted the child their wonderful gifts: those with virtue, one beauty, a third riches, and with all that is desirable in the world one way. When eleven of them had made their promises, suddenly the thirteenth came in. She wanted to avenge that she was not invited, and to greet without someone, or even looking, she cried with a loud voice: "The princess will prick herself in her fifteenth year on a spindle and fall down dead." And without saying a word more, she turned round and left the room. They were all shocked, there came the twelfth out that her desire had left, and because they do not undo the evil sentence, but mitigate only it could, she said: "For it shall not be death, but a hundred years of deep sleep, in which the princess shall fall. "the king, who wanted to keep his dear child from the misfortune, the command left out that all the spindles in his kingdom should be burnt. At the girl but the gifts of the wise women were all satisfied, because it was so beautiful, modest, friendly and understanding that anyone who he regarded it, love had. It so happened that the king and queen were on the day when she was fifteen years old not at home, and the girl was left behind alone in the castle. Since it went everywhere around, looked into rooms and chambers, as it felt like, and finally came to an old tower. She climbed up the narrow spiral staircase, and reached a little door. In the lock A rusty key was, and turned as it the door sprang open, and sat there in a little room an old woman with a spindle, busily spinning her flax. "Good day, old mother," said the Princess, "what are you doing?" - "I am spinning," said the old woman, nodding his head, "What is this thing that jumps around so funny?". said the girl, she took the spindle and wanted to spin. No sooner had she but touched the spindle when the magic decree was fulfilled, and she pricked her finger with it. But the moment when she felt the prick, she fell on the bed that stood there, and lay in a deep sleep. And this sleep fell upon the whole castle, the king and queen who had just come home, and had entered the hall, fell asleep and the whole court with them. Since the horses in the stable, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, the flies on the wall were asleep, yes, the fire that flickered on the hearth became quiet and slept, and the roast stopped sizzling, and the cook, who, because he had provided some of the scullery boy, wanted to pull in the hair, let him go and slept. And the wind dies down, and on the trees in front of the castle is not a leaf moved more. Around the castle but a thorn hedge began to grow, which every year became higher, until at last the whole castle and beyond grew that was nothing to be seen of them, not even went the flag on the Dach.Es but the forecasts in the country of the beautiful sleeping Rosamond, for so was the king's daughter called, so that from time to time kings' sons came and wanted to get through the hedge into the castle. but it was not possible for them, because the thorns as if they had hands, clung together, and the young men were caught, could not free, there died a miserable Todes.Nach long years afterwards there came a king's son in the country, and heard an old man telling about the thorn hedge, it should be a castle behind it, in which a beautiful princess named, sleeping Beauty, asleep for a hundred years already, and with it the king and queen and the whole court. He also knew from his grandfather that many kings, sons had come, and had tried to get through the thorny hedge, but they had been caught and died a sad death. The young man said: "I am not afraid, I will go and see the beautiful Sleeping Beauty." The good old man might dissuade him as he wanted, he did not listen to his words. But just a hundred years had passed, and the day had come when Rosamond should be awakened. When the prince, the mandrel-hedge, it was beautiful large flowers, which were opened by itself apart and let him pass, and closed behind him in a thick hedge along. In the courtyard he saw the horses and the spotted hounds lying asleep, on the roof sat the pigeons with their heads under their wings. And when he came into the house, the flies were asleep on the wall, the cook in the kitchen was still holding his hand, as if to seize the boy, and the maid was sitting by the black hen, which was plucked werden.Da he went on and saw in the hall the whole court lying asleep, and up by the throne of the king and the queen was. He went even further, and everything was so quiet that one could hear his breathing, and finally he came to the tower and opened the door into the little room, slept in which Sleeping Beauty. As she lay, so beautiful that he could not avert his eyes, and he bent down and gave him a Kuss.Wie he had touched it with the kiss, Sleeping Beauty opened her eyes, awoke, and looked at him quite sweetly. Then they went down together, and the king and the queen and the whole court, and looked at each other with big eyes. And the horses in the courtyard stood up and shook themselves; the hounds jumped and waving; the pigeons on the roof drew their heads under their wings, looked round, and flew into the open; the flies on the wall crept again; the fire in the kitchen burned up and flickered and cooked the meat; the joint began to roast; the cook gave a slap to the boy that he cried; and the maid finished plucking the fowl. And since the wedding of the king's son was celebrated with the sleeping beauty in all its splendor, and they lived happily ever after.
One-eye, two-eyes, and Three-Eyes	1239	511	German	It was a woman who had three daughters, it was called the oldest-eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of the forehead, and the middle one two-eyes, because she had two eyes like other people and the recent Three-eyes, because she three eyes had, and her third eye was also in the center of the forehead. Therefore, however, that two-eyes looked no different than other children of men, it did not like the sisters and mother. They said to him: "You with your two eyes are no better than the common people, you do not belong to us." They encountered it about, and threw old clothes to her and did not give him to eat more than what is left let them, and did him heartache, where they could. It so happened that two-eyes go out into the field and the goat herding had, but was still quite hungry because he had given his sisters to eat so little. So she sat down on a ridge and began to weep and so crying that two streams ran down from his eyes. And when she looked up once in her grief, a woman next to her, who said: "Two-Eyes, why are you weeping?" Two-Eyes answered: "Should I not cry Because I have two eyes like other people, they can not stand me, my sisters and my mother, my butt from one corner to the other, throwing me old clothes back and give me nothing to eat, than what they leave. Today they have so little given to me that I am still hungry. " The wise woman said: "Two-Eyes, you dry your face, I will tell you something that you are not suffering from hunger again Only say to your goat."! Kids bleat, deck "as a clean spread little table is in front of you are the most delicious food that you can eat as much as you feel like it and if you're fed up and no longer need the small table, just say,. "kid, bleat, gone!" so will it disappear before your eyes . " Then the wise woman went away. But Two-Eyes thought: I must instantly make a trial, if it is true, what she said, because me too hungry, and said: "kids bleat, gone" And no sooner had she uttered the words, then stood there a tischlein covered with a white cloth, on a plate with knife and fork and silver spoon, the most beautiful dishes were all around, smoked and were still warm, as if they had just come from the kitchen. Since two-eyes said the shortest prayer ago that it knew, "Lord God, our guest at all times, Amen!" fell to, and it let himself taste good. And were filled as it spoke it, as the wise woman had taught: "Kid, bleat, gone!" And immediately the little table and everything on it was gone again. This is a nice budget covered two-eyes, and was quite glad and happy. At night when it went home with her goat, she found an earthenware bowl with food that had set him the sisters, but it did not touch it. The next day he moved with his goat back out and let the couple Brocke were served that were handed to him lie. The first time and it is not considered at the sisters as but each time came, they saw, saying, "It's not stand wrong about Two that leaves every food, and she used devoured everything that was handed to him; found that needs other ways. " but that they should come at the truth, One-Eye should go along when two-eyes drove the goat to the pasture, and should pay attention to what it intended to do there and whether he would bring someone drinking. And when two-eyes is opened again, stepped-eye to him, saying: "I want to be into the field and see that the goat also is taken care of, and driven where there is food." But Two-eyes knew what was in One-eye in the sense and drove the goat into high grass and said, "Come-eye, we will sit down, I want you to sing something." One-eye sat down and was tired with the unaccustomed walk and the heat of the sun, and Two-Eyes sang constantly "?-Eye, you wake One-eye, are you sleeping" Since One-eye shut one eye and fell asleep and saw a two-eyes that One-Eye fast asleep, and could discover nothing, she said, "kid, bleat, deck!" and sat down at her table, and ate and drank until she was satisfied, then called again: "kid, bleat, gone! "and everything was instantly gone. Two-eyes now awakened One, saying, "One-Eye, you want to take care and sleep there one, meanwhile, had the goat can run all over the world, come, we will go home." Then they went home, and two-eyes let her little dish untouched stand, and One-Eye the mother could not tell you why she would not eat, and to excuse herself said: "I was asleep outside." The next day the mother said to Three-eyes, "This time you shall go and observe if Two-eyes eats out and if he brings someone eating and drinking, for food and must drink it secretly." Since Three-Eyes went to Two-eyes and said, "I will go and see if the goat is taken proper care of, and driven where there is food." But Two-eyes saw what Three-eyes had in mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, "We will sit down, Three-Eyes, I want you to sing something." Three-eyes sat down and was tired of the way and the sun's heat, and two-eyes began the same song as before, and sang, "Three eyes, you wake up?" But instead of that it now had to sing: "Three-Eyes, are you sleeping" it sang thoughtlessly "two-eyes, are you sleeping?" and always sang, "? Three-eyes, you wake two-eyes, are you sleeping" Since the Three-eyes were his two eyes and fell asleep, but the third, because it was not being named in the song, did not sleep on. While it did to Three-eyes, but only in her cunning, as if she were asleep and so; but it blinked, and could see everything very well. And said as Two-Eyes, Three-Eyes asleep firm, told his little piece: "Kid, bleat, deck!" Ate and drank go away again to their hearts content and called then the little table: "kids bleat, away," and Three-Eyes had all witnessed. Since two-eyes came to him, waked her and said, "Oh, Three-Eyes, you fell asleep you can well take care Come on, let's go home!". And when they go home, ass two-eyes did not come back, and Three-Eyes said to the mother, "I know now why that haughty thing does not eat; when out says to the goat:" kids bleat, deck "so there is a tischlein front of her, which is staffed with the best food, much better than we have it here, and if she is tired, she says, "kids bleat, gone!" and everything is gone I have everything. . with viewed Two eyes she put up with a little speech, but the one in my forehead, kept awake fortunately Since the envious mother cried. "Do you have it better than us? The desire shall pass you! "She fetched a butcher knife and pushed it into the heart of the goat that she fell dead. As a two-eyes saw it, it was full of trouble, sat down on the field, and wept bitter tears. As was suddenly the wise woman next to him again and said: "Two-Eyes, why are you weeping" - "Should I not cry!" she answered, "the goat that when I spoke your little speech, covered the table for me so beautiful every day is killed by my mother, and now I must again suffer hunger and grief." The wise woman said, "Two, I will give you some good advice, please your sisters that they give you the entrails of the slaughtered goat, and buried it outside the front door into the earth, it shall be your happiness." Since she disappeared and two-eyes went home and said to her sisters, "Dear sisters, I give some part of my goat, I demand nothing good, but give me the guts!" Then they laughed and said, "Can you have when you nothing will." And Two-Eyes took the entrails and buried them in the evening in silence after the rate of white women to the front door. The next morning, when she awoke, and went to the front door, so that was a wonderful, magnificent tree, the leaves of silver and fruit of gold hanging among them, that probably nothing more beautiful or precious was in the wide world. but they did not know how the tree was gone came by night; but Two that he had grown up from the bowels of the goat, for it was just where she had buried it in the ground. Then the mother said to One-Eye, "Climb up, my child, and gather some of the fruit of the tree off!" One-eye climbed up, but as it was about to reach the golden apples, so he went to the branch of the hands; and that happened each time, so it could not pluck a single apple, let her do what she might. Then the mother said: "Three-eyes, do you climb up, you with your three eyes better to look at you as One-Eye." One-eye slipped down, and Three-eyes climbed up. But Three-Eyes was not looking clever and liked the way it was, the golden apples always dodged back. At last the mother grew impatient, and climbed up herself, but could as little as One-Eye and Three-Eyes hold of the fruit and always clutched empty air. Since two-eyes said, "I will go make me once, maybe I succeed it sooner." The sisters cried, "You, with your two eyes, what can you do?" But Two-eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did get out away from him, but let himself into his hand down, so that she could pluck them one after the other and a whole apronful brought down. The mother took her from him, and instead of that, One-Eye and Three-Eyes for the poor Two should have been treated better, so they were just jealous that it alone could get the fruit, and went even harder to deal with him. It was true when she together once stood on the tree that a young knight came. "Quick, Two-Eyes," cried the two sisters, "creep under this, that we should not be ashamed of your!" and over poor Two-Eyes with all speed an empty barrel that just standing next to the tree, and they pushed the golden apples which she had broken off, even lower. So when approached the Knights, it was a nice gentleman who stopped and admired the magnificent tree of gold and silver, and said to the sisters: "Who owns this beautiful tree who would bestow one branch of it, this might require what he wanted. " Then answered One-Eye and Three-Eyes, the tree belonged to them and they wanted him to cancel a branch well. They shook both great effort, but they were not able to, for the branches and fruit both moved away each of them back. Then the captain said, "It is very strange that the tree belongs to you and you not have to break a piece of it." They stayed there, the tree was their property. But by talking to two-eyes rolled so that they ran from under the barrel a couple of golden apples from the feet of the knight, for she was angry that One-Eye and Three-Eyes not telling the truth. When the knight saw the apples he was astonished and asked where they came from. One-eye and Three-eyes answered that they had another sister, but should not be seen, because she had only two eyes like any common person. The knight, however, desired to see and said, "Two-eyes, come forth!" Since two-eyes quite comforted, came under the barrel out, and the knight was surprised at her great beauty, and said, "You, Two-Eyes, can break me certainly a branch of the tree." - "Yes," replied Two-Eyes, "that I certainly shall be able, for the tree belongs to me?" and went up and broke with little trouble a branch with beautiful silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave it to the knight. Then the captain said, "Two, what shall I give you for it?" - "Oh," replied Two-eyes, "I suffer from hunger and thirst, grief and want, from early morning until evening. If you want to take me and redeem, so I would be happy" Then the knight lifted the two-eyes on his horse and took it home to his father's castle; there he gave him nice clothes, food and drink to your heart, and because he had it so much, he settled with him consecrate, and the wedding was in great joy held. As two-eyes now was so continued by the handsome knight, her two sisters grudged her good fortune in downright. The wonderful tree remains us, they thought we can break any fruit from it, still every one will stand still in front of it, come to us and praise him; who knows what good things may bloom! But the next morning the tree had vanished and their hope gone. And how two-eyes looked out her own little room, he stood on his great joy before and was therefore followed him. merry eyes lived a long time. Once two poor women came to him the castle and asked for alms. Since they saw two-eyes in the face and recognized her sisters, One-Eye and Three-Eyes, who had been so in poverty that they wander about and had their bread from the doors. Two-Eyes, but her name was welcome, and was kind to them and took care of them, so that the two hearts repented what they had done their sister in their youth evil.
A Free History	4026	1459	German	There was a fellow who went out on the open. He came, among other things also to a Kathen where the people were living in sheer poverty and indigence. But when came the suitors that they would like to appear wealthy, you can believe. The man had been given a new sleeve in his jacket. ! "Sit down," he told the Free, "but it looks everywhere so stäubig out" and thus he went about wiped and dusted with his new coat sleeve around the benches and tables around;! but the other arm he held behind his back. The woman had received a new shoe, and with whom she came to all the benches and chairs. "It's here so frequent around," she said, "it looks here so messy" Then they called the daughter, she should come in and clean up.. The got a new hat and stuck his head in the door and nodded: "I can not because even though everywhere," she said. Yes, they were right affluent people to whom the suitor had come.
Ferdinand the Faithful and Ferdinand the Unfaithful	1199	531	German	There was once a man and a woman who so long as they were rich had no children, but when they were become poor they had a little boy. but they could not get a godfather for him; because the man said he would just go to another place to see that it there a bekomme.Und him go so he met another poor man who asked him where he was going. The man replied that he was going to see that he got a sponsor, but he was poor, and since no one wants to be godfather. "Oh," said the poor man, "You are poor and I am poor, I will be godfather, but I can not give anything to the child. But go and tell the nurse that she should come to church with the child. " When they came together to the church, the beggar was already there. And he gave the child the name. "Ferdinand the Faithful" When they came out of the church, the beggar said, "Now just goes home, I can give you nothing, and you also shall give me anything." but the midwife he gave a key and told her that she would like him when they got home, give the father who should keep him, would be to the child fourteen years of age; then it should go to the heath where there was then a lock to fit the key. Everything would be in it, it should gehören.Wie the child was grown now seven years old, and efficient, it went even play with other boys; since one had more got from his godfather than the other. but he could not say anything. As he cried and went home and said to his father: "Have I got nothing from the Godfather" - "Oh yes," said the father, "did you get a key for a lock that is then available on the heath; then you go back and closes it up." And he went, but it was heard no lock and see. Again after seven years when he is fourteen years old, he goes out once again, there's really a castle on the heath. As he opened it, there is nothing in it than a horse, a white horse. Because the boy was so that he had a horse that he mounted on it and galloped back to his father. "Now I also have a white horse, and I will travel," he said. As he went out, and when he is on the way, there's a pen along the way. but he would pick it up, he thinks to himself: Oh, you denied they are let, you'll find even where to get there, a pen, if you need one. As he goes away so ,, a voice called after him, "Ferdinand the Faithful, take it with." He looks around but can not see; he goes back and picks it up. As he rode for a while, he passes a water, there's a fish on the shore and gasps; as he says, "Wait, my dear fish, I will help you, that you come into the water," seizes him by the tail and throws it into the water. Then the fish put his head out of the water, saying, "Since you have brought me out of the mire, I will give thee a flute; if you are in need, play on it, then I will help you, and if you something did fall in the water, only games, and I'll get it out to thee. " Then he rode away, and as such is a man, therefore, who asks him where he wants. "Oh, to the next place." And how he hot? "True to Ferdinand." - "I have almost the same name," said the other, "because my name is Ferdinand the Unfaithful." but since they both set out to the next place in the Wirtshaus.Nun it was bad that Ferdinand the Unfaithful knew everything that someone else had thought of and wanted to do; he knew by all kinds of wicked arts. in the tavern there was a virtuous girl who had a bright face and was very pretty; it fell in love with Ferdinand the Faithful, for he was a handsome young man, and asked him where he was going. Oh, he just wanted to travel around so said Ferdinand faithful to her. Then she said to him that he should stay here because this country would be a king who could sure use an attendant or an outrider, and he ought to go to services. He replied that he could not just go and offer themselves. Then the girl said, "Oh, I will soon do for you." And so they went straight to the King and told him that she knew of an excellent servant for his court. And the King was well pleased, it left a lot to come and wanted to make the servant him. but he would rather be a pioneer, because where his horse was, he would be; Then the king made him the pioneer. "Do you and not me Will you help?": When Ferdinand the Unfaithful learned that, he said to the girl - "Oh," the girl said, "I will help you." She thought: That you have to keep friends, because this is not to be trusted. She went to the king and offered him as servants; so was unfaithful in the morning put on his Lord the King Ferdinand zufrieden.Wenn because wailed always ". Oh, if only I had my love with me" but the Ferdinand was unfaithful to the Ferdinand the Faithful always hostile, and when the King so moaned once again, he said: "You have the outrider, send but him who has to procure them, and if he does not, it must the head be laid at the feet. " Then King Ferdinand left true to come and said he had there and there is a darling that he should procure; if he did not, he should sterben.Ferdinand Faithful went into the stable to his white horse and wept and wailed. "Oh, what I'm looking for an unhappy man." As someone behind him cried, "Ferdinand the Faithful, why are you weeping?" He looked around, but saw no one and always wailed on, "Oh, my dear mold, I have to leave you, and now I must die." Since it again cried, "Ferdinand the Faithful, why are you weeping?" As he finally realized that his little white horse had asked him. "Is that you, my little white horse? Can you talk?" And again said, "I want there and how to start the scattered abroad to bring the bride You know not.?" Since the little white horse replied, "You go to the king and say if he would give you what you have would have, so you were the bride already brought here this you need a ship full of meat and a ship full of bread, for the big giants. on the water, if you bring them meat, they tear you: and there would still be the big birds that peck your eyes out of your head if you had no bread for them, "then the king let all butchers in the country. slaughter and all the bakers bake, that the ships were full. As they are full, the little white horse to Ferdinand says true, "Now mount me, and ride with me to the ship, and then when the giants come, say so: Hush, hush, my dear little giants, I have had thought, I told you what brought and when the birds come, you say again:.. Hush, hush, my dear little birds, I have had thought, I told you what brought then she hurt you, and if you then come to the castle, then help Get the giants; you walk up to the castle and take a few giants: because the princess lies asleep but You must not wake up, but the giants have to bear with the bed together on the ship. ". And since all that the little white horse had said happened, and the giant birds and gave Ferdinand the Faithful, which he had brought them, but the giants willing, and carried the princess to the ship, which immediately drove to the king. And when they came to the king, said the princess, she could not live, she must have her writings, they had been left at the castle. Since Ferdinand the Faithful was called at the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, and the king ordered him to fetch the writings from the castle, or he would die. There he goes again to the stable and cries and says, "Oh, my dear little white horse, now I have to go away again, how can I do that?" Since the mold told them to load the ships full again. As it happened again as the previous time, and the giants and the birds become saturated by the meat and appeased. When they come back to the castle, the white horse told him to just go in there, in Schlafzimmmer the princess lay the writings. Since Ferdinand the Faithful went in and gets them. When they are back on the water as he drops into the water his quill. As the white horse, "Now I can not help you." Since his fall his flute, and he begins to play. Since the fish comes and has the pen in its mouth and holding it out to him. Now he took the writings to the castle where the wedding held wurde.Die Queen did not like the King suffer because he had no nose, but she liked the Ferdinand the Faithful like to suffer. How, then once every gentlemen of the court were together, said the queen, they could also do tricks she could cut off a head and put it on again, it should once a try. But since none of the first wanted to be. As had Ferdinand the Faithful, again unfaithful instigation of Ferdinand. Which they chopped off his head and put him back on; it was then healed again, but looked as if he had a red thread around his neck. Then the king said to her: "My child, where did you learn that?" - "Yes," she said, "the art understand I should, I just try it on you?" - "Oh yes," he said. As they chopped off his head, but did not put it on again. She acted as if she could not get him back on it, and as if he did not want to be stuck. The king was buried, but she married Ferdinand getreu.Er but always rode his white horse, and when he once again sat on it, as said the horse to him to once a heath which he would have him ride and gallop three times round with him. As he had done that, the white horse stood on its hind legs and turns into a prince.
Fitchers bird	440	311	German	It was once a wizard who took the shape of a poor man, and went to houses and begged, and caught pretty girls. No one knew where he carried them, for they never reappeared. One day he appeared before the door of a man who three beautiful daughters, had looked like a poor weak beggar, and carried a basket on her back, as if to collect charitable gifts in it. He asked for a little food, and came out as the oldest and one piece of bread would give him, he touched her only, and she had to jump into his basket. Then he hurried away with long strides and carried her into a dark forest to his house, which stood in the middle. Everything in the house was magnificent: he gave her what she could possibly desire, and said, "Sweetheart, you will certainly be happy with me, for you have everything your heart desires." This lasted a few days, he said: "I have to continue to travel and you have a short time alone, since the house keys are: you can go anywhere and look at everything except into one room, which this little key here opens, forbid I you on pain of death. " He also gave her an egg and said, "The egg carefully for me, and carry it continually about with you, because it gienge lost, a great misfortune would come of it." She took the keys and the egg, and promised all things well aligned. When he was gone, she went round the house from top to bottom and looked at everything: the rooms shone with silver and gold, and she said she had never seen such great splendor. At last she came to the forbidden door, she wanted to go over, but curiosity let her have no rest. She examined the key, he looked like someone else, they put it and turned it a little, because the door sprang open. But what she saw when she stepped inside: a large bloody basin stood in the middle, and it lay dead zerhauene people: stood a wooden block and a flashing ax lay upon it. She was so terrified that the egg which she held in her hand fell into the basin. She got it out and wiped the blood off, but in vain, it came the moment reappeared, she washed and scrubbed, but she could not herunterkriegen.Nicht a long time, the man came back from the trip, and the first, he asked, was the key and the egg. She handed it to him, but she was trembling, and he saw at once by the red spots that she had been in the blood chamber. "Did you go against my will into the chamber," he said, "you shall now against your will in again. Your life is over." He threw her down, dragged her out by her hair, cut her head off on the block and hacked them that their red blood flowed on the ground there. Then he threw it to the rest of the basin. "Now I will take my second," said the wizard, and went back in the form of a poor man's house and begged. Since he brought the second a piece of bread, and he caught her like the first by a mere mixing and carried her away. She did not fare better than her sister, she was inspired by her curiosity tempt, opened the blood chamber and had to pay it on his return to life. He went and brought the third. but it was clever and cunning. When he had given her keys and egg, and had left her, she first put the egg carefully, and then she examined the house and last went into the forbidden chamber. Oh, what she saw! her two dear sisters were, cruelly murdered, in the basin. But they began to gather the members together and put them in order, head, body, arms and legs. And when nothing further was wanting the limbs began to move and unite themselves together, and both girls opened their eyes and were alive again. As they rejoiced, kissed and caressed each other! Then she led them out and hid them. The man called on his arrival keys and the egg, and when he no trace of blood could detect it, he said, "You have passed the test, you shall be my bride." But he had no longer any power over them and had to do what she wanted. "Well," she answered, "you shall advance a basket of gold to my father and my mother bring and even carry there on your back, inasmuch as I want for the wedding here." Then she went into her closet where she had hidden her sisters. "Now," she said, "came the moment when I can save you, the villain will himself carry you home again. But once you're at home, let me provide assistance" Then she put both into a basket and covered them with gold let alone that there was no sign of them, and called in the wizard and said, "Now carry the basket away, but you that I do not go stay stand or to rest, I looking through my little window and eight. "the wizard raised the basket on his back and went away with it, but it was so hard for him that the sweat ran down his face and he feared the dead to be pushed. Then he sat down and wanted a little rest, but called the same one in the basket: "I look through my little window and see that you rest, you want to continue." He said the bride called him to and set out again. Again he wanted to sit down, as it called again "I am looking through my little window, and I see that you are resting, you want straight on." And whenever he stood still, it cried, but since he had to continue until he finally completely out of breath associated with the basket with the gold and the two maidens into their parents' home brachte.Daheim the bride's wedding party to. They took a skull with grinning teeth, put a jewelry and carried him upstairs to the garret and let it look out there. Then He hired a friends of the Warlock to the feast, and how that was done, put them in a barrel of honey, the bed cut and rolled in the fact that she looked like a whimsical bird and no one could see them. As they went to the house out, and the road she met a part of the wedding guests, who asked, "You Fitchers bird, where are you from" "I come from skein Fitchers home here" "What makes for, as the young bride?". "Has swept from top to bottom the Hausund looks out the bottom hole." At last she met the bridegroom, who slowly walked. He asked as the others. "? You Fitchers bird, where are you from" "I come from skein Fitchers home here" "What's he doing since my young bride" "Has swept from top to bottom the house and looks for bottom hole out." The bridegroom looked up, saw the decked out skull, he thought it was his bride, and nodded to her and greeted her kindly. But when he, together with his guests had gone into the house, because the aid arrived from the sisters. They locked all the doors of the house that no one could escape, set fire to it that the warlock burned along with his crew.
Mother Hulda	231	480	German	A widow had two daughters; one was pretty and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. but she had the ugly and lazy, because she was her own daughter, much rather, and do the other had to all work and be the Cinderella of the house. The poor girl had to daily on the large road near a well set and had so much spin that it jumped the blood from his fingers. Now it came to pass that the coil was once covered with blood as she dipped it into the well and wanted to wash off; but she jumped out of his hand and fell down. It was crying, ran to her stepmother, and told her misfortune. She, however, it so hard and was so merciless that she said, "Have you let fall down the coil, they get up again." Then the girl went back to the well and did not know what it should do; and in his heart she jumped into the well to get around the coil. It lost consciousness and woke up when it came to itself and again, it was in a beautiful meadow where the sun was shining and many thousands were flowers. On this meadow, it went away and came to an oven that was full of bread; but the bread called out, "Oh, take me out, take me out, or I shall burn; I'm baked long ago." Since it came and took the bread slides out everything in sequence. Then we went on and came to a tree weighed down with apples, and called to him: "Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all of us ripe." Then she shook the tree that apples fell like rain, and shaking was until none above; and when it had all collapsed in a heap, she went on again. Finally, there was a small house, it looked an old woman, but because she had such large teeth, he was terrified, and wanted to run. But the old woman called after him: "What are you afraid, my dear Stay with me, if you want to do all the work in the house properly, so you should fine go You just have to be careful to make my bed well and there. diligently aufschüttelst that the feathers fly, then it snows in the world; I am Mother Hulda. " As the old woman spoke so kindly, so the girl took heart, agreed, and went to their service. She did everything to their satisfaction and shook the bed with such a will that the feathers like snowflakes flew; for it also had a good life with her, not a bad word, and all the days of boiled meat and fried. Now it was a time with Mother Holle, since they were sad and did not initially even what was wrong, finally noticing that it was homesickness; whether it a thousand times better than him went here at home, still she had a longing to go home. At last she said to her: "I am homesick home, and if it ever so well'm down here, I can not stay longer, I have to back up to my family." Mother Holle said: "I like it that you're asking to be home, and because you have served me so faithfully, I will bring up yourself again." She took it out by the hand and led her to a large gate. The gate was opened, and the girl just stood among them, was a huge shower of gold, and all the gold stuck to it, making it over and over it was covered. "That you shall have, because you were so busy," said Mother Holle, and also gave him the coil again, which had fallen into the well. Then the door was closed and the girl found herself back in the world, not far from her mother's house; and when it came into the yard, the rooster sat on the well and cried: "Kikeriki, Our golden girl is here again." Then she went in to his mother, and because it came so covered with gold, she was of her and her sister well aufgenommen.Das girl told all that had happened to him, and listened as the mother, how it came to the great wealth was, she wanted to give the same happiness of others, ugly and lazy daughter. She had to put on the well and spin; and her spindle bloody she pricked her fingers and hands joined in the thorn hedge. Then she threw the reel into the well and jumped in herself. She came, like the others, in the beautiful meadow and walked the same path on. When she came to the oven, the bread cried again, "Oh, take me out, take me out, or I shall burn, I'm baked long ago." But the lazy replied, "I have no desire to make me dirty," and walked away. Soon she came to the apple tree, which cried, "Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all of us ripe." But she answered: "You look right, it could drop me an upside down," and took it on. When she came to Mother Holle House, she was not afraid because she had heard of her big teeth, and entered into her service. On the first day she put her hand on, was busy and the woman followed Holle, when she said something to her, because she thought of the gold that she would give her; but on the second day she began to be lazy, on the third even more, because they did not want to get up in the morning. Neither did she make Mother Hulda's bed as it's deserved, and did not shake that the feathers to fly. So that Mother Hulda soon tired and gave her notice on. The lazy thing was well pleased and thought that now the golden rain would come; the wife Hulda led her to the door, but when she stood in a large kettle full of pitch was distributed instead of gold. "This is the reward for your services," said Mother Holle, and closed the goal. So the lazy girl came home, but she was all covered with pitch, and the cock on the fountain when he saw her, cried: ". Kikeriki, Our dirty girl has here again" And the pitch remained sticking to it hanging and wanted as long as she lived, not come off.
Fox and Raven	8020	57	German	Who is pleased to be praised with deceitful words, is punished almost always shameful and regretted es.Als a raven cheese from a window stolen hatteund him, sitting on a tall tree, wanted to eat, this saw a fox and began to speak out so "Oh, what a glory of your plumage, raven what beauty do you have on the body and in the Gesicht.Wenn you had a voice, no other bird would be better." But that fool than he wanted to show his voice, left the fall cheese from the beak, the raschder wily fox with greedy teeth aufschnappte.Dann only the Raven sighed in his stupidity deceived.
Gagliuso	3382	545B	German	Indescribably great was the joy which all felt about happiness violas, especially as they are, despite everything reluctance even their favorable fate had created through their wisdom, their sisters, who played as enemies of her own blood so many bad tricks to her possibly breaking his neck. but it was time that even Tolla should the tax had to be paid to wear, so she poured from the Stock Exchange of her mouth the gold pieces their fine words and paid their debt through the following stories: The ungrateful, my Lord, one rusty nail, which, beaten in the tree service skill makes him wither, a broken sewer pipe through which the foundations of affection fall into decay, and a carbon black, the fall in the face of friendship, acts it smell and taste how this clearly proves daily and so also in the following narrative. Once upon a time in my beloved home town Naples a very, very much poor man, who was so airy, empty and easily so meager and bare, and so without the slightest cloth and rags on their backs, that he went naked as a louse. When he was ready, then, that he should shake the bag of life, he called Oratiello and Pippo, his sons, and said unto them: "Already I am because of the bond that has the nature of my hands, pre calls been, and you can give me, as sure as we are Christians, believe me, this suffering prison would leave with great joy this grief cave when I not in quite such a bad situation, so of all exposed as the Carthusians, as poor as the church mice, and without the slightest penny blank as the barber's basin, light as feathers and dry as the plum seeds back could be so that you do not so much habet, can carry off than the dog on the tail, and if you run one hundred miles, you no Heller falls out of the pocket; because my destiny has brought me so much of the crap that I lack most needed and I no longer possess as the hour when I came out of the womb, that I, as you know, constantly yawn from hunger and always went to sleep without light am. Despite everything, I want to leave you a sign of my love for my death, and so you take your, Oratiello who art my firstborn, the screen hanging there on the wall, that thou who art the Nestvögelchen, take ! now Farewell, I go to sleep, "Once Oratiello funeral expenses for the father together amount begging and he had buried: Get the cat, and both your father remember" by saying so, he began to cry and said, soon after "! he took the screen and looked for work here and there to earn his living, so that he earned the more, the more he got through through the sieve; But Pippo took the cat and said, "As a seh even know what my father to me has left a glorious legacy; I, who I have nothing to live itself, must now make do for two! If one has ever seen such an unfortunate legacy? ! If you prefer the whole inheritance would have stayed at Cuckoo "So when the cat this whining heard, she said to him:" You complaining about over their sufferings and have yet more luck than sense; because you do not know that I can make you rich when I only ever want. "When Pippo heard these words, he thanked his Katzlichkeit and recommended its goodwill on the most pressing, and he stroked her three or four times over the back, so that the cat with pity on the poor Gagliuso all morning at the hour when the sun with the bait of light at the golden fish hooks usually fish the shadows of the night, up went to the bank and if they pretty large moray or goldfish noticed caught him and brought to the king, saying to him: "Mr. Gagliuso, your Majesty very humble servant, sends you this fish in all reverence, even though he thinks it for such a great man only a small gift is, "then the king answered the cat with a friendly face, how to look after it to make the one who brings something"! Say to the unknown gentleman that I am on the other schönstens thank "a. it once again, the cat ran after the bogs and bushes, and when the hunters shot down a grouse, a snipe or a chicken, hush, she was gone with it and brought her to the king with the same words; in short, they put it away for so long, until the king once said to her: "I feel the Lord Gagliuso so committed that I know him and I wish myself to him for the courtesy shown me to show gratitude"; what the cat said, "The the Lord Gagliuso wish is just waiting to put his property and blood for your majesty to it, and tomorrow morning, when the sun, the stubble of heaven has set on fire, it will come from, you his awe . bezeigen "but when the morning appeared, the cat went to the king and said," Mr. Gagliuso can be at your Majesty excuse that he can not appear; There are tonight him some valet ran away, which also have left left him not a single shirt. "No sooner had heard this the king, he ordered his wardrobe masters to deliver Lord Gagliuso a number of clothes and linen, so that last less than two hours were when he came and even accompanied the cat to the palace looked overwhelmed by the king with pleasantries by the latter called him sit down even in his presence and made a magnificent feast. Now while Gagliuso this access efficient, he turned once over and over to the cat and said to her: "Dear Miezchen, I only see yes to that the few rags not slip back to me from the hands," to which the cat replied!: "just be quiet and you stuff your mouth, and do not make so much talk of like begging!" and wanted to know when the king whether Gagliuso perhaps demanded something answered the cat that he would like a little lime, hence the King soon in the garden a basket was full of pluck. Gagliuso however, soon began again the song of the old clothes and shirts on, the cat told him again that he should zuspunden the mouth, and the king asked as if he wanted something, so that the cat fast as before with a pretext low sense Gagliusos had to come to the rescue. After stopped at last to feed and for a time and that had talked of that is on leave Gagliuso, but while the cat remained even with the king and his virtue, spirit and ingenuity of their Lord, but especially his great wealth and property praised, which is as she said, expanded in the neighborhood of Rome and Lombardy far and wide, so they probably thought he was worthy to marriages with a crowned head. And when then asked the king how rich he could be like the cat replied, that this, who himself did not know how much he could not even count, the moveable and immovable property and equipment Croesus; if the king wishes to convince himself of the truth of what she said, so he wants to send people to her about the limit which should satisfy themselves by inspection that no wealth in the world which would be equivalent to his. therefore the king had some of his vertrautesten servants and ordered them to teach most carefully by those at issue matter what these nachfolgten because even the cat from place to place as they namely under the pretext that the necessary refreshments for them to have to remain waiting in the all-time resting places, always preceded hurried; whenever it but a flock of sheep, cows, horses and pigs encountered on the way, she called the keepers and shepherds them to "Heda, watched, because a band of robbers plunders everything is on these fields here; if you but the hands of the same escape and Wollet see untouched your property, then only say, that it is the Lord's Gagliuso, then you will be hurt no hair. "The same is said the Cat in the villages, where she passed so that the king, wherever they arrived people heard everywhere the same old story, because of all the things they encountered on their way, they were told that they belonged to the Lord Gagliuso; therefore they finally tired of the questions returned to the king and the same miracles reported on the wealth of the Lord Gagliuso. As a result, promised a handsome dome fur king of the cat when they bring a marriage between his daughter and Gagliuso achieved; which order these, like a shuttle running back and forth, because actually executed by Gagliuso reappeared and then both the king's daughter and took a huge dowry in reception. After a day spent with numerous festivals month expressed finally Gagliuso he wanted to bring his young wife to her new residence but now, and went accordingly, accompanied by the Kings to the limit, after Lombardy, where he on the advice of the cat one number of goods and lands ankaufte and had become a baron. Now, since Gagliuso looked filthy rich and honored in this way, he thanked the cat on the fondest, saying to her that he knew well that he owes her love of his life and his wealth and that the wisdom of a cat did him more good than the mind of his father; They could therefore turn according to their desire and taste of his possessions and his life and reign, and he promised her on the most sacred, that if they should once die after years, he can embalm her body, in a gold coffin in his would keep their own room to the memory of them to always have in mind. The cat listened quietly this bragging with, and only let some time pass, but then she stretched one day lengthwise in the garden on the ground and pretended to be dead so that the woman Gagliusos once they noticed this, exclaimed: " Oh, dear man, what a disaster! The cat is dead! "-" God grant that would be the greatest misfortune that we ever happening to, "said Gagliuso," better they die as we do! "-" But what do we do with her? "Asked the woman. - "Pack it in the legs and throw it out the window," said Gagliuso. but barely heard the cat with the delicious reward they would have imagined at the very least, they jumped immediately, and exclaimed: "Is this the thanks that I have snatched up the lice? Is this the recompense that you have thrown away by my help the rags and now wear a full skirt? , Is this the reward that I have showered you with gorgeous dresses and satisfy all your desires, you who, indeed, were before a starving beggar, where the shirt was hanging out of the pants torn, zerlappter, ragged, tattered pile of rags? But it usually goes to those who accuse her pearls before swine! Enchanted was all I done for you; because you do not deserve even that one spits in your face! Is this the golden coffin in which you lie down, this is the magnificent funeral, which you hold me wanted? Since serve, work, toil and sweat to an increasingly starting to finally get this nice reward! How deplorable is this, who wants his pot in the hope that he puts on another warm, and how true but the philosopher has spoken, who said that anyone who moves like a donkey, even as such is treated and ! that in a word, the more you do, should you expect the less wage "by this the cat cried and thereby made a very sad face, she hurried out, and however much Gagliuso sought; to lick with his tongue of humility, it still did not succeed to persuade them to return, but she ran straight ahead, without even turning his head only once, and she cried out repeatedly: God hüt 'us from the heights, the fallen, as against the increase in beggars all.
Gudbrand of the Mountain	4028	1415	German	There was once a man called Gudbrand; who had a homestead that was far away on the side of a mountain, and that's why people called him Gudbrand from the mountains. He lived with his wife along so happy and friendly, that all that the man did, the woman so well däuchte done that it might be never done better; as he might start it, she had to always appreciate it. They owned their piece of arable land, were lying in the crate hundred dollars, and in the barn they had two cows in the yoke stehen.Da said one day the woman Gudbrand: "I seemeth, we should bring a cow to town and sell them, so that we would get but a few shillings issuer; We are good people and should but a few shillings have among the hands, just as other people have it; the hundred dollars in the box, we can not attack, and I do not know what we want with more than a cow; and then also still a small profit, is that I then only to a cow to fit need, rather that I now must placken me with two. "Yes, däuchte the Gudbrand quite right and reasonable terms, and he immediately took the cow and took it to town to sell. In the city but no one thought of him wanted to buy the cow. ! "Oh well," thought Gudbrand, "so go I with my cow back home; I know I have both stable, as a yoke for them, and it is as far back as here, "and he strode confidently again with his cow heimwärts.Als he left a stump that he met one who had a horse that he wanted to sell. Now däuchte our Gudbrand it was better to have a horse than a cow, and so he traded with the man. When he had gone a little further, he met the one who was driving a fat pig before him, and as Gudbrand said again, but it was better to have a fat pig than a horse, and exchanged with the man. Then he went on, and after a while he met a man with a goat. "It is of course always better to have a goat than a pig," thought Gudbrand and exchanged with the man who had the goat. Well, he went a long way away, until he finally met a man who had a sheep, and with whom he also exchanged, for he thought: "It is better always to have a sheep than a goat" As he now still. had gone further, he met a man with a goose, and now exchanged Gudbrand the sheep against the goose. When he had gone on a wide, wide end, he met a man with a tap; with whom he exchanged again, because he thought. "Basically, it's better to have a rooster than a goose" He now stepped away for so long until it was late in the day, and since then the hunger in him ceased, he sold the rooster for three pennies and bought something to eat, "because it is better to bring home life as a cock," thought Gudbrand from the mountains. Then he continued on his way home until he came to the farm of his nearest neighbor; as he turned in. "Well, how did it go out in the city?" People asked him. "Oh, that is" now gone so well, Gudbrand said, "I just can not praise my luck and do not despise," and he told them how everything had happened, from the beginning to the end. "Well, there you will also receive nice are of your wife when you get home," said the man of the homestead, "God help with you! . "-" I do not want stuck in your skin I seemeth, it could have gone much worse, "Gudbrand said of the mountains," be it but now ill, or have gone, yet I have such a good woman I never . reproaches makes, I always begin's "-" Yes, that may be true, "the man said,".? but I do not believe it yet "-" You want to bet "said Gudbrand from the mountain:" I have one hundred dollars are in the box, you think just as frequent, however "-" Topp "said the neighbor?;! and began as it to dawn, both went to Gudbrand's farm. Here, the neighbor was outside the door are to listen to while Gudbrand went in to his wife and spoke to her. "Good evening!" Said Gudbrand from the mountain, as he entered. ! "Good evening," the woman said, "Well, God be praised! You're back? "- Yes, that was he. The woman then asked how it would have gone to him because 'in the city. "Ah, so so" said Gudbrand, "I can not boast particularly my luck up. When I came to the city, there was no one who wanted to buy me the cow; so I swapped it for a horse. "-" Oh! I must know that thanks to you, yes, "she said," we are so good people that we can go to church and at home, simply as good as Andre, and if we Rath to create for ourselves a horse, why should we Not? ! Not I have the horse yet; - - Go, boys, feeding the horse '' The 'Gudbrand said " because when I went part of the way, I swapped it for a pig "-" No, "the woman cried:". that's right, as if I had done self's! thank you, dear man! now I'm still in the bacon home to the people something to offer that come to us. What we should also comfortable with the horse? People would only say we would become so refined that we could no longer go to church, how else done - Go, boys, and brings it pig in, "-" But I have the boar would not, "said Gudbrand, "because when I end had gone on, I exchanged it for a dairy goat" - "Jerum.! , How you all doing splendidly, "cried the woman," What should I do with the pig when I come to consider it? People would only say: "Those who eat everything on what they have 'No, have I a goat, so bekomm I milk and cheese, and the goat me still remains -" boys, let a goat -.! "no, I've got the goat but not," Gudbrand said, "because had progressed as I do something along the way, I swapped the goat, and got a gorgeous sheep" - "no," the woman cried. "! you've done all that I could wish it to me, just as if I were even been there. What we should also with the goat? I would then always run dahinterher and uphill and downhill climb. Am I but a sheep, have so I wool and clothes in the household, and on top of that - Go, boys, and brings the sheep - no longer the sheep, 'Gudbrand said,' 'pure' 'But I have!' because when I something had gone on, I exchanged it for a goose "-" Oh, a thousand times thank you very much, "the woman said." What should I do well with the sheep? I have neither rocking nor spindle, and also do not ask afterward to placken me and torment and weave clothes; yes we can buy our clothes, as we have done otherwise. Now I nevertheless times goose meat to taste what I was gejankt for so long, and can fill me dunes in my Pfülk - Go, boys, and bring the goose 'bekomm in! "-" The more I've got the goose but not, "Gudbrand said," because had gone when I was still a little way, I swapped it against a cock "-" God knows how you're on the fall, "cried the woman." it is just all when! I'd done it myself. A rooster that's just as if you had bought a wake-AM The same; because every morning the rooster crows at four, and then we can come at the right time on their feet. What we should probably with the goose? I 'not looking forward to cure goose meat, and my Pfülk I can cram with seagrass me yes - Go, boys, and bring the hammer' understand pure "-" But I have to tap either, "said Gudbrand!: "because when I was something gone further, I got a terrible hunger and had to sell the rooster for three dimes that I brought home only life" - "Well, that was right that you thatst the" cried the woman.! "How do you even begin it, so you makes it, I can only wish all's. What we should also use the tap? We are our own masters, and in the morning can lie as long as we want. Well, God be praised! if I have only you again that you make everything so well, I need neither rooster nor goose, nor pig nor cow. "Well made Gudbrand open the door. ? "Have I now won the hundred dollars," he cried; and there because the neighbor had to confess that he had it.
Hans in hapiness	795	1415	German	Hans had served his master for seven years, so he said to him, 'Sir, my time is up, now I wanted to go back home to my mother, give me my wages.' The Lord answered, "you have served me faithfully and honestly, as the service was, the reward should be, 'and gave him a piece of gold that were as big as his head. Hans pulled a handkerchief from his pocket, wrapped up the lump in it, put him on the shoulder and made his way home. As he went on, always put one leg before the other, he saw a horseman in the eyes, and merrily trotting by on a lively horse. "Ah," said Hans quite loud, "what it is to ride a beautiful thing! There you sit as on a chair, pushes over no stones, you save your shoes, and get on, you do not know how. ' The rider, who had heard him, stopped and called 'egg, Hans, why even You're running on foot?' 'I must surely,' he answered, 'because I have to wear a lump home: Although it is gold, but I can not keep straight, and it hurts my shoulder to head it.' 'You know what, "said the rider," we will exchange: I give you my horse, and you give me your lump.' 'With all my heart, "said Hans,' but I tell you, I need you drag it. ' The rider got down, took the gold, and helped Hans up, gave him the bridle tight in his hands and said, "If it really good pace to go, so you must click your tongue and hop hop rufen.'Hans was heartily delighted as he sat on the horse and rode away so bold and free. After a while he fiels that it ought to go faster, and began to click with his tongue and call hop hop. The horse put himself into a sharp trot, and before Hans knew 'he was thrown off and lying in a ditch which separated the field from the road. The horse would have gone off if a farmer would not have thought to who came along and driving a cow before him. Hans got his limbs together and went back to his feet. but he was vexed, and said to the countryman 'it's a bad fun, riding, especially when one gets such a mare on, like this one that pushes and throws one off, that you can break your neck; I sit now, nor ever again. Since I like your cow, as may a walk quietly behind her, and every day has certainly above, one's milk, butter and cheese. What I would give it, if I have such a cow! ' 'Well,' said the peasant, 'you done such a big favor, and I will swap the cow for the horse you well.' Hans agreed with the greatest delight, the countryman jumped upon the horse and rode quickly davon.Hans drove his cow quietly before him, and thought over his lucky bargain. 'If only I have a morsel of bread, and it will hardly fail me, so I can as often as I beliebe eat butter and cheese with it; I am thirsty, I can milk my cow and drink the milk. Heart, what more can I want? ' When he came to an inn he made a halt, ass in the great joy of all he had with him his dinner and supper, clean up, and left for his last few farthings half a glass of beer pour. Then he drove his cow onwards to the village of his mother. The heat was oppressive, the closer the lunch came, and Hans found himself upon a moor which it took about an hour. He felt it very hot, leaving him with thirst tongue stuck to the palate. "I can find to help '' thought Hans," I will milk the cow now and refresh myself with the milk. ' He tied her to a withered tree, and as he had no pail he put his leather cap underneath, but as he tried, there was no drop of milk. And because he is a clumsy way, so he gave the impatient beast at last with its hind feet such a blow on the head that he fell on the ground and for a while could not think where he was. Fortunately, just came a butcher of the way in which lay a shoe carts a young pig. 'What sort of a trick!' he cried, and helped the good Hans up. Hans told him what had happened. The butcher gave him his flask and said, "Take a drink and refresh yourself. The cow will certainly give no milk, it is an old beast, at the best it is good or for the butcher. ' 'Well, well,' said Hans, brushed the hair on the head, "who would have thought! It is certainly good if you like that at home as an animal, what meat! but I'm from the cow meat not much, it's not me juicy enough. Yes, who would have such a young pig! the tastes different, then there are the sausages. ' 'Listen, Hans, "said the butcher,' love for you I will exchange, and you want to leave the pig for the cow. ' 'May God reward you for your kindness, "said Hans, handed him the cow to let the pig unbound from the barrow, and the cord by which it was tied into the hand geben.Hans went on, and thought how he was going but everything as desired , did meet with any peevishness, so she would righted again. Presently there joined him a lad who was carrying a fine white goose under his arm. They offered each other the time, and Hans began to tell of his good luck, and how he had always made such good bargains. The boy told him that he was taking the goose to a christening-feast. 'Just lift her,' he continued, grabbing her by the wings, 'how hard it is, that has been fattened up for the last eight weeks. Who biting into the roast, the fat must wipe from both sides. ' 'Yes,' said Hans, as he weighed her in one hand, "which has its weight, but my pig is no bad one. ' Meanwhile the lad looked in all directions very serious, shaking and probably with his head. 'Listen,' he said at 'with your pig is not quite right. In the village through which I passed, the mayor has been stolen from the stable one up. I'm afraid I'm afraid you have got hold in your hand. They have sent out some people and it would be a bad business if they caught you with the pig. The least is that you would be shut in the dark hole ' bang The good Hans was, 'Oh God,' he said, 'help me out of trouble, you know around here better decision, take my pig there and leave me your goose.' 'I have to put something on the line, "answered the lad,' but I will not be to blame but that your getting into trouble. ' So he took the cord in his hand and drove away the pig quickly along a by-path but the good Hans went rid of his worries, with the goose under his arm to home. 'When considering ego right,' he said to himself, 'I have even gained by the exchange: first the good roast meat, then the quantity of fat which will drip that gives goose fat bread for a quarter year, and lastly the beautiful white feathers that I let my stuff into my pillow, and then I will probably sleep without rocking. How glad my mother will be! 'When he was going through the last village, there stood a scissors grinder with his barrow, as his wheel whirred he sang dazu.'ich sharpen scissors and quickly grind, My coat after Wind.'Hans stopped and looked at him; At last he spoke to him and said, "All's well, as you are so merry with your grinding. ' "Yes," answered the scissors-grinder, "the trade has a golden foundation. A real grinder is he grabs a man who often, in his pocket finds gold in it. But where did you buy that fine goose? ' 'The I did not buy it, but exchanged my pig.' "And the pig? ' 'That's what I got for a cow.' 'And the cow?' "I took that instead of a horse. ' 'And the horse?' 'For icheinen clumps have gold as big as my head, possibly.' 'And the gold?' 'Well, that was my wages for seven years' service.' 'You've always known you to help, "said the grinder,' Hers can get on so far that you hear jump in your pocket the money when you stand up, you have made your fortune. ' 'How shall I manage that?' said Hans. 'You need a grinder to be like me; to nothing actually belongs but a grindstone, the other is already found itself Since I've one which, although a little worn, but Ye shall not also pass on but your goose. do you want that? ' 'How can you even ask? "Answered Hans," I shall be the happiest people on earth; I have money, I often in my pocket, I need about any longer? ' handed him the goose and received the grindstone in reception. 'Well,' said the grinder, took up an ordinary heavy stone that lay by him on, 'because you still have a strong stone for on the sichs can do well and your your old nails just knock can. Take him and lifts him up orden auf.'Hans invited to the stone and went with a contented heart; his eyes lit up with joy, 'I have to be born with a caul,' he exclaimed, 'all I wish me arrives as a Sunday child.' Meanwhile, as he had been since daybreak on his feet, he began to feel tired; also tormented him hungry because he had eaten up all his stock at a time in the joy of the bargain by which cow. At last he could walk with difficulty and had to stop at any moment; the stones, weighed him down dreadfully. Since he could not help thinking how good it would be if he just now did not need to wear them. Like a snail, he crept to a field well, he would rest and refresh himself with a cool draft so that it but did not damage the stones in sitting down, he laid them carefully next to him on the edge of the fountain. Then he sat down and wanted to stoop and drink because ers knew, met with a little bit of stones, and both fell into the water. Hans saw them with his own eyes in the depth seen sinking, jumped for joy on, then knelt down and thanked God with tears in his eyes that he still proved to him that grace and him in such a good way and without that he needed to make a charge that would be exempt from the heavy stones that he alone would have been even a hindrance. 'As happy as I am,' he exclaimed, 'There is no man under the sun.' With a light heart and free from every burden he now jumped on until he was at home with his mother.
Hans My Hedgehog	1028	441	German	but it was once a farmer who had a lot of money and property, but as rich as he was, so there was something missing on his luck: he had with his wife, no children, often when he went to town with the other peasants mocked they asked about him and why he had no children. And he was angry, and when he came home, he said, "I want to have a child, and shall be's a hedgehog!" Then his wife had a child that was a hedgehog above and below a boy, and when she saw the child, she was startled and said, "See, you have cursed us!" Then the man said: "What can all this help, baptized the boy should be, but we can take no godfather to." The woman said, "We can not let him differently baptized as Hans the hedgehog." When he was baptized, the minister said: "He can come because of its spines in no ordinary bed." As a little straw was trimmed behind the stove and Hans to put my hedgehog. He could also at the mother does not drink, for he would have pricked her with his quills. So he lay there behind the stove for eight years and his father he was tired and thought that if he just died; but he did not die, but remained lying there. Now it came to pass that in the city was a market, and the farmer wanted to go because he asked his wife what he should bring her. "A little meat and a couple of rolls which are wanted on the budget," she said. Then he asked the maid who wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings. Finally, he also said: "Hans My Hedgehog, what are you going to have?" - "Father," he said, "I bring yet bagpipes!" How does the farmer came back home, he gave his wife what he had bought for her, meat and rolls, and then he gave the maid the slippers, and the stockings, finally he went behind the stove, and gave Hans My Hedgehog the bagpipes. And when Hans the hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said, "Father, do go to the forge and let me my cock shod, then I will ride away and never wants to come back." The father was glad that he should get rid of him, and left him the cock shod, and was ready when he says Hans sat hedgehog care rode away, also took pigs and donkeys who wanted it out of the forest guard. In the forest but the rooster had with him on a high tree fly, as he sat and watched his asses and pigs, and sat for many years, until the herd was quite large, and knew his father nothing about him. But when he sat on the tree, he played his bagpipes, and made music that was very nice. Once a King came traveling by who had lost his way and heard the music. He was astonished at it, and sent out his servant, he should look around even know where this music came. He looked around, but saw nothing but a little animal sitting on the tree above, it was like a rooster, on a hedgehog was sitting, and who made the music. Then the king said to the servant he was to ask why he sat there and whether he did not know where the road was going to his kingdom. Then Hans My Hedgehog climbed the tree and said he would show the way if the king wanted him and promise him whatever he first met in the royal courtyard as soon as he arrived at home. Then the King thought: I can do easily, Hans My Hedgehog does not understand it yet, and I can write what I want. Then the king took pen and ink and wrote something, and had happened as it Hans showed him the hedgehog the way, and he got safely home. His daughter but as they saw him from afar, was so overjoyed, that they ran towards him and kissed him. Then he remembered Hans My Hedgehog and told her how he had fared and that he had a whimsical animals are to prescribe what would at home first meet him, and the animal would like sitting on a cock on a horse and made beautiful music; he would have written, it shall have it not, because Hans the hedgehog can not read it yet. Thereupon the princess was glad, saying that would be good, because they would have never hingegangen.Hans hedgehog kept the donkeys and pigs, was always funny, sat on the tree and played his bagpipes. Now it happened that another king came journeying by with his attendants and runners, and was lost and did not know to get home again because the forest was so large. He likewise heard the beautiful music from a distance, and asked his runner what that would be like he should go and see. As the runner went under the tree and saw the cock sitting and Hans the hedgehog top. The runner asked him what he intended to do up there. "I feed my donkeys and pigs, but what is your desire?" The runners said they had lost and could not get back into the Kingdom if he would not show them the way. Then Hans My Hedgehog climbed down from the tree and told the aged King that he would show him the way, if he would give him his own, which would meet him in front of his royal palace first. The king said yes - and signed the Hans My Hedgehog, he should have. That done, he rode on the rooster, and pointed out the way, and the king arrived safely back in his kingdom. As he came to the farm was great joy. Now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful, ran to meet him, fell on his neck and kissed him and was glad that her father returned old. She asked him where he would have been in the world for so long; he told her he had lost his way and had very nearly not come back, but when he was traveling through a great forest, a, half hedgehog, half man, was sitting astride a cock in a high tree and beautiful music made that would have gone to help him and shown the way, but he would have promised him whatever he first met at the royal court, and that would be it, and now him unhappy. But as she promised him she wanted to go with him, if he came, her old father zuliebe.Hans hedgehog was keeping his pigs, and the pigs were again pigs and were so much that the whole forest was full. Then Hans the hedgehog no longer live in the woods and had to tell his father to have every stye in the village, for he was coming with such a great herd that all might kill who wished to kill. Since his father was upset when he heard this, for he thought Hans the hedgehog had died long ago. Hans the hedgehog, sat down on the cock, and drove the pigs before him into the village and had slaughtered. Hu! there was a killing and a chopping that could be heard far's two hours. After that, said Hans My Hedgehog: "Father, let me my rooster once more at the forge shod, then I will ride away and do not come in my life again." The father left the cock shod, and was happy that Hans did not return the hedgehog wollte.Hans Hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom. Then the king commanded that whosoever came mounted on a cock and had bagpipes with him, then all should shoot at him, cut and stab, that he might not enter the palace. And when Hans was therefore ridden hedgehog, they advanced with bayonets at him, but he gave the cock spurs, flew through the gate in front of the king's window, settled there and called out to him, he shall give him, what he had promised, or he would take the life of him and his daughter. Then the king gave his daughter good words, she wants to go to him so that she and saved the life of him. So she dressed herself white, and her father gave her a carriage with six horses and magnificent servants, money and possessions. She sat down, and Hans the hedgehog with his cock and the bagpipes next to them, then they took leave and drove away, and the king thought he should never see again. But it was different than he thought, because when they were a little way from the city, as Hans pulled my hedgehog the princess pretty clothes off, and pierced her with his hedgehog's skin until she bled all over, and said: "This is the reward of your falseness, go, I do not want you, "and chased her home again, and she was disgraced her but Lebtag.Hans hedgehog rode on further on the cock, with his bagpipes after the second kingdom where he the King had also shown the way. Now he had ordered that whosoever came, Hans the hedgehog, they should present arms, give him safe, Vivat! call and take him to the royal palace. As he saw the king's daughter, she was scared because he did not looked too strange; but they thought it would be otherwise, she would promise to her father. And it was made to feel welcome Hans My Hedgehog from her and married her, and he had to go to the royal table, and she sat on his side, and ate it and drank. How's evening came and they wanted to go to sleep because she was very afraid of his quills. And he said, they should not fear, for you no harm, and told the aged King that he was to appoint four men to watch by the chamber door and light a big fire, and when he went into the chamber and wanted to go to bed, he would creep out of his hedgehog's skin and leave it lying by the bed. Then the men should cause jumping nimbly and throw them into the fire, and to stick with it until it was consumed by fire. When the clock struck eleven, he went into the chamber, the hedgehog skin stripped off and left them lying by the bed. Then the men came and took it swiftly, and threw them into the fire, and when they fire had consumed, he was delivered, and lay in bed as a normal person, but he was coal-black as burned. The king sent for his physician who washed him with precious salves, and anointed him, when he was white and was a nice, young man. Than the king's daughter saw she was happy and the next morning they were joyfully, ate and drank, and then the marriage was properly solemnized, and Hans the hedgehog received the kingdom from old König.Wie several years were around, he said went with his wife to his father and that he was his son; But the father said he had not, he would have only had one, but that would be like a hedgehog born with spikes, and had gone out into the world. And when he made himself known and the old father was very happy, and then went with him to his kingdom.
Hansel and Gretel	146	327A	German	In front of a large forest a poor woodcutter lived with his wife and two children; The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had little to bite and to break, and once fell on the land as a great control, he could not provide more daily bread. As he evening in his bed, thoughts and tossed about in his anxiety, he groaned and said to his wife: "What will become of us as we can feed our children because we ourselves have nothing more for us?" -. "You know what, man," the woman replied, "we want early tomorrow morning take the children out into the forest, where it is the thickest Since we will light a fire and give each of them a piece of bread, then we go to our work and leave them alone. you will not find the way home again, and we are going on. " - "No, madam," said the man, "I do not, how shall I put it in my heart to leave my children alone in the forest The wild animals would soon come and tear them!." - "Oh, you fool," she said, "then we must all four die of hunger, you can only the boards for our coffins," and left him no peace until he consented. "But the poor children but me," said the Mann.Die two children were starving and can not fall asleep, and had heard what their step-mother had said to their father. Gretel wept bitter tears and said to Hansel. "Now is over with us" - "Hush, Gretel," said Hansel, "grieve not you, I will manage something." And were asleep when the old folks, he got up, put on his little coat, the lower door opened and slipped out. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house glittered like real silver pennies. Hansel stooped and put as much into his Rocktäschlein than just inside wanted. Then he went back and said to Gretel, "Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep just peace, God will not forsake us," and went back to his Bett.Als daybreak, before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the two children ". If on, you sluggards, we want to go into the forest to fetch wood" She gave each a piece of bread and said, "Because you have something for your dinner, but do not eat it before then, for you will get nothing." Gretel took the bread under her apron, as Hansel had the stones in his pocket. After that, they all set out together on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short time, Hansel stood still and peeped back at the house and did that again and again. The father said, "Hansel, what are you looking at there and staying behind, got eight and do not forget your legs!" - "Oh, father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my white kitten sitting up on the roof and wants to say bye." The woman said, "Fool, that is not your little cat, that is the morning sun shining on the chimney." But Hansel had not been looking at his kitten, but always they had come into the woods in the middle of a bare pebbles from his pocket on the way geworfen.Als, the father said, "Now gather wood, her children, and I will light a fire so you do not freeze. " Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, a small hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flame quite high burned, the woman said. "Now lie down by the fire, her children, and rest, we go into the forest to cut wood When we are done, we will come back and pick you up. "Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and came as the noon, every little piece of ass bread. And as they heard the blows of the ax, they believed that their father was near. It was not the ax, it was a branch he had tied to a withered tree and slammed back and forth by the wind. And when they had been sitting for so long, they were the eyes from fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When she finally awoke, it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry and said, "How are we going to come out of the woods?" But Hansel comforted her: "Just wait a little, has risen to the moon, then we want the way already found." And had risen when the full moon, Hansel took his little sister by the hand, and the pebbles after which shone like silver, and showed them the way. They walked through the night and arrived back at daybreak to her father's house. They knocked on the door and opened it as the woman and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said, "You naughty children, why have slept her so long in the forest, we thought you were never coming back." The father, however, rejoiced, for it had gone to his heart that he hatte.Nicht left her so alone long after was back dearth throughout, and the children heard their mother saying in bed at night to his father: "Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and the song is over, the children must go, we will take them deeper into the woods, so they do not find their way again;.. there is no other means of saving ourselves " The man felt's hard on your heart, and he thought it would be better that you share the last mouthful with your children. But the woman listened to anything he said, but scolded and reproached him. Who says A must say B, and because he had yielded first time, so he had it to zweitenmal.Die children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation. When the old folks were asleep, Hansel got up again, wanted to go out and pick up pebbles as he did before, but the woman had locked the door, and Hansel could not get out. But he comforted his little sister and said, ". Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the good God will help us," In the early morning the woman came and took the children out of bed. They received their piece of bread, but it was still smaller than the time before. On the way to the forest Hansel crumbled his in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground. "Hansel, why do you stop and look around you?" said the father, "go your way!" - "I am looking at my little pigeon sitting on the roof and I want to say bye," said Hansel. "Fool," "not that's your little pigeon, that is the morning sun shining on the chimney." Said the woman, Hansel threw all the crumbs on the away.The woman's children led deeper into the forest, where they had not been her whole life. Since a large fire was again turned on, and the mother said. "Stay just sit there, you children, and when you are tired you may sleep a little, we go into the forest to cut wood, and in the evening when we are done we come and pick you up. " When it was noon, Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, who had scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep, and evening passed; but no one came to the poor children. until they awoke in the dark night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said, "Just wait, Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have strewn about, they show us the way home." When the moon came they set up, but they found no crumbs more, for the many thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields that had picked them. Hansel said to Gretel, "We will find the way. "But they did not find him. They walked all night and another day from morning till evening, but they did not come out of the forest and were very hungry, for they had nothing but the few berries that grew on the ground. And because they were so tired that their legs would carry them no longer, they lay down under a tree and fell ein.Nun's it the third morning that she had left her father's house. they began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if not soon help came, they had to waste away. when it was noon, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a branch, which sang so beautifully that they stopped and he listened. and when it was over, it spread its wings and flew before them, and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof, it sat down and came up as it very close, they saw that the little house of bread covered was built and with cake But the windows were of bright sugar. "Since we want to have some of this," said Hansel, "and keep a good meal. I want to eat a piece of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat from the window that tastes sweet." Hansel reached up above, and broke off a little from the roof on to try how it tasted, and Gretel leant against the window and nibbled. Then a soft voice from the room cried out: "Nibble, nibble, gnaw, Who is nibbling at my little house?" The children answered: "The wind, the wind, the heavenly child," and ate on, without being led astray. Hansel, the roof very tasted good, there is a large piece of it broke down and Gretel met a whole round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with it. As the door opened again, and a very old woman, leaning on a crutch came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were so frightened that they let fall what they had in their hands. but the old woman nodded her head and said, "Oh, you dear children, who has brought you here come in, and stay with me, you will be no suffering?". They both grabbed by the hand and led them into her house. Since a good food was, milk and pancakes with sugar, apples and nuts. Afterwards were white covered two pretty little beds, and Hansel and Gretel lay down in them and thought they were in Himmel.Die old woman had only friendly employee, but she was a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had the Brothäuslein built merely, entice them. If one fell into her power, she killed it, cooked it and ate it, and it was a feast day. Witches have red eyes and can not see far, but they have a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when human beings draw near. came as Hansel and Gretel near her, she laughed with malice, and said mockingly: "The I that I shall not escape again!" Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was already up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so pretty, with their plump and rosy cheeks, she muttered to herself: "This will be a good bite." Then she seized Hansel with her shriveled hand, carried him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a grated door. He liked shrine, as he wanted, it did not help him. Then she went to Gretel, shook her awake and cried. "Get up, fetch water, and cook your brother something good, sitting outside in the stall and to be bold if he is fat, I will eat him." Gretel began to weep bitterly; but it was no use, she had to do what verlangte.Nun the wicked witch was poor Hansel cooked the best food, but Gretel got nothing but crab shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and cried, "Hansel, stick out your finger that I may feel if you will soon be fat." Hansel, however out a little bone, and the old, dim eyes had could not see it and thought it was Hansel's finger, and was astonished that he did not want to get fat. When four weeks had passed and Hansel still remained thin, she was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer. "Heda, Gretel," she cried to the girl, "stir yourself, and water! Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I want to kill and cook him." Oh, what a grief for the poor little sister, as it had to carry the water, and how it tears flowed down the cheeks! "Dear God, help us," she exclaimed, "would have eaten us only the wild animals in the forest, we would have died together!" - "Just keep your noise," said the old woman, "it helps you at all." Hang up the cauldron with water early in the morning had Gretel out and light fires. "We will bake," said the old woman, "I have already heated the oven and kneaded the dough." She joined the poor Gretel out to the oven, from which flames of fire were already darting "Creep in," said the witch, "and see to it whether is quite heated, so that we can put the bread." And when Gretel was inside, she intended to shut the oven and Gretel be baked, and then they wanted to eat it. But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said: "I do not know how to do it; as I come in there" - "Silly goose," said the old woman, "the opening is big enough, you look well, I could get in myself!" Crept up and put her head in the oven. Then Gretel gave her a shock that she went into far the iron door upon her and bolted the door. Hu! Then she began to howl quite horribly; But Gretel ran away, and the godless witch had miserably verbrennen.Gretel but ran straight to Hansel, opened his little stable, and cried, "Hansel, we are saved, the old witch is dead." Hansel sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened to him. How did they rejoiced have fallen around his neck and danced about, and kissed each! And because they no longer needed to fear, so they went into the witch's house. in every corner there stood chests of pearls and precious stones. "These are far better than pebbles," said Hansel, and thrust into his pockets whatever could be got. And Gretel said: "I want to bring something home with," and filled her pinafore full. "But now we want to go," said Hansel, "if we come out of the witch's forest." When they had walked for two hours, they came to a wide river. "We can not cross," said Hansel, "I see no bridge and no bridge." - "Here goes also no ferry," answered Gretel, "but there floats a white duck when I ask, she will help us over." Then she cried, "duck, duck, It says Gretel and Hansel No bridge and. no bridge, Take us to your white back. " The duck came to them, and Hansel sat up and told his sister to join him. "No," replied Gretel, "it is too heavy for the little duck, it shall take us across one by one." So did the good creatures, and were as happy over it for a while and went away, as they came to the forest getting more and more familiar, till at last they saw from afar their father's house. As they began to run, rushed into the room and fell on their father's neck. The man had not had a happy hour since he had left the children in the forest, but the woman had died. Gretel emptied her pinafore from that the pearls and precious stones ran about in the room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to do so. Then all anxiety was an end, and they lived together in perfect joy. My tale is done, there runs a mouse, whosoever catches it, there is a large fur cap may make of it.
Häsichenbraut	633	311	German	Once there was a woman with her daughter; who lived in a beautiful garden with cabbage; then a bunny came and ate up all the cabbages to. The woman said to her daughter: "Go into the garden, and drive out the Bunny!" The girl says to Bunny "! Shu shu You Bunny eat up all our cabbages" Said the rabbit, "Come on, girl, and sit on my tail and go with me to my hutch!" Girls do not want. The next day's Bunny comes back and eats the cabbage; until the woman said to her daughter: "Go into the garden, and drive the Bunny!" The girl says to Bunny "! School Schu You Bunny eat up all our cabbages" Said the rabbit, "Come on, girls, sit on my tail and go with me to my hutch." Girls do not want. On the third day's Bunny comes back and eats the cabbage. Then the woman says to the daughter: "Go into the garden, and drive the Bunny!" The girl says: "! Shu shu You Bunny eat up all our cabbages" Said the rabbit, "Come on, girls, sit on my tail and go with me to my hutch!" Girl sits down on the bunny tail; as applied 'it far out into his hut and says the bunny, "Now cook' kale and millet, I will ask the wedding guests." Since all the wedding guests came together. Who were the wedding guests? I can tell you how it told me something else: they were all hares, and the crow was to be trusted as a pastor while the bride and groom, and the fox as clerk, and the altar but was under Regenbogen.Mädchen was sad because she was so alone. Here's the bunny and says: "Open up, open up the wedding people are funny!" The bride says nothing, crying. Bunny goes on, Bunny comes back and says, "Open up, open up, the wedding guests are hungry." The bride again says nothing and crying. Bunny goes on; Bunny comes back and says: "Open up, open up, waiting for the wedding guests." But the bride said nothing, and the rabbit went away; but she made a figure of straw with her clothes, and gives it a red mouth, and puts them to the boiler with millet, and goes to the mother. Bunny comes again and says: "Open up, open up," and he went up and hit the straw figure on the head that her hood abfällt.Da looks Bunny, that it is not his bride, and goes away and is sad ,
Mr. basket	395	210	German	There were once a cock and a hen who wanted to take a trip. So the cock built a beautiful carriage, had four red wheels, and harnessed four mice to it. The chicken sat down with the chickens, and they drove away together. Not long before they met a cat who said, "Where are you going ?, Chicken antwortete'als addition to the Lord's basket his house. '' Take me with you," said the cat. The cock answered, "Most willingly, get up behind you vornen not herabfällst.Nehmt heed and that you do not make my little red wheels dirty. Your little wheels, roll, you little mice pipe when out to the Lord his basket Haus.'Danach came a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin, and at last a needle, which sat all on the wagon and drove. but how they came to the Lord Basket House, the Lord basket was not there. The mice drew the carriage into the barn, the hen flew with the cock upon a perch, the cat sat down by the hearth, the duck on the rod, the egg rolled itself into a towel, the pin stuck itself into the chair cushions, the needle jumped on bed middle of the pillow, and the millstone laid itself over the door. Then the Lord basket came home, went to the fireplace and was about to light a fire as the cat tossed in his face ash. He ran into the kitchen to wash off because the duck splashed some water on my face. He wanted to dry it with the towel, but the egg rolled up against him, broke, and glued her eyes to his. He wanted to rest, and sat down in the chair, as he stabbed the pin. He flew into a rage and threw himself on the bed, but he laid his head on the pillow, he stabbed the needle so that he screamed and tried to run very angry in the wide world. have been but when he came to the front door, the millstone leapt down and struck him dead. The Lord basket must be a very wicked man.
Jorinde and joringel	660	405	German	There was once an old castle in the middle of a big thick forest, in it lived an old woman all alone, this was a Sorceress. On the day she changed herself into a cat or a screech-owl, but in the evening she took her proper as appearance of a man. She could induce lure the deer and the birds, and then she killed and boiled and roasted them. If someone a hundred paces of the castle came close, he had to stand still and could not move from the place until she bade him; But when an innocent maiden came within this circle, she changed her into a bird and then locked them in a basket and carried the cage into a room of the castle. She had about seven thousand cages of rare birds in the castle. Now there was once a maiden who was called Jorinde; she was more beautiful than all the other girls. She and a handsome youth named Joringel had promised to marry. They were in the bridal days, and they had their greatest happiness was being together. could make them now one painting to talk together, they walked into the forest. "Beware," said Joringel, "that you do not go too near the castle." It was a beautiful evening, the sun shone brightly between the trunks of the trees into the dark green of the forest, and the turtle-doves sang mournfully upon the Maibuchen.Jorinde wept now and sat down in the sunshine and lamented Joringel also complained. They were so sad as if they should die; they looked around, were misled and did not know where they should go home. Still half the sun was above the mountain and half under. Joringel looked through the bushes and saw the old walls of the castle close at hand; he was startled and was deadly fear. Jorinde sang: "My little bird, with the necklace rotsingt sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, it sings that the dove dead, Sings sorrow, sor - jug, jug, jug." Joringel looked jorinde. She was changed transformed into a nightingale sang jug, jug. An owl with glowing eyes flew three times around them and shouted three times round, hu, hu, hu. Joringel could not regen.- he stood there like a stone, and could neither weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot rain. Now the sun was setting; the owl flew into the thicket, and a moment later came a crooked old woman this appears yellow and lean, big red eyes and a hooked nose, which gave the tip to his chin. She murmured, caught the nightingale, and carried her away in her hand. Joringel could not speak nor move from the spot; the nightingale was gone. At last the woman came back and said in a hollow voice. "Greet you, Zachiel, if it seems to Möndel Körbel, bind loose Zachiel to good hour" Since Joringel was going on. He fell before the woman on her knees and begged that she would give him back his Jorinde, but she said he should never have, and went away. He called, he wept, he lamented, but all in vain. "Uu, what I want to happen?" Joringel went away, and at last came to a strange village; where he kept sheep for a long time. He often walked around the castle around, but not too near to it. once at last he dreamed one night that he found a blood-red flower, was in the midst of a beautiful large pearl. The flower he stopped, walked it to the castle everything he touched with the flower was released from enchantment; he also dreamed that he would back his Jorinda. In the morning, when he awoke, he began to seek over hill and dale if he could find such a flower; He sought until the ninth day, he found the blood-red flower in the morning early. In the middle was a large dew-drop, as big as the finest pearl. This flower he wore day and night to the castle. As he came to a hundred paces close to the castle because he was not held fast, but walked on to the gate. Joringel rejoiced greatly, the door touched with the flower, and it sprang open. He went in through the courtyard, and listened for he was hearing the many birds; last he heard it. He went and found the room to the witch was feeding the birds in the seven thousand cages. When she saw Joringel, she was angry, very angry, and scolded and spat poison and gall at him, but she could not get to it in two steps. He paid no heed to them and went, the baskets looked to the birds; but there were many hundred nightingales, how was he to find his Jorinde? by so watched, [he found] that the old woman quietly take away a cage with a bird and went to the door. Swiftly he sprang towards, the basket with the flower and also the old woman touched now could conjure nothing, and Jorinde stood there, had taken him around the neck, as beautiful as it was formerly. And he made all the other birds turned into maidens again, and he went with his Jorinde home, and they lived happily together long.
Virgin Maleen	1878	870	German	Once there was a king who had a son who asked in marriage the daughter of a powerful king who was called Virgin Maleen and was beautiful. Because her father wanted to give her to another, it was denied him. However, since both loved hearts so they would not let one another, and the Virgin Maleen said to her father 'I can and will take to my husband no other.' Then the father fell into a rage and had a dark tower, fell into the no ray of sun or moon. When he was finished, he said, "Therein you shall be imprisoned for seven years, then I will come and see if thy perverse spirit is broken. ' Meat and drink for the seven years were carried into the turn, then was she and her maid ushered and walled, so divorced from heaven and earth. As they sat in the darkness, did not know when day or night began. The king's son often went to the turn around and called her name, but no sound came from outside through the thick walls. What could they do otherwise than lament and complain? Meanwhile, the time went by, and at the loss of food and drink they realized that the seven years coming to an end. They thought the moment of their deliverance would come, but no hammer let heard, no stone fell out of the wall: it seemed as if her father had forgotten. As they only had food for a short time and saw a miserable death, since the maiden Maleen 'we have the last try and see if we can break through the wall.' She took the bread-knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, and when she was tired, so they replaced the maid. After much work, they managed to take out a stone, then a second and third, and after three days the first ray of light fell on their darkness, and finally the opening was so great that she could look out. The sky was blue, and a fresh air was blowing towards them, but how sad it all looked around out: her father's castle lay in ruins, the town and the villages were, so far as one could see burned, devastated the fields far and wide: not a soul left to see. When the opening in the wall was so great that they could slip through, first the maid jumped down, and then Maid Maleen. But where should they turn aside? The enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom, driven away the king and killed all the inhabitants. They wandered forth to seek another country, but they found nowhere a shelter or a person who gave them a piece of bread, and their need was so great that they had to appease their hunger with nettles. When they came to a different country after a long hike, they offered all their services, but wherever they knocked they were turned away, and no one wanted to take pity on her. At last they arrived in a big city and went to the royal court. But even then was called to go away, at last the cook said that they might stay in the kitchen and dienen.Der as Cinderella son of the king in whose kingdom they were was, but had been betrothed to the Virgin Maleen. His father had chosen another bride for him, that was as ugly face as evil-hearted. The wedding was fixed, and the maiden had already arrived, but for her great ugliness she let no one see in front and locked herself in her room, and the Virgin Maleen had her bring the food from the kitchen. When the day came, where the bride should go with the groom in the church, she was ashamed of her ugliness and was afraid that if she showed herself on the street, they would be mocked by people and laughed. And she said to the Virgin Maleen 'you're in for a very lucky, I have sprained my foot and can not go well on the road thou shalt put on my wedding dresses and take my place. A greater honor can not be given to you' Maid Maleen however, refused it and said, 'I wish for no honor that I do not deserve.' It was in vain that they offered her gold. Last she said angrily 'if you do not obey me, it will cost you your life: I only need to say a word, so you will put the head in front of the feet.' Since they had to obey, and put the magnificent clothes of the bride and all her jewels. When she entered the royal hall, all astonished at her great beauty, and the king said to his son, "This is the bride, I choose you, and whom thou must lead to church. ' The bridegroom was astonished and thought 'she is like my Maid Maleen, and I would think it was she herself, but she has long been in the tower, or dead.' He took her by the hand and led her to the church. On the way was a nettle since sie'Brennettelbusch spoke Brennettelbusch so klene, wat you steist here allene? ik hef de Tyt geweten because hef ik dy eten ungesaden ungebraden. '' What are you talking about? ' asked the prince. 'Nothing,' she replied, 'I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.' He marveled that she knew of her, but kept silent. When they came to the bridge in front of the cemetery, said sie'Karkstegels, break not, bün true bride. '' What are you talking about? ' asked the prince. 'Nothing,' she replied, 'I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.' 'You know the Virgin Maleen?' 'No,' she replied, 'how should I know, I have only heard of it.' When she came to the church door, she said abermals'Karkendär, break not, bün true bride. '' What are you talking about? ' asked he. 'Oh,' she replied, 'I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.' As he pulled out a precious, put it round her neck, and fastened the chain rings intertwined. Then they entered the church, and the priest laid before the altar her hands together and married her. He led her back, but she talked all the way a word. When they were back in the royal palace, she hurried into the chamber of the bride, the magnificent clothes and the jewels took off, pulled on her gray gown, and kept nothing but the jewel around her neck, which she received from the groom hatte.Als came on the night and the bride in the room of the king's son should be out, she let the veil fall over her face so that he might not observe the deception. Once all the people had gone away, he said to her, 'what have you told about the nettle, which stood in the way?' 'To which nettle?' asked her, 'I do not talk to nettle.' 'If you have not done so, you are not the true bride,' he said. As they helped each other and sprach'mut heruet na myne Maegt, 'de myn my thoughts draegt.'Sie went out and the Virgin Maleen "Girl, what did you say to the nettle?' 'I said nothing alsBrennettelbusch, Brennettelbusch so klene, wat you steist here allene? ik hef de Tyt geweten because hef ik dy ungesaden ungebraden eten.'Die bride ran back into the chamber and said 'now I know what I said to the nettle, "and she repeated the words she had just heard. 'But what do you say to the bridge, when we went over?' asked the prince. 'At the foot-bridge?' She replied, 'I do not talk to dock.' 'Then you're not the true bride.' She said wiederum'mut heruet na myne Maegt, de myn my thoughts draegt.'Lief out and drove the Virgin Maleen "Girl, what did you say to the bridge? ' 'I said nothing alsKarkstegels, break not, bün true bride.' 'That will cost you your life, "cried the bride, but she hurried into the chamber and said' now I know what I said to the foot-bridge," and she repeated the words. 'But what do you say to the church door?' 'At the church door?' She replied, 'I talk to church door.' 'Then you're not the true bride.' They went out and the Virgin Maleen "Girl, what did you say to the church door? ' 'I said nothing alsKarkendär, break not, bün true bride.' 'The break your neck, "cried the bride and fell into the greatest rage, but hurried back into the chamber and said' now I know what I the church door have spoken, "and she repeated the words. 'But where hast thou the jewel which I gave you at the church door?' 'What an ornament?' she replied, 'you have given me any jewel.' 'I have it yourself around the neck and even hooked: if you do not know that, then you're not the right bride.' He pulled the veil from her face, and when he saw her immeasurable ugliness, he sprang back terrified, and said, 'how did you get here? who are you?' 'I am your betrothed bride, but because I was afraid that people would mock me when they saw me out, so I have commanded the scullery to put on my clothes and go instead of me to church.' 'Where's the girl?' he said, 'I want to see it, go and bring her here.' She went out and told the servants that the scullery maid was an impostor, they must take her out into the yard and cut off his head. The servant grabbed it and wanted to drag her, but he screamed so loudly for help, that the King's son heard her voice, hurried out of his room and gave the order to let go of the girl instantly. There Lights were brought, and then he saw on her neck the gold chain which he had given her at the church door. 'You are the true bride, "he said," who went to church with me: come with me to my room.' When they were alone, he said, "you called Maleen on the church, the Virgin, who was my betrothed bride: if I thought it were possible, I would think she was standing before me. You are like her in everything ' She answered, "I am the Virgin Maleen, who sat trapped around you seven years in the darkness, suffered hunger and thirst, and has lived so long in want and poverty: but today me the sun shine again. I was married to thee in the church and I am thy lawful wife. ' As they kissed each other and were happy days of their lives. The false bride was in retaliation the head abgeschlagen.Der Turn, in which the Virgin Maleen had been sitting, standing for a long time, and when the children passed by it sie'kling sang sounded kloria Who sits in dissing Toria? Dar sitt s King Dochter in that can ik nich to lakes krygn. De Muer, de do not wanna Braeken, de Steen, de do not wanna stand. Johnny de with colorful yak, kumm unn success my achterna. '
Cat and Mouse in Partnership	19	15	German	A cat acquaintance had made with a mouse and her much pre says of great love and friendship that he felt for her, that at last the mouse agreed to live with her in a house and lead collaborative economy. "But for the winter, we must make preparations or we shall suffer hunger," said the cat. "You, little mouse, can not you dare everywhere and in the end you into a trap." The good advice was followed and so bought a pot of fat. but they did not know where to put it. Finally, after much deliberation, said the cat, "I know of no place where it would be better off than in the church because no one dared to take anything away, we put it beneath the altar, and not touch it rather than to we. have needed. " The pot was therefore taken to safety. But it was not long before the cat was craving it and said to the mouse. "What I wanted to tell you, little mouse, I am asked by my cousin to be godfather She brought a son into the world, white with brown spots, and I keep on baptism. Let me go out today and you look after the house alone! " - "Yes, yes," answered the mouse, "go in God's name, if you eat something good, think of me from the sweet red christening wine I would like to drink a drop!" But it was all untrue. The cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to be godfather. She went straight to the church, crept up to the Fettöpfchen and licked the fat off. Then they went for a walk on the roofs of the city, and then stretched out in the sun, and his whiskers, they often to the Fettöpfchen thought. was only when it evening, she came back home. "Well, there you are again!" said the mouse. "You were certainly a fun day." - "Everything went well," answered the cat. "What did they give the child a name?" asked the mouse. "Top-Off," said the cat quite coolly. "Top-Off," cried the mouse, "that's a strange name! Is it a usual one in your family?" - "What's on!" said the cat. "He is no worse than Crumb-Thief, as your godchildren are called." Before long the cat was seized by another cravings. She said to the mouse, "You must do me a favor and once more manage the house alone; I'm asked again to be godfather, and since the child has a white ring around the neck, so I can not refuse it." The good mouse consented, but the cat crept behind the town wall to the church and ate the pot of fat half out. "Nothing tastes better," she said, "than what you eat yourself," and was quite satisfied with her day's work. When he arrived home the mouse asked, "What is this child since been baptized?" - "Half-Gone," answered the cat. "Half-Gone! What are you saying! The name I have not heard in my life. I'll wager it is not in the calendar." The cat's mouth soon again after the treat. "All good things come in threes," she said to the mouse. "I asked to be godfather again. The child is all black and has merely white paws, otherwise no white hair all over. It meets every few years only once. You will let me go out yet?" - "Top-Half-Gone," answered the mouse, "there are strange names, they make me think." - "As you sit at home in your dark gray fur coat and long tail," said the cat, "and fancies That's what happens when you do not run out during the day." The mouse cleaned during the absence of the cat and brought the house in order; the greedy cat devoured but the pot of fat purely out. "If only everything is eaten, so you have peace," she said to herself, and was filled and fat until the night home. The mouse at once asked what name had been given to the third child. "He is you will not like it," said the cat; "His name is All-Gone." - "All-Gone!" cried the mouse. "This is the most worrisome name printed is it not occurred to me. All-Gone! What does that mean?" She shook her head, curled up and put schlafen.Von now wanted no one invited the cat to be godfather. When it was approached but the winter and outdoors to find anything more, the mouse thought of their stored food, and said, "Come on, cat, we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves will taste good now!". - "Yes," replied the cat, "You will enjoy it as if you yours out fine tongue of the window." They were on their way and arrived than she, although the pot of fat was still in place, but it was empty. "Oh," said the mouse, "now I see what has happened here it comes the day you are to me have a true friend You ate everything when you were serving as a godfather!.! First top off, then half done then ... "-" Will you be silent! " cried the cat. "One more word and I'll eat you up!" "All gone," had the poor mouse already on the tongue. As soon it was out, the cat did sprang on her, grabbed her and threw her down. Do you see how it works in the world.
Knoist and his three sons	1317	1965	German	Between Werrel and Soest, there lived a man, and was called Knoist; had three sons: one was blind and the other was lame, and the third stark naked. They went again across the field, when they saw a hare. The blind man shot him, the lame one caught him and the naked one put it in his pocket. When they came to a large, powerful water, there were three ships out: one ran, the other sank, and the third had no bottom. And where was no floor, in this ship three of them came into it. Then they came to a large forest-powerful; it was a great, almighty tree where the tree was an almighty big chapel in the chapel was a sexton and a buchsbaumener pastor who shared the holy water with clubs aus.Selig is the man Who can from holy water run.
King Drosselbart	500	900	German	A king had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure, but so proud and arrogant that you no suitor was good enough. They had an off by one, and drove even ridiculed them. Once the king left a big feast prepared, and invited thereto, from far and near the marriageable men funny one. They were all marshalled in a row according to their rank and standing; only the kings, then the dukes, princes, counts and barons, the nobles came. Now the king's daughter was led through the ranks, but to every one she had something. One was her thick, 'the wine barrel!' she said. Another was too tall, "Long and thin has little in. ' The third was too short, "Short and thick is never. ' The fourth was too pale, "As pale as death! ' The fifth too red, "A fighting-cock ' the sixth was not straight enough, "A green log dried behind the stove ' And so she had some objection to each one, but especially she was a good king funny, was at the top and the chin was a little grown crooked. 'Ei' called them, laughing, 'having a chin as the throttle a beak ;, and since the time he received the NamenD r o s s e l b a r t. But the old King, when he saw that his daughter did nothing but mock the people, and all the suitors who were gathered there, spurned, he was angry and swore that she should take the first beggar to the man who before his door käme.Ein few days afterwards a minstrel to sing under the window in order to earn a small alms. When the King heard, he said, "let him come up. ' Since the fiddler came in his dirty, ragged clothes, and sang before the king and his daughter, and asked when he was ready to make a charitable gift. The king said, "Your song has given me so well liked that since I want to give you in marriage my daughter. ' The King's daughter shuddered, but the King said, "I have taken an oath to give you to the very first beggar man I will keep it. ' It helped no objection, the priest was brought, and she had to coincide with the Spielmann get married. That done, the king did not say 'now sends sichs that you stay as a beggar any longer in my castle, you can away with your husband fortziehen.'Der beggar led her out by the hand, and she had to with him foot leave. When they came to a large forest, as asked sie'ach who owns the beautiful forest '' It belongs to King Thrushbeard. Hättst du'n taken, it would have been yours? '' I unhappy girl, oh, I'd ! taken King Drosselbart 'then they came to a meadow, and she asked wieder'wem does this beautiful green meadow?' 'it belongs to King Thrushbeard hättst du'n taken, it would have been yours'' I unhappy girl. 'oh, I had but taken King Thrushbeard!' Then they came to a large town, and she asked wieder'wem is this beautiful big city '' it belongs to King Thrushbeard? hättst du'n taken, it would have been yours. ''! I unhappy girl, alas, I had but taken King Drosselbart '' There I do not like, "said the musician, you always another can desire for a husband; am I not good enough? ' At last they came to a very little hut, and spoke sie'ach, God, what is the house so small! Who likes the miserable tiny house be? 'The fiddler answered, "this is my house and yours, where we live together.' She had to stoop in order to go in at the low door. 'Where are the servants?' said the Princess. 'What servant!' replied the beggar, 'you must yourself do what you wish to have done. Just make a fire and set on water that you cook my supper; I am really tired.' But the king's daughter knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking, and the beggar had to lend a hand himself that it was still fairly done. When they had finished their scanty meal they went to bed: but in the morning he drove them up quite early because they should look after the house. A few days they lived in this way perfect and upright, and consumed all their provisions. Since the man's wife did not speak, so go on any longer that we feed off here and nothing deserve. You weave baskets. ' He went out, cut some willows, and brought them home as they began to weave, but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands. 'I see it is not,' said the man, 'spin, perhaps you can do that better.' She sat down and tried to spin, but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so that the blood ran down. 'You see,' said the man, 'you're good to not work with you, I have made a bad. Now I will try and make a business with pots and earthenware; you must sit in the market and sell the ware '. 'Oh,' she thought, 'when people come to the market from my father's kingdom, and see me sitting there, selling, how they will mock me!' But it was no use, she had to add, if they did not die of hunger. The first time we went well, because people buy the woman because she was beautiful, like their merchandise, and they paid what they asked; many gave her the money and left the pots with her to do so. Now they lived on earned as long as it lasted, then the husband bought a lot of new dishes. They sat down at a corner of the market, and put it around him and held for sale. And suddenly there came a drunken hussar galloping along, and he rode right into the pots that they were all broken into a thousand pieces. She began to cry and did not fear what they should do. 'Oh, how is it to me endure!' she cried, 'what will my husband say!' She ran home and told him of the misfortune. 'Who would seat herself at the corner of the market place with crockery?' said the man, 'let off crying, I see very well, you're not do any ordinary work. Since I am in our king's castle was, and asked if they could for a kitchen, and they have promised me they would take you to do so; this way you will get Essen.'Nun was the king's daughter, a kitchen maid, the cook had to go to hand and do the dirtiest work. She made both pockets fastened a little jar, in which they took home what you were given of the leavings, and upon this they lived. It happened that the wedding of the king's eldest son was to be celebrated since started up the poor woman stood in front of the hall door to look on. When all the candles were lit, and always a nice came in than the other, and everything was full of pomp and splendor, she thought with a sad heart, their fate and cursed the pride and haughtiness which had fallen humiliated and in such great poverty , Of the delicious dishes that have been there once and discharged, and from which the smell rose to her servants threw her a few morsels of them, which she did in her jars to take home. Suddenly the king's son entered, clothed in velvet and silk, with gold chains around his neck. And when he saw the beautiful woman in the door, he took her by the hand and wanted to dance with her, but she refused and was shocked because she saw that it was the king Thrushbeard, wooed her and she with ridicule dismissed. Her struggles did not help, he pulled her into the hall: there tore the tape on which the bags were hanging, and the pots fell out that the soup flowed and jumped around the Brocken. And how the people looked, there arose general laughter and derision, and she was so ashamed that she would rather a thousand fathoms would have liked underground. She sprang to the door and tried to escape, but on the stairs a man caught her and brought her back and she looked at him, it was again the king Drosselbart. He spoke to her friendly 'do not be afraid, who has been living with you in that wretched hovel I and the musician are one: you I disguised myself so, and the hussar who gave you in half rode the pots, I am also been. All this is done to bow to your proud spirit and to punish you for your insolence with which you mocked me. ' Then she wept bitterly and said, 'I have had great wrong, and am not worthy to be your wife.' And he said, 'Be comforted, the evil days are past, now we will celebrate our wedding.' Then the maids came and put on her the most splendid clothing, and her father came and the whole court, and wished her happiness in her marriage with King Drosselbart, and the real joy now began in earnest. I wish you and I, we had been there too.
Louse and the Flea	287	2022	German	A louse and a flea kept together in a household and brewing beer in an egg shell. Then the little louse fell in and burnt herself. In the little flea began to scream at. Since the little room-door: "Why do you cry, little flea?" - "Because the louse has burnt herself." Then the little door began to creak. Since a little broom in the corner said: "What are you creaking, little door?" - "Should I not creak louse has burnt herself, the little flea is crying?". Since the broom began to sweep appalling. Then a little cart passed by and said: "What are you sweeping, little broom?" - "Should I not return louse has burnt herself, The little flea is crying door is creaking?." So the little cart said, "Then I will run," and began to run horribly at. Since the ash-heap, where it ran past said, "What are you running, little cart?" - "Should I not run louse has burnt herself, The little flea is crying door is creaking, broom is sweeping?." Since the ash-heap said: "Then I will burn furiously," and began to burn in clear fire. A little tree stood near the ash, which said, "ash-heap, why art thou burning?" - "Should I not burn louse has burnt herself, The little flea is crying door is creaking, broom is sweeping, running carts?." The little tree said: "Then I will shake myself," and began to shake that all her leaves fell , Saw a girl who came up with her water and said: "trees, which you shake you?" - "Should I do not shake louse has burnt herself, The little flea is crying door is creaking, broom is sweeping, little cart is running, burning ash-heap?." Then said the girl: "Then I will break my little water," and broke her little water. Since the little spring from which ran the water: "Girl, why you break your little water?" - ". Should I my water did not break louse has burnt herself, The little flea is crying door is creaking, broom is sweeping, little cart is running, burning ash-heap, tree shakes" "Oh," said the spring, "then I will begin to flow, "and began to flow terrible at. And in the water everything was drowned, the girl, the little tree, the ash-heap, the little cart, the broom, the little door, the little flea, the louse, all together.
, The Story of the Youth Who Went Forth to Learn What Fear Was	36	326	German	A father probably had to send two sons, it was the oldest smart and sensible, and knew in everything. The younger was stupid, nothing could understand and learn and when he saw the people, they said, "With the will of the father nor his load!" When anything had to be done, so it had always the elder; told him to but get the father was late, or at night something and the way led through the churchyard, or any other dismal place, he answered well: "Oh no, father, I do not go there, it makes me shudder!" For he was afraid. Or when stories were told by the fire, with a shudder the skin, the listeners sometimes, "Oh, it makes me shudder!" The youngest was sitting in a corner and listened to, and could not understand what it should have been called. "They are always saying, it makes me shudder, it makes me shudder I do not shudder's That will probably be an art of which I understand nothing!.." Now it happened that his father said to him: "Listen, you in corner there, you'll be big and strong, you need to learn something, what you do for your bread. Do you see how your brother works, but in thee hops and malt is lost. " - "Well, father," he replied, "I want to learn something, yes, if it could but I would learn that to me shudder, of which I understand nothing." The elder brother smiled when he heard that and thought: My God, what is my brother a blockhead, from which his life is nothing. What will be a check mark must bend in time. The father sighed and replied, "The shudder that learning shall you have, but you will earn your bread with it not." Soon after this the sexton came to visit the house. Then the father bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learned nothing. "Just think, when I asked him what he wanted to earn his bread, he actually wanted to learn to shudder." - "If it's nothing," replied the sexton, "he can learn that with me Send him to me, I will soon polish him." The father was happy because he thought the boy a little fed supported. The sexton therefore took him into the house, and he had to ring the bells. After a few days he woke him at midnight, was called up, get in the church tower and ring him. You shall soon learn how to shudder, he thought, secretly went ahead, and when the boy up was and turned and tried to grab the bell rope, he saw on the stairs, the sounding hole, are a white figure. "Who's there?" he shouted, but the figure made no reply, and did not move. "Answer me," cried the boy, "or take that yourself off, you have nothing to do here at night!" The sexton remained motionless, so that the boy might think he was a ghost. The boy cried a second time, "What are you doing here Say, if you're an honest fellow, or I'll throw you down the stairs?". The sexton thought: That will be so bad not mean made no sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy for the third time called him, and as that was also to, he took a run and pushed the ghost down the stairs, it fell down ten steps and remained lying in a corner. Then he rang the bell, went home, lay down without saying a word to bed and fell asleep. The sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, but he did not come back. At length she became uneasy, and wakened the boy and asked, "Do you know where my husband is not, remained He climbed up the tower before you?". - "No," Is the boy replied, "but as a has the sound hole faced on the stairs, and because he not answer and did not want to go away, so I thought he was a scoundrel, and pushed down to her, and so on. will you see if he's been, it should be very sorry. " The woman ran away and found her husband, who was lying in a corner and whined and a leg broken hatte.Sie carried him down, and rushed with loud shouts to the boy's father. "Your boy," she cried, "has done a great misfortune, my husband, he has thrown down the stairs, that he has a broken leg. Complete the scamp from our house!" The father was shocked came thither and scolded the boy. "What are these wicked tricks of evil that must you have entered." -.. "Father," he replied, "only hear, I'm completely innocent He stood there at night as one who harbor evil sense, I did not know who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go away . " - "Oh," said the father, "with you I have nothing but unhappiness, get out of my eyes, I do not want to look at you." - "Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day, I will go out and learn how to shudder, I understand one art which will support me." - "Learn what you want," said the father, "it is all the same Here are fifty dollars, so go out into the world and tell no one where you are from and who is your father, because I have to. to shame. " - ". Yes, Father, as your's are like, if you desire nothing more that I can easily do" When day dawned, the boy put his fifty dollars in his pocket, went out into the great highway, and continually said himself: "If I's but shudder when I could but shudder!" Then a man approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with himself, and when she a little further was that you could see the gallows, the man said to him: "See, there is the tree where have held wedding with the daughter Seiler seven and now learning how to fly sit under it and wait till night comes, and you will soon learn how to shudder. " - "If nothing goes with it," replied the boy, "it is easily done; but I learn so quickly the creeps, you shall have my fifty dollars; just come back tomorrow morning to me." Then the youth went to the gallows, sat down under it and waited till evening came. And because it was cold, he set a fire. But at midnight the wind was so cold that he could not get warm in spite of the fire. And when the wind gegeneinanderstiess the hanged men that they were moving back and forth, he thought: You shiver below by the fire, but how those up there cold only and fidget. And as he felt pity, he raised the ladder, climbed up, unbound one after the other, and brought down all seven. Then he stirred the fire, blew it, and set them around that it to warm themselves. But they sat there and did not move, and the fire caught their clothes. And he said, ". Take care, or I will hang you up again" but the dead did not hear silent and let go on burning their rags. He grew angry and said, "If you will not take care, I can not help you, I will not be burnt with you," and he hung them up again series. Now he sat down by his fire and fell asleep, and the next morning, the man came to him the fifty dollars wanted and said, "Well, you know how to shudder" - "No," he replied, "how was I to know it's mouth have not done the fellows up there and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which they had on their bodies burning?". Then the man saw that he would not get the fifty dollars today, and went away saying: "As a youth has never happened to me." The boy went his way, and once more began to mutter to himself: "Oh, if I could but shudder! Ah, if only to me but shudder! " Heard a truck driver who was striding behind him, and asked, "Who are you?" - "I do not know," replied the boy. Then the wagoner asked, "Where are you from?" - "I do not know." - "Who is your father?" - "I am not allowed to say that." - "What do you brummst stable in the beard into it?" - "Ah," replied the boy, "I wanted that to me shudder, but no one can teach me it." - "Let your foolish chatter," said the carter. "Come, go with me, I will see that I'll kill you." The boy went with the driver, and in the evening they arrived at an inn where they wanted to stay. Then at the entrance of the room again quite loudly, "If I could but shudder when I could but shudder!" The host who heard this, laughed and said, "If you desire, there should here be a good opportunity." - "Oh, hush hush," said the hostess, "so many inquisitive persons have already lost his life, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as these should never see the daylight again." but the boy said: "If it were so hard yet, I want to learn it once, so I'm undressed." He let the host have no rest, until the latter told, not far from it stood a haunted castle where any one could very easily learn what shuddering was, if he wanted to watch it for three nights. The King would have wanted to risk the one who's promised his daughter in marriage, and she was the most beautiful maiden the sun shone; in the castle lay great treasures guarded by evil spirits, which would then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Already many men had gone into it, but none come out yet again. Then the youth went next morning to the King and said: "If it were allowed, I will willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle." The king looked at him and because he liked him, he said: "You are allowed beg nor three, but it must be inanimate things, and that you may take into the castle." Then he answered: "Then I ask for a fire, a turning lathe, and a cutting with a knife." The king left him all by day in the castle carry. As night was, the boy went up and made himself into a chamber a bright fire, the cutting-turned with a knife next to it and sat down on the lathe. "Oh, if only shudder's," he said, "but here I shall not learn it." Around midnight he wanted his fire aufschüren as he was blowing it, something cried suddenly from one corner: "Au, miau What we freeze!" - "You fools," he said, "what are you crying when you are cold, come you set the fire and warm yourselves. . "And as he said that, two great black cats came up in a tremendous leap and sat down on each side and looked at him with fiery eyes quite wild at After a while, when they had warmed themselves, they said:" Comrade we have a game at the card? "-" Why not? "he replied," but once show me your paws "Then they stretched the claws out." Well, "he said," what long nails you have.! Waiting that I must you cut first. "He grabbed her by the neck, lifted the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast." To you I have seen on the fingers, "he said," because I goes by the desire to play cards , "struck them dead and threw them out into the water. but when he had two put to rest and wanted to sit down again by his fire, as black cats and black dogs came from all corners of hot chains, more and more that he could not move. The yelled horribly, he went on his fire, pulled it apart and wanted to put it out. he watched them for a while quietly, but when it was him badly, he summed up his carving knife and called .. "away with ye, vermin," and began to cut them Some of them ran away, the others he killed, and threw them out into the pond as he came back he fanned the embers of his fire again and warmed itself. And so when he sat, his eyes wanted nic ht stay open longer and he got the urge to sleep. Then he looked around and saw in the corner of a large bed. "This is exactly what I wish," he said, and got into it. But when he wanted to shut his eyes, so the bed started to drive by themselves and went over the whole castle. "Well done," he said, "only better." Since the bed rolled on as if six horses biased, over thresholds and stairs up and down: all at once, hop, hop! threw it over, upside down, and it's like a mountain on it lag.Aber he threw blankets and pillows in the air, got out and said: "Well like driving, if you feel like," lay down by his fire and fell asleep, until it was day. In the morning the King came, and when he saw him lying on the ground him, he thought the evil spirits had killed him and he was dead he said, ".. It's too bad about the beautiful people" The youth heard it, got up and said, "So far is not it!" Since the King was astonished, but very glad, and asked how he had fared. "Quite well," he replied, "one night is past, the two others will also go around." When he went to the innkeeper, who opened his big eyes. "I did not think," said he, "that I'd see you alive again; Hast thou learned how to shudder?" - "No," he said, "it's all in vain if me someone could say it only." The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the fire and began his old song, "If I could but shudder " When midnight came, an uproar and din let hear; only then gently getting stronger, then it was a bit quiet, finally came up with a loud scream, half a man down the chimney and fell before him. "Heda!" he cried, "another half belongs to this is too little." As the noise continued to fresh, there was a roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise. "Wait," he said, "I want to blow you until the fire a little." As he had done that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together and sat a frightful man in his place. "So we do not bet," said the youth, "the bank is mine." The man wanted to push away him, but the boy let himself's not like him pushed forcibly away and sat back in his seat. As more men fell down, one after the other, they brought nine dead men's legs and two skulls, and set them up and played bowling. The youth also wanted and asked, "Do you hear, I can with be?" - "Yes, if you have money." - "Money enough," he replied, "but your balls are not quite round." Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and turned it around. "So now they will roll better," he said, "heida! Now It's funny!" He played with them and lost some of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished before his eyes. He lay down and quietly fell asleep. The next morning the king went to inquire. "As you go this time?" asked he. "I have bowled," he replied, "and lost a couple of farthings." - "Did you not you the creeps?" - "Eh, what," he said, "I have had a me If I only knew what it was to shudder." On the third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite peevish: "If I could but shudder!" When it grew late, came six big men and brought carried in a coffin. And he said, "Ha, ha, that is certainly my little cousin, who died only a few days," waved his finger and shouted, "Come, little cousin, come!" They placed the coffin on the ground, but he went to it and took the lid off: there was a dead man in it. He felt his face, but it was cold as ice. "Wait," he said, "I want you a little bit warm," went to the fire and warmed his hand and laid it on the face, but the dead man remained cold. Then he took him out, and sat down by the fire, put it on his lap and rubbed his arms that the blood might circulate again. And did no good, he remembered, "if two lie in bed together, they warm each other," took him to the bed, covered him over and lay down beside him. the dead man became warm for a while and began to stir itself. Then the boy said, "You see, little cousin would have I not warmed you!" But the dead man got up and cried, "Now I will kill you." - "What," he said, "this is my thanks to direct you shall return to your coffin?" Set him up, threw him and shut the lid; Then came the six men and carried him away again. "It creeps me does not want to," he said, "here I do not learn it all my life." Then a man entered who was bigger than. all others, and looked terrible; but he was old and had a long white beard. "You wretch," he said, "Now you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for thou shalt die." - "Not so fast," replied the boy, "should I die, I have to be there." - "I want you to pack on," said the fiend. - "Softly, softly, do not talk so big as strong as you, I am also, and perhaps even stronger." - "We shall see," said the old man, "you are stronger than me, and I will let thee go, come, let's try." Then he led him by dark passages to a smith's forge, took an ax and struck an anvil with a punch to the Earth. "I can even better," said the youth, and went to the other anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to watch, and his white beard hung down. The boy grabbed the ax, split the anvil with one blow and tucked the beard of the old and into it. "Now I've got you," said the youth, "now dying is up to you." Then he took an iron bar and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, he would give him great riches. The boy pulled out the ax and let him go. The old man led him back into the castle back and showed him in a cellar three chests full of gold. "Of these," he said, "is a part of the poor, the other for the king, the third yours." Meantime it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the boy was standing in the dark. "I'll help me out-rounder," said he, and felt about, found the way into the room and slept there by his fire. The next morning the King came and said, "Now you'll have learned how to shudder?" - "No," he replied, "What is it, my dead cousin was just there, and a bearded man came, who has since shown me down a lot of money, but how to shudder, I did not tell you?". Then the king said: "You have redeemed the castle and shalt marry my daughter." - "That is all very well," he replied. "But I know what is still not shudder" Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated, but the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was always said, "If I could but shudder when I could but shudder!" She grieved at last. Your maid said: "I will greatly help the creeps he is yet to learn." She went out to the stream which flowed through the garden, and settled a whole bucketful of gudgeons. At night, slept when the young king, his wife had to move away to him the blanket and bucket of water herschütten full cold with the gudgeon about him that the little fishes would sprawl about him. Then he woke up and cried: "Oh, what makes me shudder, what makes me shudder, Madam Yes, now I know what creeps is!".
Mary's child	27	710	German	In front of a large forest a woodcutter lived with his wife, who had only one child was a girl of three years. but they were so poor that they no longer had daily bread, and did not know what they should give to eat him. One morning, the woodcutter out sorrowfully into the woods to his work, and while he was cutting wood, suddenly there stood a beautiful large woman in front of him, which had a crown of shining stars on her head and said to him: "I am the Virgin Mary, the mother of the Christ child: you're poor and needy, I bring your child, I will take it with me and be her mother and care for her. " The wood-cutter obeyed, brought his child, and gave her to the Virgin Mary, who took it with him into the sky. Since it was probably him, it was ass carrot and drank sweet milk, and his garments of gold, and the little angels played with her. When it was now grown old fourteen years, called her one day the Virgin Mary, and said: "Dear child, I have a great journey, so take the keys to the thirteen doors of heaven for safekeeping: twelve of which you may unlock and the glories consider it, but the thirteenth, to which this little key belongs, is forbidden you: beware that you do not aufschliessest or you'll unfortunate ". The girl promised to be obedient, and when the Virgin Mary was gone, she began to examine the dwellings of the kingdom: every day there is a closed were on until the twelve around. In each but sat an apostle, and was surrounded by great splendor, and rejoiced in all the magnificence and splendor, and the little angels who always accompanied her rejoiced with him. Then the forbidden door was left alone, and she felt a great desire to know what could be hidden behind it, and said to the angels: "quite open I do not want it and will not go in too, but I will unlock so that we a little through the opening to see. " - "Oh no," said the little angels, "that would be a sin forbidden The Virgin Mary has, and it might easily cause thy unhappiness." Then she was silent, but the desire in her heart was not stilled, but gnawed and pecked it properly and let him rest. And when the angels had all gone out, she thought: Now I'm all alone and I could peep it knows no one when I do it. She sought out the key, and when she held it in her hand, she put it into the lock, and when he had put it also turned around. As the door opened, and she saw there the Trinity sitting in fire and splendor. It stayed there awhile, and looked at everything in amazement, then she touched a little with your finger on the gloss, her finger became quite golden. Immediately a great fear the door slammed violently and ran away. The fear did not want to give way again, let her do what it wanted, and the heart beat continually and would not be still the gold too stayed on her finger and did not go away, let her wash and rub it never so much .Gar not long before the Virgin Mary came back from her trip. She called the girl to him and called him the keys of heaven back. Than the bunch, he looked at the Virgin in the eye and said, "Have you not opened the thirteenth door?" - "No," she answered. And she put her hand on his heart, and felt how it beat and beat, and saw well that it disobeyed her order and had opened the door. As she spoke again: "Do you have certainly not done it?" - "No," said the girl a second time. Then she perceived the finger which had become golden from touching the fire of heaven, and saw well that it had sinned, and said for the third time: "Have not you done it?" - "No," said the girl a third time. Since the Virgin Mary said. "You have disobeyed me, and hast lied to you are no longer worthy to be in heaven" because sank the girl woke up in a deep sleep, and when it was the bottom of the earth, in the middle of a wilderness. She wanted to cry, but could not utter a sound. It jumped up and wanted to run away, but where it turned herself, she was there by thick thorn hedges retained, it could not break through. In the desert, in which she was imprisoned, there stood an old hollow tree, which had to be his home. Into this she crept when night came, and slept in it, and when it stormed and rained, she found a shelter: but it was a miserable life, and when it thought about how it was so beautiful in the sky, and the angels had played with him, it wept bitterly. Roots and wild berries were that it could come her only food was looking for it so far. In the fall she gathered the fallen nuts and leaves, and carried them into the cave, the nuts were his food in winter, and when snow and ice came, she crept like a poor little animal in the leaves that it was not cold. Before long, his clothes torn and dropped a piece after another from his body down. As soon as the sun shone warm again, she went out and sat in the tree, and his long hair covered her on all sides like a cloak. So it sat a year after year, and felt the pain and misery of Welt.Einmal, stood as the trees again in fresh green, the king of the country was hunting in the forest, and followed a roe, and as it had fled into the bushes that included the forest area, he got off his horse, tore the bushes asunder, and cut himself with his sword a way. When he finally passed out, he looked under the tree a beautiful girl sitting, which sat there and was covered with her golden hair down to her foot toes. He stood still and looked at her full of surprise, then he spoke to her and said, "Who are you why are you sitting here in the wilderness?" but there was no answer, for she could not open his mouth. The king continued, "Will you go with me to my castle?" Then she just nodded a little with his head. The King took her in his arms, carried her on his horse and rode home with her, and when he reached the royal castle, he had dressed in beautiful garments and gave him everything in abundance. Although she could not speak, it was still beautiful and charming that he was heartily love won, and it was not long since he married ihm.Als about a year passed, the Queen brought a son to World. Then at night, when she lay in her bed alone, it appeared the Virgin Mary and said, "Will you tell the truth and confess that thou didst unlock the forbidden door, I want your mouth open and you play language: but you persist in sin and deny persistent, I will take thy new-born child with me. " Then the queen was permitted to answer, but she remained hard, and said, "No, I did not open the forbidden door," and the Virgin Mary took the new-born child from her arms, and vanished with it. The next morning, could not be found when the child, a murmur went among the people that the Queen was a man and had killed her own child. She heard all this and could say nothing against it, but the king did not want to believe it because he so loved hatte.Nach one year and the Queen bore a son again. On the night the Virgin Mary to her and came back in and said, "Will you confess that you opened the forbidden door, I will give thee thy child back and untie your tongue: but continuest you in sin and deny so I also take this new child with me. " Since the Queen again said: "No, I did not open the forbidden door," and the Virgin took the child out of her arms, and away with her to heaven. In the morning, was but when the child disappeared, the people declared quite loudly that the Queen had devoured it, and the King's councilors demanded that she should be judged. And the king loved her so much that he did not want to believe it, and commanded the councilors under pain of death, no more about it next to sprechen.Im year the Queen bore a beautiful little daughter, as their appeared for the third night the Virgin Mary and said, "Follow me." She took her by the hand and led her to heaven, and showed her there her two eldest children, they laughed and played with the globe. When the Queen rejoiced thereat, the Virgin Mary, "Is your heart not yet softened if thou wilt own that you opened the forbidden door, I will give back your two little sons." But the queen replied for the third time: "No, I did not open the forbidden door." As they left the Virgin sink down to earth again and took her the third Kind.Am next morning, when the loss was reported abroad, all the people cried loudly: "The Queen is a man, they must be condemned," and the King was his counselors not reject more. It was a trial was held, and because they do not respond and could not defend, she was condemned to die at the stake. The wood was collected, and was tied as they to a stake and began to burn the fire round about her, melted the hard ice of pride and her heart was moved by repentance, and she thought: "I can only before my death confess I've opened the door, "because she had the voice that she cried out loudly," Yes, Mary, I did it! " And immediately the sky began to rain, and put out the flames of fire, and broke forth above her light, and the Virgin Mary descended with the two little sons by her side, and the newborn daughter in her arms. She spoke kindly to her, "He who repents his sin and acknowledges it, is forgiven them," and handed her the three children, untied her tongue and gave her happiness for her whole life.
Master awl	1706	801	German	was a little thin, but lively man who had not a moment of rest. His face, from which only the turned-up nose protruded, was pockmarked and deathly pale, his hair was gray and shaggy, his eyes small, but they glanced perpetually about on all sides. He saw everything, criticized everything, knew everything better and was always in the right. he went on the road, so he rowed violently with both arms, and once he hit a girl carrying water, the bucket so high in the air that he was even watered it. 'Stupid thing, "he called to her, while he shook himself,' you could not see that I was coming behind thee? ' He was a shoemaker, his craft, and when he was working, he took the wire out with such force that it to anyone who did not stay far enough away from home, joined his fist into the body. No apprentice stayed more than a month with him, for he had always something to complain at the best work. Soon the stitches were not even, sometimes, a shoe was too long, a shoulder higher than the other, or the leather was not sufficiently beaten. 'Wait,' he said to the apprentice, "I will show you how we make skins soft you before, 'he brought a strap and gave him a few strokes across the back. Loafers he called them all. but he himself did not much going on, because he had no quarter-hour sit quietly. his wife was early in the morning got up and lighted the fire, he jumped out of bed and ran with bare feet in the kitchen. 'Will you burn me the house?' he cried, 'this is a fire that you could roast an ox by! Does wood cost nothing? ' Were the maids at the washtub laughed, and told each other what they knew, he scolded them out 'as are the geese cackling, and forgetting about the chatter their work. And why fresh soap? hopeless waste and on top of that a shameful laziness. They want to save their hands and do not rub the things properly ' He ran away, but met with a bucket of suds in a way that the whole kitchen was flooded. Someone was building a new house, so he ran to the window and watched. 'Since they walled up again the red sandstone,' he cried, 'that never dries in the house no one stays healthy. And just look how badly the fellows are laying the stones. The mortar is good for nothing: pebble need it, not sand. I live to see that the people coincides the house over your head. ' He sat down and took a few bites, then jumped up again, unfastened his leather apron and cried, "I will just go out and talk to people's conscience. ' He stumbled on the carpenters. 'What's this?' he cried, 'it's not skin on a cord. Do you expect the beams would stand straight? one wrong will put all wrong. ' He tore a carpenter ax from his hand and wanted to show him how he would cut, but when a cart loaded with clay came by, he threw the ax away, and hastened to the peasant who walked near her. 'You're not in your right mind,' he exclaimed, "who yokes young horses to a heavily loaded car? the poor beasts will die on the court. ' The farmer gave him no answer, and awl ran back into his workshop with anger. When he wanted to put to work, the apprentice reached him a shoe. 'What's that again?' he shouted at him, 'I have not told you, you should not cut shoes so far? who will buy a shoe, on which almost nothing but a sole? I demand that my orders being followed exactly. ' 'Master,' answered the apprentice, 'You may be right that the shoe is no good, but it's the same one that got your cut and even set to work at. When you jumped before, you have thrown down it off the table, and I just picked it up. but you could an angel from heaven not right machen.'Meister awl dreamed one night that he was dead and befände on the way to heaven. When he arrived, he knocked loudly at the door: 'I wonder,' he said, 'that they do not have a ring at the gate, the ankle should be tapped sore.' The apostle Peter opened and wanted to see who demanded so vehemently inlet. 'Oh, your oath, Master awl,' he said, 'I'll let you in, but I warn you that you ablasst of your habit and find fault with nothing you see in heaven. It could get you sick' 'You would have you can save the exhortation,' replied awl, 'I know already what is seemly, and here, thank God, perfect everything and nothing to blame as on earth.' So he came in and went into the wide spaces of the sky up and down. He looked around, left and right, but sometimes shook his head and muttered something under his breath. Then he saw two angels carrying away a beam. It was the bar, the one had in mind while he was looking for the other splinter in the eye. but they do not carry the beam length, but obliquely. 'Did you ever see such ignorance?' Master thought awl; But he was silent and seemed satisfied 'it does not matter basically how they carry the beam, straight or crooked, if you just get away with it, and truly, I see they are reaching nowhere.' Soon afterwards he saw two angels, which drawing water from a well into a barrel, at the same time, he noted that the barrel was full of holes and ran out of the water on all sides. They watered the earth with rain. 'All hail!' he blurted out, but happily recollected himself, and thought, "Perhaps it mere pastime; makes it a fun, it can be like useless things do even here in heaven, where, as I have already noted, do nothing but idle. ' He went farther and saw a car that was stuck in a deep hole. 'No wonder,' he said to the man who stood by, "who would load so unreasonably? what do you have there? ' 'Good wishes, "the man replied,' I could not get on the right track with this, but I have pushed up the car still happy, and here they will not let me stuck. ' Really came before an angel and spanned two horses. 'Very well,' said awl, 'but two horses will not get the car fours have at least before it.' Another angel came and brought about two horses, but does not harnessed in front, but behind. That was the master awl too much. 'Dub,' he burst out, 'what are you doing? Has any one ever since the world, pulled out in this way a car? but as they say better to know everything in your conceited arrogance. ' He wanted to talk, but one he had grabbed by the collar of the inhabitants of heaven and pushed him out with irresistible force. Beneath the gateway Master turned his head again to the car and saw him ward.In lifted up by four winged horses that moment awoke Master awl. "Things are certainly in heaven otherwise than they on earth, 'he said to himself,' and there can be some excuse, but who can view patient with that one the horses both behind and before hooking? indeed, they had wings, but who knows? Incidentally, it is a great folly horses have four legs to run to attach a pair of wings. But I have to get up, otherwise they make my house a loud perverted stuff. It's just fortunate that I'm not really dead. '
Nennillo and Nennella	3414	450	German	As Ciulla had reached the goal, Paola was preparing to start the race, and after she had geräuspert duly and wiped his mouth with a new semi linnenen, half hempen handkerchief, she began: Woe to him that his children in a step-mother to give a nurse believes; he brings them with her but only one instigator of their calamity into the house; because one never sees that a stepmother considered the children of another with favorable eyes, and if there really was even one that did this, we can consider it a miracle, saying that it was a white raven. Besides the many stepmothers well, maybe Speaking of which you heard all were, I will now also tell you about one that must be counted among the most unscrupulous and deserved the punishment they had imposed on itself. There once was a man named Jannuccio who had two children, and Nennillo Nennella he loved more than himself; but after death with a file of time had all the locks of the prison in which the soul of his wife was imprisoned by filed, he married a vile, vicious beast of woman that the foot had not set her husband on the threshold as soon as she was beginning to hold their heads high and say, "Am I came here to get the kids to lausen another? The missing just me that I charge me this burden and throughout the day these screamers should have around me. Rather, I wanted that I would have broken his neck, but that I would be gone for bad food, worse drinking and sleeping even worse, as it gives me this breed in this hell; I can not bear this life; because I want to be a housewife and not a servant. I must find some means to rid myself of this brood, or even go on it; better it is to blush even to pale than a hundred times; I will make the matter once and for all an end; for I am determined it to me to create or rid itself of running away "The poor husband, who had quite fond of this bitch, replied:". Do not be bitter so, dear wife, because the sugar is expensive. Tomorrow morning but when the cock has little crowed, I will free you from this burden and you vacate so every reason to harm's way. "Before so even the next day Aurora hinausgebreitet the red bedspread to the window of the East to the fleas shake out, the poor father took his two children by the hand, a large basket of food on the arm and led her into the woods, held where an army of poplars and beech darkness besieged. Once there, Jannuccio said to his children: "My little children, abide in this place, eat and drink happy and cheerful, and if you lack something, these strips can see ash, I hinstreue here and you like a thread is out of this maze straight to our house. he gave "Then every child a kiss and went crying back home. However, in order, as all creatures, summoned by the bailiffs night, nature pay off the control of sleep the hour, had the children afraid to stay on that desolate places alone, where the sound of a river that whipped the bold stones willfully stepped in his way, even a braggart could have put in fear; Therefore, they moved slowly down the cinder path along and finally arrived around midnight at the home of the father of. Pascozza but her stepmother, not behaved like a woman, but as an incarnate fury and let out a huge cry by beating with hands and feet around, and like a shy horse snorted, and she exclaimed: "What's that? the hell where they come from faces, these crabs? Can it drive them out of the house no mercury? Want to keep me on the offense in the house they certainly? Get her to me right now out of sight, because I want to wait for neither the crowing of cocks nor the beeping of the chickens; but if not, so you can more anger burst before I sleep ever again with you, but I will return tomorrow morning to the house of my parents back. because you do not deserve me, and not to have I so brought many beautiful things in the house to the dirt and stench of the bellows aufzuriechen other women, nor did I get to such a rich dowry from my parents to slave being of children that made me not concern them. "the poor Jannuccio saw how bad am the cause and how hot his wife was, the children took so again by the hand and went with them into the woods, where he them as the last time a basket was with Eßsachen and said, "you see, the only beloved children, how much your stepmother you to ruin me and came to my house to grief, hate you; it is only in this forest, where the trees, compassionate than they protect you from the sun, where the river benevolent than them, you as they, you offer to give without venom to drink and the earth-friendly lawn bearings without risk is, and when you lack food, so this path comes from bran along, I draw a straight line to our house, and bring you what you have need. "so saying, he turned his face away so as not to show that he was crying, and not to discourage poor things. When they had finished what was in the basket consumed, they wanted to return home; but since the accident scattered on the ground bran had been eaten away by a donkey, they missed their way and wandered for several days in the forest around by fed on acorns and chestnuts, which they found on Earth. Through the addition of the sky, however, who always keeps his hand over the innocent, was just at this time a prince in that forest to hunt, and Nennillo got the barking of dogs so great fear that he crawled into a hollow tree while nennella began to run with all his strength until they came out of the woods addition to the seashore. There she was by pirates who took wood, kidnapped and then brought from their leader in his house, where he and his wife, shortly before robbed by the death of a daughter they adopted as sons. Meanwhile Nennillo, who had crept into the tree was surrounded by dogs was that raised a deafening barking, so that the prince had finally see what would be the occasion for it, and there we found this beautiful boy, who was still so small that he could not tell who were his parents, he was a hunter, take him to the saddle and take in the royal palace. There he very carefully educate and beautiful in all and useful things Nennillo, but especially in what a pruner must know, teaching, so that he so skillfully in his art, was that he understood the food on most graceful precut after a few years. During this time, now it was discovered that the vessel owners to Nennella was in his house, a pirate was, and therefore wanted to put him in jail; but because he had the court people become friends and she kept in his pay, he got wind of and made off with all his house out of the dust. but it was perhaps the justice of Heaven, which caused the who committed his crime at sea, should also pay on the sea for it; because he had embarked on a weak bark and was on the high seas up the middle, came such a gust of wind and waves urge that the boat capsized and all were drowned. Only Nennella who, like his wife and children had not participated in the robberies, escaped the danger by itself was at the same time near the ship a great charmed fish opened his terrible jaws and Nennella swallowed. Grade believed she that it would be with her over, they saw in the belly of the fish wonderful things; as there were in splendid fields, beautiful gardens and a magnificent palace with all conveniences, where she lived like a princess. The fish brought to this with the utmost speed to a seacoast, and there just oppressive summer heat prevailed, scorched like a lime kiln, so the prince had just gone there in order to refresh on the sea freshness. While they prepared a magnificent meal Nennillo had stepped onto a balcony of the palace, which stood on the shore and cut there some knives as he headed to insert himself honor his office with much zeal. As Nennella therefore saw him through the throat of the fish, she raised her voice from the depths and said, "My little brother, my little brother, the knives are ground finely, the table covered neat and clean, but it hurts me even bitterly, in the fish ! to dwell without you "Nennillo stayed although not initially to that voice; but the prince, who was on a different balconies and these plaintive tones had also heard, turned in that direction and saw the fish. When he heard repeating the same words again, he found himself in amazement beside himself and sent from a number of people to watch whether they might pull the fish by stealth or otherwise in any way to land. Meanwhile, he kept hearing the same words, "My little brother," repeated my little brother and therefore asked each one of his servants, whether he would have a sister who would have lost him, said what finally Nennillo he remembers as in a dream that, was found when he in the forest, he had a sister he never heard of something. The prince then said to him that he should approach the fish and see what would be going on, maybe this thing was going straight at him. Nennillo went up to the fish, which the latter his head brought close to the shore and a six cubits high throat opened, stepped out of the Nennella in such beauty that they all looked like a nymph in any interlude by the magic of a magician from the belly comes forth a monster. When the prince she asked how she would come into it because she told him a part of their history of suffering, especially as they were hated by their stepmother. However, since neither they were able to remember the name of their father or their place of residence nor her brother, the Prince made a proclamation publicly that he who had lost two children named Nennillo and Nennella, should come in the royal palace; because he would there receive good news. Jannuccio who had spent the whole time a sad and miserable life, because he believed that his children would have been eaten by the wolves, ran when he heard that announcement, joyfully to the Prince and told him that he had lost the children , where he also told how he had been forced by his wife to take her into the woods. The Prince now washed his duly his head and called him a simpleton that he had let himself be so by a woman off like hunt and two such jewels as his children have thrust away. but after he lambasted him properly, he put him back on the pavement of consolation by charging thereto his two children, who was to embrace the father and kiss never tire of what the prince remove his coat and instead a splendid clothing let create. Then he called the woman Jannuccios summon, showed her the schmuckes children couple and asked them what the one who probably deserve some of them do evil and bring them in critical condition. "I would take him," she said, stuck "in an approved canned barrel and this then rolling down a mountain." - "So it done," said the prince, "the buck this time has pushed itself. Inasmuch as you speak your judgment itself, it should be carried out; for you have tracked your stepchildren with unearned hatred. "Accordingly, he ordered the by herself felled saying in execution to bring what he other equally rich nobleman but gave Nennella one of his vassals, a very rich nobleman, the daughter of her brother to wife where he instructed them hinlängliche income, so she and her father could without need of any that live comfortably while her stepmother once in a barrel and was therefore excluded from further life, being continually until her last breath through the bunghole shouted well slowly grinds the mill stone, but he holds safe and grinds you fine.
Oll Rinkrank	1860	311	German	Dar was once 'Waen n king, un de har' has n Dochter: and de har 'n bells Barg maken laten, un har segt, de represents över lopen kun, vallen on to, de schull sin Dochter to' n Fro hebben. Do is is ok en, de like liden de King Dochter so gärn, de vragt the king of sin he Dochter nich hebben stale. 'Yes,' segt de King, 'when he kan represents lopen över the Barg, at dat he valt, the scarf he är hebben.' Do segt de King Dochter, wil se is with Hum över lopen and wil Hum hollen who he was vallen school. Do lopt se is with, nanner över, un as se constitute miden up sünt, do glit de King Dochter ut un valt, un de glass Barg, de deit sick apen, un se bulk in hendal: un de Brögam, de kan nich sen, was se herdör came is, the de Barg het sick glick would be to dan. Do whines un went so he väl, un de King is ok so trorig un let the Barg is wedder away Braeken un ment, he wil är wedder ut krigen, you se könt de Stae ni finnen, would se hendal vallen is. Ünnertüsken came is de King Dochter very dep de Grunt in 'n grote Höl. Do Kumt är is 'n ollen Kärl with' n whole long gray beard to Moet, un de segt who se sin maid wäsen wil and all do wat he bevelt, the scarf se Laeven bliven, anners will he är ümbringen. Do deit se all was segt he är. , S morning, the kricht he sin Ledder ut de un task sets to the de Barg un stands darmit to 'n Barg Henut: un the lukt he Ledder de na sick ümhoch henup with sick. Un the courage se sin Äten kaken and sin Bedd maken un sin all work don, un to whom he wedder in Hus Kumt that brings he alltit 'n Hüpen Golt un Sülver with. were as se al väl Jaren bi em wäsen is un al olt all is because he het är Fro Mansrot, un se Moet Hum oll Rinkrank heten. Do is he ok ut into enmal, do makt se Hum sin Bedd un waskt sin Schöttels, un do makt se de Dören un Vensters all close to, do is un is so 'n Shuf wäsen was' t Lecht herin schint het because let se apen. As d 'oll Rinkrank do wedder Kumt so he klopt to sin Dör and roept' Fro Mansrot, do mi d 'apen Dör.' 'Well,' segt se, 'ik do di, oll Rinkrank d' apen Dör non. ' Do segt he'hir sta ik poor Rinkrank up min söventein Senen lank 's up min vergüllen Vot, Fro Mansrot, wask mi d' Schöttels. '' Ik heb din Schöttels al wusken, 'segt se. Do segt he wedder'hir sta ik poor Rinkrank up min söventein Benen lank, up min en vergüllen Vot, Fro Mansrot, mak mi 't Bedd.' 'Ik heb din Bedd all makt,' segt se. Do segt he wedder'hir sta ik poor Rinkrank up min söventein Senen lank, up min en vergüllen Vot, Fro Mansrot, do mi d 'Dör apen.Do löpt hey all runt üm sin Hus to un süt, dat de lütke Luk represents apen is, do think he' you schast but the roar, wat se constitute wol makt, warüm dat se mi d 'Dör wol nich apen don wil.' Do wil he is dör kiken un kan the Kop is ni dör krigen van sin long beard. Do stekt he sin beard is only dör de Luk, un as he is de hendör het, do geit Fro Mansrot bi un villain de Luk degree to mit'n Bant, de se is het Bunnen on, un de Bart blift is vast immoral. Do catch he so jammerlik kriten on to, dat deit üm so sar: un do bidd't he är, se likes üm wedder los laten. Do segt se, he nich as bet he är de Ledder deit, he was sail with To'n Barg Herut. Do like he's sake or non, he mot är sedges, was de Ledder is. Do bint se 'n whole long Bant is to de Shuf, un do puts se de un Ledder of stings to' n Barg Herut: un se as Baven is, do lukt apen se de Shuf. Do geit se na är Vader hen and vertelt where dat är all gan is. Do pleased de king sick so un är Brögam is ok is still un gat do se hen un gravt the Barg up un finnt the ollen Rinkrank with all sin Golt ün Sülver it. Do let with de king to ollen Rinkrank dot maken, and all sin Sülver un Golt nimt he. Do kricht de King Dochter the ollen Brögam still sound man, un se lävt quite vergnögt un delightfully un in joy.
Pervonto	3372	675	German	All laid great joy at the Prince unexpectedly bestowed become luck and the evil wenches imposed sentence on the day; but finally let the chatter after, and there Meneca was her turn, she began to tell as follows: The good never go unrewarded; who sows services reap gratitude; who plants kindness, love looks up sprouted; The proven a susceptible heart benevolence is never barren, but gives birth gratitude and generates operated favor. thereof evidence can be seen in people's lives every day, and an example in the story you will hear that I have been on the lips as to tell you. A brave woman in Casoria, called Ceccarella had called a son who Pervonto and the largest Schöps, the most simple-minded dolt and out do most Dümmling was that the world ever produced. Here About now the poor mother everything seemed as black as a kitchen towel, and a thousand times of the day they cursed the knee which this Erzgimpel had opened the door to this world; for he was not fit even to lure the dog from the oven, and the unfortunate woman might call and scream as much as they wanted, Bearskin moved and did not move to her also to perform only the slightest service. At last, however, after the lightning struck a thousand times on his skull, she washed him a thousand head, and after a thousand-fold Hinundherreden and bickering brought him one day to go for a rice bunch in the forest, saying to him: "It is now that we take time a bite to us, therefore, run fetch wood and do not forget the way, what you're doing, and come again soon; because we want to cook a few aufgeklaubte cabbage stalks, to eke out to our poor life, "Although the slacker of Pervonto went away, but how that has nothing to miss one went. of course he went, but was moving so slowly, as if he were a magpie when he would occur eggs and when he scored the kicks by einhertrödelte very slowly and deliberately and step by step and used the road to the forest to Beherzigung of the proverb . "Slowly it comes to the goal" as he was thus arrived at an open field that was traversed by a river, which the grumbled their way hindering stones over the immodesty him and growled, he met three young people who the lawn for mattress, Feldstein had taken a pillow and, as dead slept under the midday sun, they durchbriet with vertical beams. Once Pervonto saw these poor people who had turned the heart of a fiery lime kiln to a water source, he felt sorry for them and cut down some tree branches, from which he made them a pretty arbor. Soon after, awakened the young men who were sons of a fairy, and while they perceived the friendliness and officiousness Pervontos, they gave him the magic power that all he wished it might be fulfilled. Then Pervonto continued on his way to the forest and made there such a tremendously large rice covenant that it would have required a winch to get it to drag. Then he saw that was not to think about it, it mop on his shoulders, he sat astride it down, exclaiming, "A thousand again, if this covenant still want to carry away like a horse myself," No sooner had he. said this, the federal government got into a trot like a Andalusians and made, arrived in front of the palace of the king, and voltes Kurbetten to the astonishment. When the maids of honor, who stood at the window, saw this miracle, they called surprising the king's daughters, named Vastolla, cause that, perceiving from the window the tours of Rice Federation and the jumps of the wooden club broke into a loud laugh, though she used to always be so gloomy that no one recalled seeing they ever laugh. Once Pervonto noticed that mocked him, he exclaimed: "Hell, Vastolla, I wish that you got pregnant I want," and this saying, he put the rice collar heels into the body and arrived soon after the Turks gallop for at home by such a large crowd of street boys with howling and shouting derision behind him ran that if his mother had not shut the door of the house quickly, he would have succumbed to a hail of lemons and Kohlstrünken. but Vastolla noted some strange cravings and morning sickness that is not properly stands with her, and tried to hide her pregnancy as long as possible; they, however, the body that since swelled like a ton, could not hide more, the king saw the roast, and after he made a pandemonium, he summoned his council, said: "You know perfectly that the moon my honor horns get and that to the chronicle, or rather to write Hornik my shame, my daughter has provided me with endless matter that one word she to complain my heart has let the body complain; therefore say, me guess. I would think that they would force prefer to give the lives of herself before she is a bastard of himself; I would like to have them rather than feel the pain of the death of birth; I wish rather that they travel before it sets in the world from the world rice and scion "The councils, which might have enjoyed probably more oil than wine, then replied as follows:". However, they deserve a great punishment, and from the horn, they put you, one would have to make the handle of the knife, which one would take her life. However when they are now killing during her pregnancy, so at the same time that Naughty punishment is going to escape that to rush you with sorrow of every kind, such horns uses against you; to you to plunge into a battle of suffering to let you made a horned champion and around you dream a real dream of shame, you led through the gate of horn. So we want to wait until the end and try to know which has been the root of this disgrace, but then remember exactly and decide what we have to do. "When the king heard them speaking in such a complete and plausible manner, he was their counsel be acceptable. therefore he controlled his anger, saying: "We will wait for the end of the thing, in fact," The will of heaven according But finally came the moment of birth zoom, and after a few slight contractions she threw at the first blow of the rear trumpet in. the first word midwife, at the first pressure of the body of the midwife two boys like apples of gold in your lap. The king, who still was full unwillingness called now turn the councils together and said to them. "My daughter has finally born, and it's time to help her with clubs" - "No," replied these wise old men ( and always,) to gain time, "we want to wait until the rogues grow to recognize the physiognomy of the father to them." the king, who, in order not to write crooked, not even a line without a ruler of used to make Council, shrugged, was patient and waited until the grandchildren were seven years old, at which time the council, asked again to consider the matter properly and to hit the nail on the head by one of their number replied :. "Since you, Mr. King, can not investigate your daughter all were and find out who was the forger, who has falsified the crown of your image, and we will soon cart off the blemish. So shall command that a great feast will organized and that each Elegant and Noble appears our city with him. We want then probably watch and then, peeking with eagle eyes to who drove the little ones by nature, contact prefer; because that is easily the Father and we then provide it as quickly aside like a pile of excrement "This advice pleased the king. he organized a banquet, all persons of birth and state invited, and after fed, he left her in a series of questions and then passing them lead the children. These cared so little about those people as the ass to the lyre, so that the king is hard angry and bit into her lips, and although it did not lack other and farther shoes, but because it just this shoe of anger very pressing, stamping his foot on the floor. But the councilors said to him: "Be patient, Ew. Majesty bezähmet your displeasure; for tomorrow we organize another feast, but do not load people of high rank more, but only from low registry. Maybe we, as women still cling to the bad, under Cutlers, Paternoster dealers and comb Achern the root of your anger discoveries, because we have not been identified among the Cavaliers. "The speech pleased the king, and he ordered a second banquet to organize, in which by virtue of public notice everything rabble and common packing, all evil entities, rogues, Galgenstricke, scoundrels, vagabonds, Ragamuffin, scoundrels, begging dogs and people with cloth and wooden shoes that were only some in the city, came together and how Counts on a long, long table began taking a seat, efficient hew. Ceccarella now, who had also heard the announcement, penetrated unceasingly in Pervonto that he should arrive at the Festgelag, and really brought him finally to the fact that he gave to the gluttony. But no sooner had he arrived there than those two pretty boys clung on either side of him and showered him beyond measure with flattery and caresses. When the king perceived this, he began to pluck the beard that winning this delicacy, the results become this large lot of one so very ugly grimace face given that if you just saw it, aroused disgust and breaking; for, besides that Pervonto had a shaggy head triefige eyes, a parrot nose and an enormous mouth, he was ragged barefoot and so that one also without reading medical books, an opinion about what was not visible to him, could have the king therefore said thus, after a deep sigh: "What made only nickel from my daughter that she hanged at this hideous monster? What was she being converts that they become involved with this rag dog? O thou vile, cunning beast, what kind of metamorphosis? You make yourself to a pig's sake to sow, so I'm going to ram? - However, what I'm waiting, which I still hesitate? You will be punished as it deserves; they suffer the punishment that your auferleget her, and createth them out of my sight; because I can not look any longer. "So the council deliberated and arrived at last agreed that both would put as the culprit and the two children into a barrel and thrown into the sea, so that without the King to join hands with his own blood-stained, should make the final point of their lives. The verdict was not so soon like, as well as the barrel already appeared, in which one immediately grabbed into all four; before they were closing it, however, had some chamber of Miss Vastolla which wept as if they pushed the goat, thrown in a keg with raisins and dried figs, so they, though, something had to live only for a short time. Hardly the lid of the barrel but was nailed, it has also taken away and thrown into the sea, where it driven by the wind, sometimes here, sometimes swam there. Vastolla now crying her eyes uninterrupted streams of tears and said to Pervonto: "What's our misfortune that we have the cradle of Bacchus for Sarge at our death! Oh, if only I could at least know who my body planned and I was brought into this dungeon! Alas, I was bored without even knowing how. Say, crocodile, say, what magic and what Rod took you to lock me into the tire of this barrel? ? Tell me telling you, drive what devil you to screw me the invisible pins, so I have no other opening before our eyes as a black bunghole "Pervonto, which until then had turned a deaf ear, finally answered:" Give me figs and raisins so I will serve you. "just for something out of him, gave him Vastolla a handful of them. And when he, the crop was full, he told her in great detail, what had happened to him with the three young men, then with the wood Bund and last with itself, namely because they treated him as Gauch, giving her filled her stomach. Once the poor thing heard this, they took courage and said to Pervonto: "Shall we then, friend, let run our lives in this cask? Why do not you do that this vessel is changed into a beautiful ship, so we escape this danger and into a safe harbor shrink "to which Pervonto said," Give me figs and raisins, so I will serve you, ";? and Vastolla filled him then his throat so that he open the bung, and like a fisherman mask in the carnival she fished him with figs and raisins, the words straight from the mouth, followed at once by Pervonto said what Vastolla wish the barrel turned into a ship with all the drive necessary ropes and all the sailors that were necessary for the operation of the vehicle, and immediately you could see the one the braces put on, shoot another the ropes, govern a third control, a fourth sail represent a fifth climb the mast, a sixth 'links' rum,' a seventh 'right' call around, "an eighth call to the mouthpiece, fire a ninth, the gun and that the others that do so Vastolla quite up felt overboard and swam in a sea joy. Since it was now up to the time when the moon "with the sun G'vatter lend me d'shear" starts playing, Vastolla told Pervonto: "Make but, handsome youth that this ship to transform into a beautiful palace ; because we will then be more secure. You know that they say:> praise the sea and hold you to the land, ' "Pervonto said," Give me figs and raisins, so I will serve you, ";. whereupon she immediately made him what he wanted to come and Pervonto, the mouth-filling, also fulfilled her wish. Because all of a sudden pushed the ship to shore and turned into a fully decorated palace, who was filled with so much equipment and so great splendor that he left left nothing to be desired, so Vastolla who had recently given their lives for a threesome, now would not have changed places with the most distinguished lady in the world by as received a queen and served it looked. As a keystone of their whole so favorable luck change it now even penetrated Pervonte, located auszubitten the grace 'that he would beautiful and young, so that from now on they each could enjoy pleasures; because although the proverb said, "Better a pig to man as an emperor as her lover," so she would still consider the greatest happiness on earth when its outer shape was transformed; whereupon both Pervonto same condition presented as before, saying, "Give me figs and raisins, then I will serve you," and immediately the constipation of words Pervontos made Vastolla by Laxiermittel of figs remedy, and no sooner had he spoken the word, it turned from a Wiedehopf in a nightingale, from a bogey to a Narcissus of a scarecrow in a doll. Since Vastolla saw this, they fell with joy almost beside himself, and by closing it tightly in his arms, her ran the mouth over with delight. About the same time, it happened that the king, which, every fly had gotten on the wall of the day when he that misfortune had befallen, was led by his courtiers to dissipate hunting. On this he attacked the night, and as he saw shining a light through a window of that palace, he sent a servant from to ask if they wanted to accommodate him. He was told that he not only break a bottle neck, but when it pleased him, a whole barrel could empty it so that it so soon went with his entourage in the palace. While he climbed the stairs and walked through the room, he did not see a single living being, except for the two boys who ran about him while shouting: "Grandfather, grandfather, grandfather," The king surprise surprised and taken aback, stood there like charms, and after he sat down with fatigue at a table, he saw at once by an invisible hand a damastenes Tischgedeck hang up and dishes of roast and accessories appear so that he dined like a real king and drank, while those two pretty boys him served, and as long as he was at the table came a music of pipes and tambourines uninterrupted whose loveliness penetrated him to the toes. As soon as he was now finished eating, so suddenly stood before him a bed of pure gold foam, in which he, after the boots had to move out, lay down without delay, which followed suit and all his courtiers, which likewise a hundred in the other rooms prepared panels had accessed efficient. But when the day broke and the King wanted when going away to take the two little ones with you, so Vastolla appeared together with her husband, threw himself at his feet and begged him for mercy by telling him in detail what had happened to her from the start , and when the king saw that he found two grandchildren like pearls and a son like a fairy child, he hugged both, she wore almost floating in the city and held there great celebrations which lasted to this great discovery sake many days, with he admitted against his will that man proposes, God disposes.
Petrosinella	3379	310	German	to entertain my wish, the princess in a pleasant way, is so great that I otherwise did when I rummaged through all the previous night, were in which buried all the other people in the deepest sleep the old chests and boxes of my brain, searched the drawers of my memory and among the tales that those good soul, the wife Klara little hole, grandmother of my uncle (though God rest her soul!) used to tell those picked to me seemed to fit the most to you daily a dishing thereof; so I have reason to hope (if I'm not about completely located even in error) are that they make you a lot of pleasure or, if not to drive as armed bands to boredom, then at least serve as trumpets to cheer my other comrades so that they are more power than my small forces, it will allow me, take the field and replace it with the abundance of her mind the lack of my words. Once upon a pregnant woman named Pascadozia which, saw from a window that went into the garden of a witch a bed of parsley and such a lust of them was that they also almost fainted and make it satisfying, the time abpaßte when the witch went out, during which she plucked a handful. But when the witch returned home and wanted to make a soup, they saw that someone had been with the parsley, and said, "Go get me the hell if I do not get this langfingerigen rogue and teach him at his own expense will ., from his plate to eat and leave the pots of other people untouched "by the poor pregnant now descended on several occasions in the garden, she was caught one morning from the witch who spoke full of anger and bile to her:" have 'I finally caught you, you thief, you hussy? What you pay rent to me because for the garden that you so wegstiehlst me easily my green stuff? By my faith, 'I'm not going to send you only to Rome, so you should do there repentance. Fright began Pascadozia on to apologize, saying that they neither gluttony nor from cravings to have evil misled "Except leave to commit this bad faith, but rather because she was pregnant and that she feared the child's face would all be covered with parsley-like painting, yes, she had to know Thanks to it rather that they have been wishing her not angry eyes. "It's empty chatter," said the witch, "I have not you come with it. Your life date has expired, unless you promise me to give me the child, it now may be a little girl or a little boy. "To escape from the danger in which she found herself, poor Pascadozia made with his hand on the heart of the required oath and was then released by the witch. But when the time of her delivery came, she gave birth to such a beautiful daughter that it was a real pleasure, and it had a cute times on the chest, which looked like a parsley, it was named Petrosinella. This was now growing every day approach rapidly and was as soon as they reached the seventh year, sent to school; "Tell your mother that she should think of the promise"; but always when they met on the street of the witch, they spoke to her and as often as the witch Pascadozia sent this bad news that the poor woman in despair did not want to further listen to the same and to her daughter one day said, "If you return the old woman hit and it demands the fulfillment of the damned promise so her reply: > Take what you want to have. ' "so when Petrosinella that no evil suspect once again met the witch and heard from her the same speech, she replied in the innocence of her heart, as her mother told her, after which the witch grabbed by the hair and dragged into a forest, where the sun never entered horses to it on the dark pastures not cancer. There now Petrosinella has been banned by the witch into a conjured from her tower, which neither had doors stairs and just a little window nor by which the witch by means of very long hair Petrosinellas like a sailor on the shrouds ascend and descend used. This is what happened after all that, as Petrosinella one day out put during the absence of the witch's head out of that hole and let shine her braids in the sun, the son was passing a prince, who at the sight of these two gold standards, which the hearts of recruitment under Cupid flags induce called, and of the tab under the glorious shimmering waves siren Given fell in love with as high a beauty on the sterblichste. After he sent her a petition of Sighs, was adopted by her to take him into favor, and the trade was so expeditious manner; that the prince friendly nod and kisses, love looks and bows, thanks, and proffers, hopes and promises, caressing was thrown in large quantities words and flattery. When they had it but so repeated several days, they were so familiar with each other that they arranged a further meeting with each other, and that should this at night when the moon with the stars Hide played, take place, but Petrosinella enter the witch a nightcap and up pulling the prince with her hair. As soon as this appointment was in accordance appeared certain hour, and the prince had gone to the tower, the lichens were lowered on a whistle him down, which he quickly grabbed with both hands and then called out, "Take arrived" Upstairs, he crawled through the little window in the room, enjoyed in rich measure of that parsley broth Cupid and rose, even before the sun god taught his horses jumping through hoops of the zodiac, again on the same gold Head down to return home. As he often repeated these visits, it was finally a crony of the witch aware of what was accustomed to concern themselves with things that did not concern her and stuck her nose into every cottage cheese; Therefore she said to the old woman, she should be on their guard, because Petrosinella have a young lad a love affair; they suspect that things would not stop, they see through everything and know how it would come; if that is so, does not provide might well Petrosinella before it at its versehe it be over the hills. The witch thanked the godmother many times for the well-meant advice, adding that she would already make sure the Petrosinella the way to move, except that it would be her quite impossible to escape because they have the same so charmed that, if they do not the three galls that were in the hole of a kitchen bar, had in their hands, all efforts to make out of the dust, would be lost. But while the two old witches discussed in this way, overheard Petrosinella which always perked up and harbored against the godmother suspect their whole conversation. therefore, let them once the night pouring out their black clothes to protect them from the moths, and the prince had, as usual, set to rise it to the bar in the kitchen and look for the galls, which her how she knew, because of her attached by the witch spell were essential necessary. After finding them and made a rope ladder, they both went down the tower and began to flee in the way that led to the city. Since they were but here seen from the Gossip, this began, so to call to scream and the witch that the latter awoke, then as soon as they heard that Petrosinella had fled, on the same rope ladder that was still tied to the little window, descended and began to lag the lovers. As they now saw them running faster than a free serene horse behind him the witch, they held initially for lost; Finally, however, Petrosinella reminded the galls and quickly threw a down to earth, so that suddenly a terrible Corsican mastiff appeared that with weitgeöffnetem mouth and terrible barking of the witch ran counter to them to swallow as a single bite. This, however, which more cunning and tricks in his head had as the incarnate devil's hand tucked into his pocket and drew a bun out that she had presented little dog when he lowered his tail and head left all his anger, which she began nachzusetzen again the fugitives. Once Petrosinella saw her get close again, she threw the second Gallapfel to earth, and suddenly a terrible lion, which lashed the earth with his tail, shook his mane and made ready for a yard wide open jaws to crush the witch; so this immediately returned, a donkey grazing in a meadow, withdrew the skin, these umhängend, a lion met him again, which in the opinion that it would be a real long-eared bat, got such great fear that he tore at once. After the witch now had thus skipped this second trench, she began again to pursue the poor refugees who, commented on the kicks and the dust cloud that rose up to the sky, that the witch again would be after them; but this was out of fear, the lion she could pursue the Eselshaut not yet taken off, so that, as Petrosinella had now thrown the third gall on the ground and conjured up in this way a wolf this without the witch time for a new way out to let them devoured like a donkey. Then put the lovers, free from any danger, very slowly and leisurely made their way to the kingdom of the Prince back, this woselbst with the permission of his father Petrosinella married and both felt after so many sufferings storms that: Only one hour 'of port, free of risk can soon forget many Sturmesjahr.
Pintosmalto	3410	425A	German	As Cecca had her narrative that all liked very exceptionally, complete and Meneca that what was on the torture to theirs unload, perceiving that the audience all pricked up their ears, she began as follows: It has always been difficult for the people to preserve what has been acquired to acquire than new, because when one assists the happiness that often stand by the injustice to another, but mind is necessary; Thus one often sees Although people who lack wisdom, rise to greatness, but for lack of insight they fall back down again as you if you are not fool can, seen from the following story. There was once a merchant who had an only daughter and very much wanted to see her married; But as often as he struck this string, he found his daughter a hundred miles from the desired sound removed because this foolish thing would remain single, her game reserve on the jealous guarding and her Tribunal always vacancies in their school always holidays, in her Court wished to have more holidays; so that the father in the highest degree depressed and in despair was. As he once had to go to a trade show, he asked his daughter Betta said what he should bring her what she replied: "If you love me, Father, so bring me half a hundredweight Palermozucker, half sweet almonds, four to six bottles of fragrant water, some musk and amber, and also about forty pieces beads, two sapphires, some grenades and rubies, some gold dream, especially a baking tray and scratch diameter of silver. "The father wondered via this somewhat immodest demand but did not want to contradict his daughter, so he traveled to the fair and brought her on his return exactly everything they desired. As Betta these things had received all, she shut herself in her room and began, from almonds and sugar mixed with rose water and perfumes, to knead a large dough; which she gave him the figure of a beautiful young man, he made of gold spun hair, eyes of sapphires, pearls and teeth lips of rubies, also gave him so much charm and grace that he was missing was the language. When she was done with the picture, she began, knowing that come to life at the request of King of Cyprus also once a statue to ask the goddess of love in such a way that to open the statue's eyes and breathe after continued requests Bettas also began at last for breath even let out words, and was last dissolved when the band all the members, also began to go hugged Betta and kissed once the young man with a much greater pleasure than they would have won a kingdom, and led him to this on the hand in front of her father, to whom she said, "You've always said, Lord and father, and your warm wishes, married to see me, so I now have to want to drive you, chosen according to the wish of my heart." when the father saw his daughter out of the room to see go in this beautiful youth, he had not come out, he got into the biggest surprise, however, was the sight of his beauty that would have Money can see, with the choice of his daughter happy and organized to celebrate their wedding a big party. Among other guests that homed to it, even a great queen, who at the sight Pintosmaltos (for so Betta had told him what to German of "Enameled" means) is up to his ears in his love, and since Pintosmalto appeared unknowingly, the only eyes had opened for the wickedness of the world hours before barely three, was still very much inexperienced, so it led the queen that he like all the other ladies who had honored his wedding with their presence, the statement of his bride as up to the stairs accompanied, by the hand gradually to six horses to her carriage that held in the court, it then entered and was then the coachman with all speed to their residence back, they woselbst with the simple-minded Pintosmalto who does did not know what was happening, married to the most urgent. But Betta, which it had expected for some time and did not see coming back him, sent finally down into the yard, whether he was talking to someone who rose to the chamber if he there as breathe fresh air, and went to the secret chamber, if he might as darbrächte the first tribute to the needs of life; but by finding him anywhere, she guessed at once that he had been robbed her because of its beauty and, therefore, issued a public notice, but remained without any success, so they made the decision, disguised as a beggar, it anywhere in the to search all over the world. - when they had made in this way on the road, they finally came to the house of an old woman who received them very friendly, and as soon as she heard the accident Bettas and also noticed that she was pregnant, taught three children sayings; the first was: "gotchas warlacke rains the house"; the second was "Enije, denije, dacken thick, crack legs"; the third was "Ringel, Ringel, Rosenkranz, vice a pot of water"; which she did know her that she should these sayings if she were once in great need, recite; because they would be of great benefit to her. Although now Betta very surprised about this paltry gift, they still thought in her mind: "a gift horse in the mouth can not be seen; from taking one is not poor; is a thing no matter how small, it can still be useful; who knows what is for secret power in those words. "Therefore, they thanked the old well and went back on the road. After she went about long and had arrived in a beautiful city, called Round Mountain, they went straight to the royal palace, where she pleaded for God's sake to a shelter, even if only in a stable, because it was her delivery suggests so that the maids of the Queen, when they perceived this, the poor Betta a chamber near instructed by the stairs. Here she saw one day Pintosmalto pass and it felt so much joy that she was about sliding down the tree of life. When they now saw himself in such great distress, she wanted to try the first of its taught by the old woman's sayings and therefore saying. "Gotchas warlacke rains the house" Then all of a sudden appeared a beautiful Wägelein of gold, all with precious stones strewn that rolled around by itself in the chamber that it was a true miracle. When the women of the queen saw this, they said it to, without losing time the queen, repaired to the room Bettas and at the sight of the magnificent car asked her if she wanted to sell it; because it would give her what she would require only some; what Betta replied that, although only a beggar, yet satisfying their wishes would prefer all gold in the world; therefore, if the queen demand to own the car, so she should be sleeping with her husband one night Betta. The queen was very surprised at the folly of this poor woman the room, which was accompanied so ragged and wanted to one Gelüstes sake give away so much wealth, but she was not inclined to let these good bite escape but Pintosmalto enter a sleeping potion and so indeed to fulfill the desire of the poor Betta, but to pay them poorly. And when the night came and the guard parade of stars in the sky and the glow-worms should be held on the ground, the Queen gave her husband the sleeping potion and told him to lie down to Betta; because the good man did everything he was told. No sooner but he was in bed, he started like a log to sleep, so that the poor Betta that this night endured sufferings to make up imaginary and saw that she could not be heard, burst into bitter complaints, accusing him everything they had done for him, and not before his mouth shut even the sleeper opened his eyes, until the sun with the nitric acid appeared to separate the darkness from the light, at which time the Queen came down and Pintosmalto continue led by the hand, saying to Betta. "your wish is fulfilled" - "would would that all your wishes time of your life so full," Betta said in a low voice, "because I spent such a bad night that I will not soon forget. "the poor, however, their desire could not resist and wanted to try the second spell. Therefore, she said, "Enije denije, dacken thick legs crack" and saw immediately a golden cage appear with a beautiful bird that was made of gold and precious stones and like a nightingale sang. Hardly the maids these fine things again had noticed and it tells the Queen, they wanted to immediately see the bird, and by how did this same question in the car and Betta her like the answer first time promised the Queen, who knew what a stupid thing they have the right to turn to let Betta sleep with her husband, and took it along with the cage bird in reception. And when the night came, they were, as the day before, Pintosmalto a nightcap and sent him to Betta into the room, woselbst a very nice camp was trimmed. But as he slept this time as dead, even Betta broke out again in the same complaints, so that a stone could have moved to pity, and by now so in a continuous whined and cried and scratched, they brought a second night fully torments what at dawn the Queen picked up her husband and the poor Betta leaving sunk in pain and pain as they bit his hands over his her played match with rage. had But Pintosmalto the morning left the palace to pick up in a garden outside the city some fresh figs, approached him a cobbler whose office adjoined the Bettas and no word of any action they ejected, lost, and he reported in detail how he had lament the poor beggar, crying and hear screaming. Once Pintosmalto, who was beginning to be sensible, heard the words of the cobbler, he speculated as to behave with this thing liked, and resolved, if it should meet once more that he was asleep in the beggar that, what the queen gave him before, not to drink. wanted as now Betta make the third attempt and the third sentence: "Ringel, Ringel, Rosenkranz, Vice reciting a pot of water," were all of a sudden a number of fabrics from silk and gold and embroidered napkins along with a golden bowl in front of her, can that the Queen had no more glorious treasures even match. When the maids saw this, they reported it back to her mistress, who sought to bring the materials, like other things in themselves, and they received the same response from Betta that if she wanted to have her, her husband should let her sleep with her, she said to herself: "What I lose going to do this farmer their will, if thereby I come into possession of these beautiful things," therefore took the treasures it offered Betta in reception, and? as the night, the accuracy appreciative of the debt requirement of sleep and rest, hired for their payment, she gave Pintosmalto turn the nightcap to this but kept in the mouth and, in a room in which he to want to piss under the pretext was kicked, spat, after which he went to sleep with Betta. This now resumed their usual speech by telling him how she kneaded it with his own hands from sugar and almonds, have made of spun gold, and her eyes and mouth of pearls and precious stones him hair, as he also conferred to him by the gods live only owe their requests, as he was then robbed her, but she herself, though heavily pregnant, had visited him everywhere under such great hardships that may heaven preserve every Christian soul facing similar hardships; Further, as it so that this would be slept for two nights with him and it surrendered two priceless treasures, but nevertheless also have not heard from him a single word the last night of their hopes and the latest date of their lives. Pintosmalto who did not sleep this time, but all sounded exactly awoke nevertheless as from a deep sleep by he remembered everything sooner had happened, what he Betta embraced with joy, then, because just the night had appeared with her black larva, to the dance of the stars to perform, very quietly got up in the room of the queen, who was in the deepest sleep, in simplest and all the things they abgeluchst Betta, and all jewels and gold foxes, it had in the desk, took away to itself to compensate them because of angetanen injustice. He returned then to his wife back, left with her immediately and rushed to the palace with her, without stopping anywhere, across the border; only then they rested in a comfortable inn until Betta brought a beautiful boy into the world. But as soon as their weeks were over, they went back on the road to Bettas father she found fresh and healthy and see again through the joy of his daughter, again completely tapered while the queen as she neither her husband nor the beggar, nor their treasures found himself with rage over and over and scratched ausraufte the hair and often reminded of the proverb: tit for tat!
Rapunzel	116	310	German	There was once a man and a woman who wanted a long time in vain a child who finally made himself the hope woman, God was about to fulfill her wish. in back of their house, people had a small window, it could be a splendid garden view, fully stood the most beautiful flowers and herbs; but he was surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was standing by this window and looking down into the garden, as they saw a bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion; and she looked so fresh and green that she was lusting and the greatest desire felt to eat from the rampion. The desire increased every day, and she knew she could not get it, so they made a whole, looked pale and miserable. Since the man was startled and asked, "What ails you, dear wife?" - "Oh," she replied, "if I can not eat some rampion from the garden behind our house, I shall die." The man, who loved her thought: "Eh You give your wife die, you bring it by the rampion let it cost what it wants." So at dusk he climbed over the wall into the garden of the enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rapunzel and took it to his wife. She at once made herself a salad of it and ate it in greedily. They had their but so good, so good that they got three times as much pleasure the other day. If they have any rest, her husband had to again climb into the garden. So he set out at dusk back down when he was but clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before him. "How dare you," she with angry look, "to climb into my garden and like a thief to steal my rapunzel? That you shall fare badly." - "Oh," he replied, "let justice with mercy for law, I have decided only out of necessity: my wife saw your rapunzel from the window, and felt such great desires that they would die if they do not it would get to eat. " Since the witch abated in her anger and said to him: "If it remains so, as you say, I will allow you to take rampion all you want, but I make one condition: You have to give me the child your wife will bring into the world. it shall be well treated, and I will care for it like a mother. " The man said anything about in fear, and came as the woman in weeks, the enchantress appeared at once, gave the child the name of Rapunzel, and took it with him fort.Rapunzel was the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was twelve years old, it closed the witch in a tower, which lay in a forest, and neither stairs nor door, only had the top was a little window. When the enchantress wanted to go, they stood and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold. When she heard the voice of the enchantress she tied her braids off, wrapped it up around a window hook, and then the hair fell twenty ells down, and the Sorceress, it rose hinauf.Nach a few years carried it to, that the king's son rode through the forest and passed by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her solitude time to have uttered their sweet voice. The king's son wanted to climb up to her and looked for the door of the tower, but it was to find none. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and listening. When he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw that an enchantress came, and heard how she cried: "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." Because let Rapunzel down the braided hair, and the enchantress climbed up to her. "Is this the ladder by which one mounts, I will just try my luck." And the next day when it began to get dark, he went to the tower and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." Immediately the hair fell down and the prince hinauf.Anfangs rose startled Rapunzel dramatically when a man came to her, her eyes never one had seen, but the king's son began very friendly to talk to her and told her that from was their singing his heart so moved that it must let him have no rest, and he had even seen. Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she thought, "He will love me more than the old woman Gothel," and said yes, and put her hand in his hand. She said. "I will gladly go with you, but I do not know how to get down If you come, so every time a train bringing silk, and I will weave a ladder, and when that is done, I will descend and you take me on your horse. " They agreed that until then he should come to her every evening, because during the day the old woman came. So the witch knew nothing of it until once Rapunzel said to her: "Tell me yet, Mrs. Gothel, how it happens, it will be much pull up my heavier than the young prince, who is in a moment with me." - "Oh, you wicked child," cried the witch, "what do I hear from you, I thought I had separated you from all over the world, and yet you have deceived me!" In her anger she grabbed the beautiful hair of Rapunzel, wrapped them twice left her hand, grabbed a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she did live in great grief and misery musste.Denselben day but where she had violated Rapunzel evening the sorceress the cut braids at the window hook firmly, and when the King's son came and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." she let the hair down. The king's son climbed up, but he did not find his dearest Rapunzel, the enchantress, who gazed at him with wicked and venomous looks. "Aha," she said scornfully, "you want to get the woman dearest, but the beautiful bird does not sit longer in the nest and does not sing more, the cat has got it and you will also scrape nor the eyes. Rapunzel is lost You will never see her again. " The prince got out in pain, and in despair he jumped down the tower: he brought the life, but the thorns into which he fell, he zerstachen eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but roots and berries, and did nothing but lament and weep over the loss of his dearest wife. So he wandered several years in misery around, and at length came to the desert where Rapunzel with the twins, who gave birth to her, a boy and girl who lived miserably. He heard a voice, and it seemed to him as well known; as he walked toward it, and as he approached, he saw Rapunzel and fell on his neck and wept. Two of her tears wetted his eyes because they were clear again, and he was able to see otherwise. He led her to his kingdom where he was joyfully received, and they lived a long, happy and contented.
mystery tales	1531	407	German	Three women were changed into flowers which grew in the field, but one of them could be the night in their house. And she said to a time to her husband, as the day drew near and they in turn go to their companions in the field and had to be a flower, "If you come this afternoon and I destroyest, shall I be saved, and remain with you forever "what then happened. Now the question is how they had recognized her husband because the flowers were all alike and without discrimination? Answer: "Seeing then it the night at her house and was not on the field, did not fall the dew on them as on the other two where she recognized the man. "
Bittern and Hoopoe	1658	2075	German	'Where to feed your flocks best?' asked one an old cowherd. 'Here, sir, where the grass is neither too rich nor too poor, it does otherwise no good. ' 'Why not?' asked the Lord. 'Do you hear that from the meadow that melancholy cry?' replied the shepherd, "that is the bittern, which was once a shepherd, and the hoopoe it was. I want you the story erzählen.Der bittern tending his flocks on rich green meadows where flowers were in abundance, so his cows became wild and unmanageable. But the hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren mountains where the wind plays with the sand, and his cows were thin, and got his strength. When it was evening and drove the shepherds homeward, bittern could not get his match, they were arrogant and jumped him about it. He called 'colorful, herüm, (brindled cow, around), but in vain, they did not listen to his call. but Hoopoe could not get going, so faint and weak it had become his cattle. 'Up, up, up !, he screamed, but it did not help, they remained lying on the sand. How to do when one has no measure. Even today, when they guard no flock, screaming bittern 'colorful, herüm,' and the Hoopoe 'up, up, up!'
Little Red Riding Hood	251	333	German	Once there was a sweet little girl who everyone loved, who just looked at her, but most of all her grandmother, who did not know what to give the child. Once she gave her a little cap of red velvet, and because he stood so well, and she wanted to wear more nothing else, it was said only that Little Red Riding Hood. One day her mother said to him, "Come, Little Red Riding Hood, because you have a piece of cake and a bottle of wine, the grandmother bring out; she is ill and weak, and will it Mach refresh yourself, before it gets hot. and if you also come, go pretty modest and do not run off the road, otherwise you fall and break the bottle, and the grandmother has nothing. and when you come into her room, so do not forget good morning to say and do not look only at all corners around! "" I want to make it all right, "said Little Red Riding Hood to her mother, and gave her hand on it. but the grandmother lived out in the woods, a half hour from the village. Now as Little Red Riding Hood entered the wood, a wolf met her. Little Red Riding Hood, but did not know what that was a wicked animal, and not afraid of him. "Good day, Little Red Riding Hood!" he said. "Thank you, wolf!" - "Where are you going so early, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "To grandmother." - "What have you got in your apron?" - ". Cake and wine We baked yesterday, as poor sick grandmother is to do something bear with to make her stronger." - "Little Red Riding Hood, just where does your grandmother?" - "A good quarter hour from here in the forest, under the three large oak trees, as is their house, the nut hedges, which will be below you know," said Little Red Riding Hood. The wolf thought to himself: The young, tender thing that is a fat morsel will taste even better than the old. You have to start craftily, so as you grab both. Then he went for a while beside Little Red Riding Hood ago, he said, "Little Red Riding Hood, even see the beautiful flowers, are the round about, Why are you not look round I think you are not listening how the birds are singing so sweetly you go.? yes for you out than when you went to school, and is so funny booms in the forest. "Little Red Riding Hood opened his eyes, and looked as if it, like the sun rays through the trees back and punched her and everything was full of beautiful flowers, thought it: When I bring the grandmother a fresh bouquet that will please her; it is so early in the day that I'll be home on time, ran off the road into the woods looking for flowers. And if it had broken one, it felt further afield stands a more beautiful, and ran for it and got deeper and deeper into the forest. But the wolf ran straight to the house of the grandmother and knocked on the door. "Who is outside?" - "Little Red Riding Hood, bringing you some cake and wine, open up!" - "Just press the latch!" cried the grandmother, "I am too weak and can not get up." The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open and he went, without saying a word, just to the bed of the grandmother and swallowed them. Then he took her clothes, put her cap, lay down in her bed and pulled the curtains vor.Rotkäppchen but was running about picking flowers, and when so much had together that she could carry no more, she remembered her grandmother again, and it made her way to her. She was surprised that the door got up, and how it came into the room, it seemed so strange in front of that thought, Oh, my God, how fearful to me is Zumrut today, and I am usually so happy to Grandmother! It called out, "Good morning," but received no answer. Then we went to bed and pulled back the curtains. There lay her grandmother and the hood was placed over her face and looking very strange. "Oh, grandmother, what do you have for big ears!" - "The fact that I can better hear you!" - "Oh, grandmother, what have you for big eyes!" - "The fact that I can see you better!" - "Oh, grandmother, what have you for big hands!" - "The fact that I can better grab you!" - "But, grandmother, what did you a horribly big mouth" - "That I can eat you better!" No sooner had the wolf said this, he did a set out of bed and swallowed the poor Rotkäppchen.Wie the wolf had appeased his appetite, he climbed back into bed, fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just past the house and thought: How the old woman is snoring! You have yet to see if she wants anything. As he entered the room, and when he came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it. "Will I find you here, you old sinner," he said, "I've been looking for you a long time." Now he wanted to put his gun because he remembered the wolf might have devoured the grandmother and she might still be saved, not shoot, but took a pair of scissors and began to cut open the sleeping wolf's belly. As he had made two snips, he saw lights the red cap, and a few cuts, the girl jumped out and cried, "Oh, I was so frightened, as was so dark inside the wolf's body!" And then the old grandmother came out alive and could hardly breathe. But Red Riding Hood quickly fetched great stones with which they filled the wolf's body, and as he woke up, he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he immediately sank and were happily totfiel.Da all three. The hunter pulled the wolf's fur and went home with it, the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine that Little Red Cap had brought, and recovered; Little Red Riding Hood but thought: You do not want all your life alone again off the road into the forest run when thee prohibited the mother hat.Es is also said that once brought as Little Red Riding Hood of the old grandmother again Baked, another wolf approached it and the ways have to deduce. Little Red Cap took care and went straight continued his way, and told the grandmother that it had met the wolf, who wished him good day, but would so angry looked out of sight: "If it would not have been in the street, he would have eaten me up. " - "Come on," said the grandmother, "we want to close the door that he did not enter can." Soon afterwards the wolf knocked and called out, "Open up, grandmother, I am Little Red Riding Hood, I'll bring you some baked." But they were silent and did not open the door. Since stole the gray head around the house several, finally jumped onto the roof and wanted to wait until Little Red Cap went home at night, he wanted to steal after him and would carry it in the dark eat. But the grandmother saw what he had in mind. Now, standing in front of the house is a large stone trough, she said to the child: "Take the bucket, Little Red Riding Hood, yesterday I cooked sausages, as Carry the water in which they are cooked in the trough" Little Red Cap carried until the large, large trough was quite full. Then the smell of the sausages into the wolf's nose. He sniffed and looked down, stretching his neck so long that he could not hold it and began to slip; he slipped down from the roof, especially in the big trough in and drowned. Little Red Cap went happily home, and from now on no one did him more harm to anyone.
Rumpelstiltskin	530	500	German	There was once a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful daughter. Now it happened that he came to speak to the king, and to make himself appear important he said to him. "I have a daughter who can spin straw into gold" now "This is an art that pleases me well, if your daughter is as clever as you say, bring her tomorrow in my castle, as I will put to the test." When the girl: The king said to the miller was brought to him, he led her into a room that was quite full of straw, gave her a wheel and spindle, and said, "now set to work, and you if you do not spun that night through until tomorrow morning this straw into gold so you must die. " Then he closed the door himself, and left her there alone. Sat there now the poor miller's daughter and knew to do for her life: she understood nothing of how you could spin straw into gold, and her fear was always so great that she began to weep. Then all at once the door opened, and in came a little man, and said: "Good evening, mistress miller, why are you crying so much" "Oh," the girl replied, "I have to spin straw into gold and do not understand this . " Then the little man, "What will you give me if I spin it for you" - "My necklace," said the girl. The little man took the necklace, sat in front of the wheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr, three times, the reel was full. Then put it in another, and whirr, whirr, whirr, three times, was the second full; and so it went on until the morning, there was spun all the straw, and all the reels were full Gold.Bei sunrise was already the king and when he saw the gold he was astonished and delighted, but his heart was only greedy. He had the miller's daughter taken into another room full of straw, which was much larger, and commanded her to spin that also in one night if she valued her life. The girl knew not how to help and cried because opened again the door, and the little man appeared and said, "What will you give me if I spin the straw into gold" "The ring on my finger," answered the girl. The little man took the ring, again began to purr with the wheel, and by morning had spun all the straw into glittering gold. The king was pleased with the masses at the sight, but was still not gold enough, and he had the miller's daughter into an even larger room filled with straw, and said, "The you still have that night spin: but if you succeed, you shall you be my wife. " - "If it is a miller's daughter," he "is not a richer woman I find in the world." Thought When the girl was alone the manikin came again for the third time and said, "What will you give me if I spin the straw this time?" - "I have nothing left that I could give," answered the girl. "So I promise, if you should become queen, your first child." - "Who knows how still is, the" thought the miller's daughter and also knew in the emergency no other way; she promised the manikin what he wanted, and the male spin, until all the straw into gold. And in the morning the king came and found everything as he had wished, he took her in marriage, and the beautiful miller's daughter became a Königin.Über a year, she brought a beautiful child into the world and did not think more of the little man But suddenly he came into her room and said, "Now give me what you promised." The queen was frightened and offered the little man all the riches of the kingdom if he would leave her the child: but the little man said, "No, something alive is dearer to me than all the treasures of the world." Since the queen began to whine and cry that the manikin pitied her, "For three days I will take your time," he said, "if you mean by then know the name, and you shall keep your child." now the Queen remembered the night of all the names that she had ever heard, and sent a messenger over the country, who should inquire far and wide, that there might yet for names. When the next day came the male, she began with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar, and said all the names she knew, one after the other ago, but spoke with each the little man, "That is not my." The second day they left around the neighborhood asking how people would called there and told the little man the most unusual and bizarre name before "Does you might Shortribs or mutton or Laceleg?" But it always replied, "That is not my." On the third day the messenger came back again and said: "New names I can not only see, but as I came to a high mountain to the forest area, where the fox and the hare itself say good night, so I saw a little house, and before the house a fire was burning, and the fire jumped quite a ridiculous little man, hopping on one leg and shouted: "Today I bake, tomorrow I brew, the morning I get ! the queen's child Oh, how good is that no one knows that I hot Rumpelstiltskin "as you can imagine how the Queen was happy when she heard the name, and when soon afterwards the little man came in and asked," Now , Queen, as I hot "she asked only:"?.?.? Are you called Jack "-" No "-" Are you called Harry "-" No "-" does this mean you about Rumpelstiltskin "" That gave you the devil said it has told you the devil, "cried the little man, and joined with the right foot with rage so deep into the earth, that it b is inside pulled to the body, then it grabbed in his rage the left foot with both hands and tore himself in two.
Snow White and Rose Red	1541	426	German	A poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage, and in front of the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore white and the other red roses; and they had two children who were like the two rose-trees, and one was called Snow White and the other Rose Red. but they were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children have been in the world: Snow White was just quiet and gentle than Rose-Red. Rose Red jumped rather in the meadows and fields seeking flowers and catching butterflies; But Snow White sat at home with his mother, helping her in the house work, or read to her when there was nothing to do. The two children were so fond of each other that they always took each other's hands, they often went out together; and when Snow White said, "We do not want to leave us," said Rose Red answered, "As long as we live, not," and the mother added, ". What does that have one heck share with the other" They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no beasts did them any harm, but they came in confidence brought about: the bunny ate a cabbage leaf from their hands, the roe grazed by their side, the stag leapt quite funny over, and the birds were on the branches sit and sang whatever they knew. No mishap overtook them - if they had late in the forest and the night came on, they laid themselves side by side on the moss, and slept until morning came, and the mother knew this and had no distress on their. Once, when she had stayed in the wood and the dawn had roused them, they saw a beautiful child in a white, shiny dress sitting near their bed. It stood up and looked at her very friendly, but said nothing and went into the forest. And when they looked around, they had all slept next to a precipice, and would certainly fallen if they had gone a few steps in the dark. But the mother told them that would have been the angel, bewache.Schneeweisschen the good kids and Rose Red kept mother's little cottage so neat that it was a pleasure to look inside. In the summer Rose Red got the house and the mother made every morning before she woke up, a bunch of flowers to his bedside, it was from each tree a rose. In winter Snow White lit the fire and hung the kettle on the fire hook, and the kettle was of brass but glistened like gold, he was scrubbed so clean. In the evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said, "Go, Snow White, and push the bolt," and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took her spectacles and read from a large book, and the two girls listened to, sat and clamping; next to them lay a lamb upon the floor, and behind them on a perch sat a white dove with his head under the wing gesteckt.Eines evening when they ate together as confidential, someone knocked at the door when he wanted to be let in. The mother said, "Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it will be a wanderer who is seeking shelter." Rose-Red went and pushed the tie off and thought it would be a poor man, but it was not, it was a bear that stretched his broad, black head within the door. Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered, and Snow White hid behind her mother's bed. But the bear began to speak and said, "Fear not, I will do you no harm! I am half-frozen, and only a few will warm me with you." - "Poor bear," said the mother, "lie down by the fire, only take care that you do not burn your coat." Then she cried, "Snow White, Rose Red, come out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well." Since they both came up, and gradually also the lamb and dove approached and had no fear of him. The bear said, "Children, knock the snow a little out of my coat," and they brought the broom and swept the bear's hide clean; but he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably. Before long they were quite familiar and played tricks with their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands, put their little feet on his back and rolled him back and forth, or they took a hazel and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. The bear let himself's but good part, only when they made it too badly, he cried. "Let me live, you Kinder.Schneeweisschen, Rose Red, you hit the suitor dead" was bed and the others went to bed, said the mother to the bear, "you can because in God's name are by the hearth, you are protected from the cold and the bad weather." As soon as the day dawned, he left the two children out, and he trotted into the forest over the snow. Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid down at the stove and allowed the children to drive amuse themselves with him as much as they wanted; and they were so used to him that the door was never fastened, war.Als as arrived until their black approached the spring and outside everything was green, the bear said one morning to Snow White, "Now I must continue and should the not come back all summer. " - "Where are you, going, then dear bear?" asked Snow White. "I have in the forest and my treasures from the wicked dwarfs beware: in winter, when the ground is frozen hard, they need to stay below and can not work, but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed the earth, since break through it, and come out to pry and steal; what once gets into their hands, and in their caves, does not easily return to the light of day. " Snow White was very sad about the departure, and when she unbolted the door for him and the bear also pushed, he remained on the door hook hanging, and a piece of his skin ripped open, and there it was Snow White, as if seen gold shining through; but it was not certain of his cause. The bear hurried away and was soon behind the trees verschwunden.Nach some time, the mother sent her children into the forest to collect twigs. They found out a big tree which lay felled on the ground, and the tribe jumped between the grass a little up and down, but they could not distinguish what it was. As they approached, they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a yard long, snow-white beard. The end of the beard was caught in a column of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping up and down like a dog tied to a rope and did not know how he should help. He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried. "What are you standing there! Can you not come here and help me?" - "What are you, little man?" asked Rose Red. "You stupid, prying goose," said the dwarf, "the tree I myself want to split, to have a little wood for cooking; with thick logs burn equal to the bit of food that one of us takes the gobbles not as much as their coarse, greedy people. I had just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as desired, but the wretched wood was too smooth and jumped suddenly out, and the tree closed so quickly along that I my beautiful not white beard pull out more could; now it is tight, and I can not continue because the silly, sleek, milk-faced laugh Ugh, what did you nasty ".! The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard, he stuck too tightly. "I will run and fetch people," said Rose Red. "Senseless goose," snarled the dwarf, "who will fetch some, you are me already two too many;? Not you think of something better" - "Do not be impatient," said Snow White, "I want to create already advice," took her scissors from his pocket and cut off the end of the beard. As soon as the dwarf felt himself free, he grabbed a bag which lay between the roots of the tree and filled with gold, he raised up, grumbling to himself: "unplaned people, I cut a piece of my fine beard wage it! you the Guckuck! " Then he swung the bag upon his back and walked away without the children only once anzusehen.Einige time after that Snow White and Rose Red fishing a dish of fish. When they were near the brook they saw something like a large grasshopper zuhüpfte after the water as if it were going to leap. They ran to it and found the dwarf. "Where are you going?" said Rose Red, "you would not want the water?" - "Such a fool I am not," cried the dwarf, "do not you see that the accursed fish wants to pull me?" The little man had been sitting there fishing, and unluckily the wind had twisted his beard with the fishing line; just then a big fish bit, and the feeble creature lacked the forces that pull it out; the fish kept out the upper hand and pulled the dwarf to him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it did not help much, he had to follow the movements of the fish, and was in danger of being dragged into the water. The girls came just in time, held him fast and tried to free his beard from the line, but in vain, beard and line were confused with each other. There was nothing, bring out as the scissors and cut beard, wherein a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that he screamed at her, "Is that civil, you toad-stool, to disfigure one's face is not enough that you have truncated the beard below me, now you cut me the best part of it from:? I may not be seen from the mine. that definitely need to run it and lost the soles would have! " Then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without saying another word, he dragged it away and disappeared behind a Stein.Es came to pass that soon after the mother of the two girls after the city sent, thread, buy needles, laces and ribbons. The road led them across a heath, scattered on the powerful here and there pieces of rock were. When they saw a large bird hovering in the air, circling slowly above them, it sank deeper and finally not niederstiess far with a rock. A moment later they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf packed, and was going to carry him. The compassionate children kept equal to the male firmly and dragged for so long with the eagle around until he let go his prey. had as the dwarf recovered from the initial shock, he cried with a shrill voice: "Could you handle not have done it cunning have you at my brown coat it all torn and punctured, helpless clumsy creatures that you are!" Then he took a bag of precious stones, and slipped back under the rock into his hole. The girls were used to his ingratitude, continued on their way and did their business in the city. When they came back on the heath the way home they surprised the dwarf who had poured on a clean spot, his bag of precious stones and not think so late someone would come along. The evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and shone so magnificently in all colors that the children stood still and looked. "Why do you stand there and have gaping!" cried the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face became copper-red with rage. He wanted to continue with his bad words when came trotting towards a loud humming heard left and a black bear out of the woods. Startled jumped the dwarf, but he could not reach his lair, the bear was already close. So he called in anguish: "Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures; look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Give me life, what do you have little to me, lanky guy you feel me.? not between the teeth, because that grabs two wicked girls, these are delicate for you bites, fat as young quails devour in God's name. " The bear did not care about his words, but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his paw, and it stirred not more.The girls had run away, but the bear called after them: "Snow White and Rose Red, fear not, wait, I will go with you. " Then they knew his voice and stood still, and was when the bear with them, suddenly fell from the bear skin, and he stood there as a handsome man and was dressed all in gold. "I am a king's son," he said, "and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen my treasures, to run as a wild bear in the forest until I was freed by his death. Now he has his comeuppance received. "snow White and Rose Red was married with him and his brother, and they divided the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered together in his cave. The old mother lived for many years calm and happy in their children. but the two rose-trees took them, and they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful roses, white and red.
snow white	510	709	German	It was the middle of winter, and the snowflakes were falling like feathers from the sky. As a queen sat at a window that had a frame of black ebony, and sewed. And how they worked, gazing after the snow, she pricked her finger with the needle, and it fell three drops of blood in the snow. And because the Red in the white snow looked so beautiful, she thought to herself: If I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the wood of the frame! Soon after, she had a little daughter that was as white as snow, as red as blood and hair as black as ebony, and she was Snow White (Snow White) called. And when the child was born, the queen died. the king over a year took another wife. It was a beautiful woman, but she was proud and arrogant and did not like that at her beauty of someone should be exceeded. She had a wonderful mirror when she stepped in front of it, and look it, and said: "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all", "Queen, you are the fairest one of all so answered the mirror . " Since she was happy because she knew that the mirror spoke the truth. But Snow White grew and became more and more beautiful, and was than seven years old she was as beautiful as the day, and more beautiful than the queen herself as they once asked her mirror. "Mirror, mirror on the wall, Who is the fairest of them all? " It answered, "Queen, thou art fairest here, But Snow White is a thousand times more fair." Since the Queen was shocked, and turned yellow and green with envy. From then on, whenever she looked at Snow White, the heart returned to her in the abdomen around - so she hated the girl. And envy and pride grew like a weed in her heart ever higher, that she had day and night no longer alone. She called a huntsman, and said: "Take the child out into the woods, I do not see in front of me's You shall kill it and bring me her heart as a token.." The huntsman obeyed and took her away, and had drawn when he his knife, and Snow White was about to pierce innocent heart, she began to cry and said, "Oh, dear huntsman, let me run my life I want in the wild forest, and never! come home again. " And because it was so beautiful, the hunter had compassion and said, "Away, you poor child!" The wild animals will soon have devoured you, he thought, and yet it seemed to him that would be rolled from his heart a stone because he did not need to kill it. And just then came running by a young rookie, he stabbed it, and took out lung and liver and took them as a symbol of the queen. The cook she had in salt cook, and the wicked woman she ass, and thought she had eaten Snow White's lungs and liver. But now the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and so terrified that she looked at all the leaves on the trees and did not know how it should help. Since it began to run, and ran over sharp stones and through thorns, and the wild beasts ran past him, but they did nothing to him. She ran as long as her feet would carry her, wanted to soon be evening. Then she saw a little cottage and went into it to rest herself. Everything in the cottage was small, but as pretty and clean, that it is not to say. There stood a white spread little table with seven little plates, and each plate a little spoon, moreover, seven knives and Gäblelein and seven little mugs. On the wall stood seven little beds side by side, and covered with snow-white sheet over it. Snow White, because it was so hungry and thirsty, ate from each plate a little porridge and bread, and drank a drop of wine out of each mug; because it did not want to take away one everything. Afterwards, because it was so tired, it lay in a crib, but none fit; one was too long, another too short, until at last was the seventh right; and so she remained in, said a prayer and fell asleep. When it was quite dark, the men came from the little house, those were the seven dwarfs who hacked into the mountains for ore, digging. They lit their seven candles, and as it was now light within the cottage they saw that someone had been sitting there, for everything was not in order, as they had left it. The first said, "Who has been sitting on my chair? ' The second, "Who has been eating from my plate?" The third, "Who has been taking my little loaf?" The fourth, "Who has been eating my vegetables?" The fifth, "Who has been using my fork?" The sixth "Who has been cutting with my knife?" the seventh, "Who has made of my mug Drunk" Then saw the first round and saw that on his bed a little hollow, he said: "Who in my bed ? came "the others came up and each called" in my well someone has located "but the seventh when he looked at his bed saw little Snow White was asleep therein and he called the others, who came running came and shouted!. before astonishment, and brought their seven candles lit and Snow White. "Oh, my God! Oh, my God! "They cried," what a lovely child! "And had such great joy that they did not wake her, but let her sleep on in the bed. And the seventh dwarf slept with his companions, one hour with each ., as was the night around When it was morning, woke Snow White, and she saw the seven dwarfs, she was frightened but they were friendly and asked, "What is your name?" - "My name is Snow White," she answered. ". How did you come to our house? "said the dwarfs. Then she told them that his stepmother would have to have her killed, the hunter had spared her life, and how she had walked all day until it finally had found their dwelling The dwarfs said. "you want to take care of our house, cook, beds, wash, sew and knit, and keep everything neat and clean you can stay with us, and it is you want for anything. "-" Yeah, said Snow White, "from the heart gladly!" and stayed with them. It kept the house in order. In the morning they went to the mountains and looked for copper and gold, in the evenings they came back, and there had their food to be ready. Throughout the day the girl was alone; as it warned the good dwarfs, saying, "Beware of your stepmother, who will soon know that you are here; let no one in the queen but after she thought Snow White's lungs and liver have eaten, did not think otherwise, that she was again the first and fairest, she went to her glass and said, "mirror, mirror. on the wall, Who is the fairest of them all "And the glass answered," Queen, thou art fairest here, But Snow White a thousand times more beautiful than the BergenBei the seven ZwergenIst as your "As frightened her, for she knew. that the mirror spoke the truth, and realized that the huntsman had betrayed her and was Snow White is still alive and meditated there and thought again how she might kill her,. because as long as she was not the fairest of them all , you let the envy no peace. and when they finally something had come up, she painted her face and dressed herself like an old pedlar woman could have known. In this disguise she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked on the door and cried bargain "Beautiful goods! ! Bargain "Snow White looked out the window and shouted," Good day, dear woman! What have you to sell? "-". Good things, "she replied," laces of all colors, "and pulled out one that was braided from colorful silk The honest woman I may let, thought Snow White, she unbolted the door and bought the pretty lace. "child," said the old woman, "how you look! Come, let me lace you properly for once. "Snow White had no suspicion, but stood before her and let her lace her with the new lace. But the old woman laced so quickly and so tightly that Snow White respiratory passed and fell down there for dead. . "Now, have you been the most beautiful," she said, and hurried out Not long after, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home, but how they were terrified when they saw their dear Snow White lying on the ground, and it was moving and moving not as if it were dead. They lifted her into the air, and because they saw that it was laced too tightly, they cut the laces in half; as it began to breathe a little and he revived gradually returns. When the dwarfs, heard what had happened, they said, "The old pedlar woman was no other than the wicked queen heed and let no one in when we are not with you." But the wicked woman when she had reached the house, went to the mirror and asked, "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all" And it answered as before, "Queen, thou art of beauty rare, But Snow White a thousand times more beautiful than the BergenBei the seven ZwergenIst than you." When she heard that, all her blood rushed to the heart, so she was frightened, 'for she saw plainly that Snow White was alive again. "But now," she said, "I will think of something that shall judge dense underlying" and witchcraft, which she understood, she made a poisoned comb. Then she disguised herself and took shape of another old woman. So she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked on the door and called out, "Good wares to sell bargain!" Snow White looked out and said, "Just go on, I may let in no one!" - "The reputation you will be still allowed," said the old woman, pulled the poisonous comb out and held it in the air. It pleased the girl so well that it left tempted to open the door. When they had made a bargain the old woman said, "Now I will comb you properly for once." Poor Snow thought of nothing, the old woman let grant, but no sooner had she put the comb in her hair than the poison worked in it and the girl fell down senseless. "You paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "now it's happened to you," and walked away. but fortunately it was almost evening, when the seven dwarfs came home. When they saw as dead lying on the ground Snow White, they had the same stepmother suspected searched for and found the poisoned comb. And no sooner had they taken him, Snow-white came to him and told him what had happened. Then they warned once again to be on his guard and no one to open the door. The queen went home before the mirror and said: "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all" And it answered as before, "Queen, thou art of beauty rare, But Snow White a thousand times more beautiful than the BergenBei the seven ZwergenIst than you." When she heard as the mirror, she trembled and shook with anger. Snow White shall die, "she cried," even if it costs my life! "Then she went into a quite secret, lonely room, where no one ever came, and there she made a poisonous apple. Outwardly he looked beautiful, white with red cheeks that anyone who saw it felt like it, but whoever ate a piece of it had to die. finished as the apple, she painted her face and dressed herself up as a farmer's wife, and so she went over the . seven mountains to the seven dwarfs She knocked on Snow stuck his head out the window and said: "I can not let anyone, the seven dwarfs have forbidden me go!" - "I am willing," answered the woman, "my apples. I want rid of. . Since, n e i n e I will give you "-" No, "said Snow White," I dare not take anything "-" Are you afraid, "said the old woman," before poison you see, I will cut the apple in two pieces!?; eat the red side, white I want to eat "The apple was so cunningly made that the red cheek was poisoned. Snow White longed for the beautiful apple, and looked as if it that the farmer it ass, so it could no longer resist the hand reached out and took the poisoned half sooner but it had a bit of it in the mouth, it fell dead to the ground, since it regarded the queen with a dreadful look, and laughed aloud and said:.. "White as snow, red such as blood, black as ebony! This time the dwarfs can not awaken you again. "And when she went home and asked the mirror:" Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all "he finally answered," Queen, you are the fairest . as was her envious heart, as well as an envious heart can have. "the dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, Snow White found lying on the ground, and there was no breath more out of his mouth, and it was dead. they lifted her up investigated whether they could find anything poisonous, it constricted her, combed her hair, washed her with water and wine, but to no avail; the child was dead, and remained dead they put it on a stretcher and. sat all seven of them, and wept for it and wept for three days because they wanted to bury it, but it still looked as fresh as a living person, and still had her pretty red cheeks they said.. "we can not enter the dark ground, "and left one by into account coffin of glass made, so that you could see it from all sides, and they laid her and inscribed with golden letters his name on it and that it was a king's daughter. Then they put the coffin out upon the mountain, and one of them was always there and watching it. And the animals came too, and wept Snow White, first an owl, then a raven. and last a dove. Now Snow White lay a long, long time in the coffin and decayed not, but looked as if she were asleep, for she was as white as snow, as red blood and hair as black as ebony like. It happened that a king's son came into the forest and came to the dwarfs' house to spend the night there. He saw on the mountain the coffin, and beautiful Snow White in it and read what was written in golden letters. As he said to the dwarfs, "Let the coffin, I want you to give me what you have want it," But the dwarfs answered. "We do not give him all the money in the world" And he said, "So I give him, because I can not live without seeing Snow White, I will honor it and highly as my dearest." As he spoke, felt the good dwarfs sorry for him and gave him the coffin. The king's son now left him by his servants on their shoulders to carry away. It so happened that they stumbled over a bush, and from the shock the poisonous piece of apple which Snow White had bitten out of her throat. And not long before she opened her eyes, lifted the lid of the coffin into the air and straightened up and was alive again. "Oh God, where am I?" called it. The prince said joyfully, "You are with me" and told what had happened, saying, "I love you more than anything in the world, will come with me to my father's castle, you shall my wife." Since it Snow was good and went with him, and their wedding was held with great show and splendor. To the feast but also Snow White's wicked step-mother was invited. As she had arrayed herself in beautiful clothes she went to the mirror and said, replied, "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who's the fairest of them all?" The mirror, "Queen, thou art fairest here, But the young queen is a thousand times more beautiful than her. "Since joining the wicked woman a curse, and was so wretched, so utterly wretched that she knew not to let. They first wanted to not go to the wedding, but it left her no peace, they look had gone and the young queen. And when she went in she recognized Snow White, and rage and fear, she stood there and could not stir. But iron slippers had already put upon the fire and were brought in with tongs, and set before them. Since they had to step into the red-hot shoes and dance until she dropped down dead.
Six soldiers of the whole world	679	513A	German	There once was a man who understood all kinds of arts, he served in the war and had been brave and brave, but when the war ended, he was sent about three and a farthing to live on the road. "Wait," he said, "that leave I find I do not like I have the right people, just want me to publish yet the treasures of the whole country the king. So he went angrily into the forest and saw a stand in it, who had six trees plucked as if's corn stalks speech he to him. "Do you draw you be my servant and me" - "Yes, he replied," but first I want my mother bring home this little bundle of wood, "and took one of the trees and wrapped it around the other five, the wave picked up his shoulder and carried her away. Then he came back and went with his master, who said. "We two shall carry the whole world" And when they had gone for a while, they found a hunter who was on his knees, the gun had created and aimed. The master said to him, "Hunter, what are you going to shoot?" He answered, "Two miles from here a fly is sitting on the branch of Oak tree, which I will shoot out the left eye." - "Oh, go with me, 'said the man," if we are three together, we shall carry the whole world "The hunter was ready and went with him, and they came to seven windmills whose sails were quite. hastily around, and still went left and right no wind and moved not a leaf as the man said. "I do not know what the windmills drives, it stirs not a breath of air," and went with his servants continued, and when she had gone two miles they saw a man sitting on a tree, holding one nostril and blew another out of. "My! What are you doing up there, "the man asked, he replied." Two miles from here are seven windmills, you see that I blow that they run "-" Oh, go with me, "said the man," if. the four of us are together, we shall carry the whole world! "so the blower got down and went with him, and after a while they saw, standing on one leg and had the other unbuckled and laid beside him. Then said one the Lord. "you have thee so easily made to rest" - "I am a runner," he replied, "and I do not even too fast jump, I have one leg taken off when I walk with two legs, so it's quicker, flying as a bird. "-" Oh, go with me when we are five together, we shall carry the whole world "so he went, and it was not long before they met a man who wore a hat on, it had but entirely on one ear Then the Lord said to him. "Manierlich! Mannerly! Hang not your hat but on an ear, you look like a Hansnarr. "-" I can not do it, "said the other," because 'translated I my hat straight, so is a huge frost, and the birds of the sky freeze and fall dead to the ground. "-" Oh, go with me, "said the Lord," if we are six together, we shall well carry the whole world "Now went the six of in a city where the king! had proclaimed that whosoever wanted to run with his daughter in the bet and davontrüge victory that was to be her husband, but whoever would lose, would also have his head give Then the man came forward and said, "I want to but my servant for me. . run "the king replied." Then you must also whose life in pledge to put his so that and stick your head for victory "as the appointment and was moored, the man buckled the runner the other leg and said, to him, "Now be nimble, and help that we win" It was be true that those who bring a very remote wells on the first water, which should be the winner. Now the runners a pitcher and the princess got one too, and they started at the same time to run to; but was in a moment when the princess only a short distance away, the runner could have no more viewers to see, and it was no different than if the wind had whizzed In a short time he reached the fountain, filled his jug of water and turned back. Middle but on the way home he felt a weariness, as he sat down the pitcher, he lay down and fell asleep. He had but there was a horse's skull on the ground, made a pillow so that he would be hard and soon awake. Meanwhile was so good it just an ordinary man can, reached the King's daughter, who could also run well in the well and hurried back full of water with her pitcher; and when they are the runner and looked asleep, she was happy and said, "The enemy is given into my hands," emptied his pitcher and ran on. Now everything would have been lost if not stood for good luck the hunter with his sharp eyes on top of the castle and had seen everything. Then he said: "The princess will not prevail against us," loaded his gun, and shot so cleverly that he wegschoss the runner the horse's skull under his head without hurting him. Awoke the runner, jumped up and saw that his pitcher was empty and the king's daughter was already far ahead. But he did not lose heart, ran back to the well with his pitcher, again drew water and was home ten minutes before the princess home. "You see," he said, "now I have only the legs lifted, previously was it to name no running." But the king hurt it and his daughter even more, that they should suffer as a common, discharged soldier; they took counsel with each other as they would him and his companions go. Then the king said to her: "I have found a way, let you not be afraid, do not want to come home again." And said to them: "You shall now make merry together, eat and drink," and led her to a room that had a floor of iron, and the doors were of iron, and the windows were kept with iron rods. In the room was a table was set with delicious food, the king said to them, "Go in and let yourself be well!" And how they were in it, he let the door close and lock. Then he left the kitchen and ordered him to make a fire so long under the room until the iron would glowing. The cook did, and it was the sixes in the room, as they sat at the table, very warm and they thought that the coming of the food; but when the heat was getting bigger and they went out, the door and windows but were closed because they realized that the king had had evil in the sense and wanted to suffocate. "But let him not succeed," said the one with the hat, "should I want to leave a frost coming from the fire ashamed and hide." Then he put his cap straight, and immediately there came such a frost that all heat disappeared and the food on the dishes began to freeze. And when were a couple of hours around and the king thought they were perished in the heat, he left open the door and wanted to even look for them. But as the door opened, they were all six of there, and well, and said it was their love that they could out to warm themselves, because in the great cold in the room, the food frören firmly to the bowls. When the king came down with anger to the cook, scolded him and asked why he had not done what he had been commanded. But the cook replied, "It is enough embers there, just look yourself." And the king saw that a huge fire was burning under the iron room, and realized that he could not harm the sixes in this way. Now the king bethought himself how he would evil guests go, let the Master, and said, "Want to take gold and give up your right to my daughter, you shall have all you want." - "Oh yes, Lord King," he said, "give me so much, can carry as my servant, so I ask your daughter." And the king was pleased, and that continued, ". So I want to come in a fortnight and get it" Then he called all the tailors in the kingdom that had fourteen days to sit long and sew a sack. And when he was done, had the strong could pluck which trees take the sack on his shoulder and go with him to the king. Then the king said, "What is this huge guy wearing the big house bales canvas on the shoulder ?," alarmed and thought: What will the carry off for gold. As was said he brought bring a ton of gold bearing had sixteen, ten of the strongest men, but the Strong grabbed her with one hand, put them in the bag and said, "Why do not you bring equal more that yes barely covers the ground." Then the king abated and cause wear to all his treasure to the Strong slid into the bag, and the bag was not full of them in half. Since had seven thousand chariots with gold in the whole kingdom moved together, which pushed the Strong along with the biased oxen in his sack. "I do not's long-is," he said, "and take what comes, so that the bag is just perfect." Like anything stuck in it, but went into it a lot; he said: "I will now put an end to the thing, you probably binds once a sack when he is not yet full." Then he One took him on his back and walked away with his companions. When the king saw how the only man in the whole country wealth carried off, he was angry and let sit his cavalry, which should remove the sixes chase, and had orders of the strong the bag again. Two regiments soon overtook and shouted to them: "You are prisoners, puts the bag of gold down or you will be cut to pieces!" - "What do you say?" said the wind, "we would be prisoners? Rather you shall all around in the air dancing," held one nostril and blowing with the other two regiments as they drove apart and away into the blue sky over the mountains, a here, the other there. A sergeant cried for mercy, he had nine wounds and was a brave fellow who did not deserve the insult. Since the wind abated a little, so he came down again without injury, he said to him, "Now go home tell the king, and he should only send more riding, I wanted to blow them all up in the air." The king, when he heard the decision, saying, "Let's go guys who have something in itself." As brought six of home wealth, it divided among them, and lived happily ever after.
Simeliberg	1355	676	German	There were two brothers, one rich, the other poor. The rich man gave nothing to the poor, and he had to the grain trade puny feed; because he was doing so poorly many times that he had no bread for his wife and children. Once when he was wheeling a barrow through the forest, he saw aside a large, barren mountain, and because he had never seen before, he stood still and looked at him with amazement. As he stood, he saw twelve wild, big men coming because he believed they were robbers he pushed his barrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree and waited to see what happened there würde.Die but twelve men went to the mountain and shouting "Mount Semsi, Mountain Semsi, do you in. " And immediately the barren mountain opened in the middle of one another, and the twelve went into it, and how they were inside, he concluded to himself. But after a little while he teamed up again, and the men came forth carrying heavy sacks on their backs, and they were all back in the daylight they said, "Mount Semsi, Mountain Semsi, do you too." Then the mountain closed together, and was seen no more input on it, and the twelve went fort.Als it to him now quite out of sight were the poor man got down from the tree and was curious what would have hidden in the mountain Secret. So he went up to it and said, "Mount Semsi, Mountain Semsi, do yourself," and the mountain opened to him also. As he stepped inside, and the whole mountain was a cavern full of silver and gold, and behind lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels, heaped up like corn. The poor man did not know what to do and if he could take some of the treasures; last he filled his pockets with gold, pearls and precious stones but let it lie. When he came out again he also said: "Mount Semsi, Mountain Semsi, do you too," since joined took the mountain, and he was wheeling a barrow to Haus.Nun he did not have to worry and could with his gold for wife and child buy bread and wine to live happily and honestly, gave to the poor, and did good to every. But when the money was over, he went to his brother, borrowed a bushel, and brought himself some more; but he did of the great treasures of nothing. How he wanted to get something for the third time, he borrowed his brother once the Scheffel.Der rich but was long been envious of his wealth and the beautiful living which he had set up, and could not understand from whence the riches came, and what his brother in the bushel would begin. He thought a trick, and covered the ground with pitch, and when he got back the measure, a piece of gold was stuck in it. He at once went to his brother and asked him, "What have you measured by the bushel?" "Corn and barley," said the other. Then he showed him the piece of gold, and threatened that if he did not tell the truth, he would accuse him before the court. He then told him everything as it had happened. The rich let the same car a tense, drove out, wanted to use the opportunity to bring better and quite different treasures. When he came to the mountain he cried: "Mount Semsi, Mountain Semsi, do you in." The mountain opened, and he went inside. There lay the treasures all before him, and he knew a long time, which to clutch at first, he finally invited gems as much as he wear konnte.Er his burden wished to carry, but as his heart and soul were entirely full of the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain, and cried. "mountain Simeli, mountain Simeli, do yourself," But that was not the right name, and the mountain never stirred, but remained shut. Since he was terrified, but the longer he thought, the more confused his thoughts, and helped him all the treasures nothing mehr.Am evening the mountain opened, and the twelve robbers came in, and when they saw him they laughed and shouting "bird, we have you at last, do you think we had never noticed that you came in twice, but we could not catch you, this third time thou shalt not back out." Then he shouted, "It was not me, my brother's it," but let him beg for his life and say what he would, they cut his head off.
Sun, Moon, and Talia	3365	410	German	There was a gentleman who had come together of the kingdom in the birth of a daughter all the wise men and soothsayers, that they might prophesy him her life skill. After several discussions, they said from now that it would suffer by a flat fiber great danger; why her father to prevent to any accident, a strict requirement enacted that neither flax nor hemp would ever brought to his palace or anything similar. But when Thalia grew up and one day standing at the window, she saw an old woman pass by the spinning, and as she had never received Kunkel or spindle to face, she also found at the Hinundherdrehen big favor, she was seized by such great curiosity that they let the old woman come up and the distaff taking in hand, began to turn the thread; Unfortunately, however, she pricked her doing a hemp fiber under the nail of a finger and immediately fell dead to the ground. When the old woman saw this, she hurried down the stairs, the poor father but, taught by accident, paid only with whole barrels tears this cup vermouth, then let the dead daughter in the summer palace, where he just was, on a velvet chair under put a canopy of brocade, after which he locked all the doors and the place that was the cause of such misfortune, left to completely and forever his memory from memory to bannen.Nun but there was a day that a royal hunting went and a falcon, which escaped him of his fist, flew into a window of that lock, so that the king, as the bird did not stop the decoy, was knocking at the door, because he believed that the building would inhabited. After a long and fruitless knocking the king was fetch a winery ladder to even would spray and to see how it looked within, and after he had walked through it all, he was all to find beside himself with amazement not a living soul in it. At last he came into the room where the enchanted princess was, and called her because he thought she was asleep; but as they did not awaken despite his crying and shaking, but he by her beauty through and through glowed, was he. in his arms on a camp and picked there the fruits of love Then he left her lying on the bed and returned to his kingdom, where he thought no more long time of this incident. Thalia gave birth but after nine months of a pair of twins, a boy and a girl who resembled a twofold Jewelery and were greeted by two fairies who appeared in that palace, put to the breast of the mother and otherwise cared for most carefully. And when they wanted to suck once again, and did not find the nipples, they took a finger and sucked as long at it until the fiber had pulled out what Thalia seemed to come out of a deep sleep, the little angels that they are next saw enough chest and loving won as their own lives, but without knowing what had happened to her, she namely perceived that two infants she alone was in the palace and looked We brought by unseen hands food and drink. But finally it happened that the king himself Thalia remembering, came to the palace under the pretext to go hunting with her; when he wakes up and also two little angels of beauty was with her, he felt about the greatest joy. After telling Thalia, who he was and what happened between them, they made a very close friendship alliance and stayed a few days together; whereupon the king with the promise to return and pick her up from her adopted and went back to his kingdom. There, however, he thought at any time of Thalia and his children so that he might eat or drink, he at the same time also Thalia and the sun and moon (had it namely called his children) led and in his mouth when he lay down to rest, the names of all three cried. The king's wife, however, who had scooped up by its long absence some suspicion that the name "Thalia, Sun, Moon," was always boiling hot at the constant Listen. Therefore once she took her private secretary aside and said to him, "Listen, friend, you find yourself now on the wing, between the block and Beil, between rope and ladder. For if you tell me who is the mistress of my husband, I will make you a rich man; if you but this verheimlichst me, it's happened to you. "The secretary, on the one hand driven by fear, on the other hand spurred by self-interest, which is the blinkers on the eyes of honor, the blindfold of justice, the cataract of loyalty, gave Queen plain truth. so they sent him on behalf of the king of Thalia and let her tell the king wanted to see the children; Thalia what she sent him with great joy, that Medea heart but the chef ordered to kill them and to turn them into soups and stews, which they wanted to give to eat the poor king. But the cook, who had a soft heart, was when he saw the two little angels, seized with pity, and as he handed it to his wife so that she should hide, he prepared instead of her two kids in a hundred ways to and sent she the Queen, who received the meals with great joy. When the king came and began to eat with a lot of well-being, where he once said of the other, "This tastes so wonderfully in my soul! ! It tastes so delicious, as I live, "his wife always said: ,, Eat, because you eat from your" The king had this talk two or three times unnoticed;. However, when he saw that they would not stop, he exclaimed at last: ,, I know that I may eat what is mine; for thou hast brought me nothing in the house! "To which he jumped up angrily and went to a not distant country house to lassen.Inzwischen there fly his anger was the queen, whose anger was not satisfied by what they have done , the secretary turn on, Thalia, under the pretext that the King she expected to fetch. This came soon rediscover with joy and desire, the light of her eyes, not realizing that she was expecting instead fire. Therefore, when she appeared before the Queen, they said to her with a Nero visions and poisonous as a viper, "Welcome, welcome, you precious woman! So you the massacre, the weeds that my husband are withdrawing from me? So you're the infamous bitch that I caused so many sleepless nights? Let only be good! Now you have come to purgatory, where you shall pay for what you did to me. "When Thalia heard this speech, she began to apologize, saying that she committed no crime, and the king, while in sleep lying there, possession was taken from their land; But the Queen, who wanted to hear no excuses, let the court of the palace even light a big fire and ordered to throw in Thalia. And when they saw how bad it will stand with her, she fell to the Queen on her knees and begged her to her until her clothes have filed at least as much delay to allow. The queen, not out of sympathy for the unfortunate as to acquire so much embroidered with pearls and gold vestments, therefore, said, "All right, take off your clothes," to which Thalia started to undress and every piece they took off, a loud cry uttered. When they give also shut grazed after passing the over throw, apparel and bodice petticoat, where they let out the last cry, and you already gone dragged to prepare from her body ash for the lye to Charon's pants, the king hurried cause and wanted to know at the sight of this spectacle, what was going on; then he also asked about his children, and he learned that his wife, to take revenge for his infidelity, she had to be killed, he exclaimed: "I myself so was the wolf my sheep? Woe is me, why did not recognize my veins that they were the source of her blood? O thou shameful Barbarin, what a cruelty you have committed there? But wait, it will not you go to your punishment should certainly not be very gentle. "So saying, he ordered that they be thrown into the lighted for Thalia fire, with her at the same time the secretary that the boy in this misfortune game and the Anzettler this fabric was of malice. When he wanted to but do same with the chef because he believed that he had chopped up the children threw these at his feet and exclaimed, "Surely, Lord King, would require none at other sinecure for the service I shown you, as if I were thrown into a Kalkofenglut, no other cost replacement if you drilled me a thorn in the butt, no other amusement than to cook me soft in the fire and fry than to let, no other advantage than that the with a queen would mixed ashes of a cook; . But this would happen but no particular reward that I you have your children in spite of that pitiless beast that wanted to kill them, saved to thee thy reproduce itself, "When the king heard these words a part, he stopped as if petrified; because he thought he was dreaming and could not believe what his ears heard; but finally he turned to the cook and said: "If you really have saved my children, so be sure that you do not continue to turn spits, but in the kitchen of my heart my will rotate shalt as you please, as I you so will reward that nothing should be lacking to your happiness. "While the king said this, the woman brought the cook who saw how necessary it was, the sun and moon to the king, who began at once, sometimes with his wife, sometimes with his children to play Kußmühle, the cook but rich rewarded and made him his chamberlain. He then married Thalia, which takes the lead, her husband and their children live a long and happy life, after she realized: Who the sky probably will, he is fortunate in his sleep.
Spindle, the shuttle and needle	1790	585	German	There was once a girl whose father and mother died, when it was still a small child. At the end of the village lived his godmother supported herself by spinning, weaving and sewing in a house all alone. The old woman took the forlorn child to him, held it to to work and educated her in all piety. When the maiden fifteen, she became ill, called the child to her bed and said, "Dear daughter, I feel my end approaching, I leave you the house wherein you are protected from wind and weather, and my spindle, shuttle, and needle, so that you can earn your bread. " Then she laid her hands on his head, blessed it and said, "Just keep God in your heart, then you go now well!" Then she closed her eyes, and was buried as they to the earth, the girl went weeping bitterly behind the coffin and paid her last respects. The girl now lived in a small house all alone, was busy, spun, wove, and everything it did, the blessing rested the good old man. It was as if the flax multiplied in the chamber itself; and whenever she wove a piece of cloth or carpet, or sewed a shirt, then equal to a buyer who paid it plenty of thought, they felt that no distress and others something to tell konnte.Um this time drew the king's son in land around and a bride wanted to look for. A poor he should not choose a rich and he did not. And he said, "She shall be my wife, who is also the poorest and the richest." When he came to the village where the girl lived, he asked, as he did everywhere who would be in the place the richest and poorest. They called him the richest first; the poorest, they said, was the girl who all lived in the small house at the end. The kingdom was sitting on the doorstep in full flush, and when the prince approached her, she got up, went to meet him and bowed before him. He looked at her, said nothing, and rode on. When he came to the house of the poor, the girl was not at the door, but sat in his little room. He stopped his horse and looked through the window, through which the bright sun was shining, the girl at the spinning wheel and sit busily spinning. She looked up, and saw it as that the prince was looking, was it red all over, his eyes cast down and spun on; whether the yarn was matter this time, I do not know, but it spun so long, had ridden away again to the king's son. Then it went to the window, opened it and said, "It is so hot in the room"; but it looked after him as long as it still recognize the white feathers in his hat konnte.Das girls sat back in his room to work and spun on. As a saying he came to mind, the old woman had often repeated when it was sitting at work, and she sang in front of himself: "spindle, spindle, you go out, bring a suitor to my house!" What happened ? The spindle sprang instantly out of hand and out the door; and stood there in amazement as her and looked after, it saw them funny danced into the field and Duke a shining golden thread behind it. Before long they had disappeared from his eyes. The girl, as it had no spindle, the shuttle took in hand, sat down at the loom and began to weben.Die spindle but always danced on, and just as the thread came to an end, she reached the king's son. "What I see," he cried, "the spindle certainly wants to show me the way?" turned his horse around and rode back with the golden thread. The girl but sat singing at her work, "Shuttle, my shuttle, weave well, the free guide me in!" And immediately jumped her, the boat from his hand and jumped out the door. Before the threshold, but it began to weave a carpet, more beautiful than they had ever seen one. On both sides blossomed roses and lilies, and in the middle against a golden background rose green tendrils up, which bounded hares and rabbits; Deer stretched their heads in between; in the branches sat colorful birds; lacked nothing but that they would have sung. The shuttle jumped back and forth, and it seemed to grow everything from selber.Weil the shuttle had run away, the girl had sat down to sew. She held the needle in her hand and sang: "needle, needle, pointed and fine, make the house a free rein!" There you jumped the needle out of his fingers and flew into the room back and forth as fast as lightning. It was no different than if invisible spirits were working; straightway table and benches covered with green cloth, the chairs with velvet, and the windows were hanging silk curtains down. Hardly had the needle done the last trick, the maiden saw through the window the white feathers of the hat of the prince, whom the spindle had fetched the golden thread. He dismounted, strode in to the house over the carpet, and when he entered the room, the girl was standing there in his shabby dress, but it was glowing in it like a rose bush. "You are the poorest and also the richest," he said to her, "Come with me, you shall be my bride!" She was silent, but she held out her hand. And he gave her a kiss, led them out, she picked up his horse and brought her to the royal castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great joy. Spindle, shuttle, and needle were preserved in the treasury and held in great honor.
The Straw, the Coal, and the Bean	176	295	German	In a village dwelt a poor old woman who had brought together a dish beans and wanted to cook them. So she opened her hearth fire deal, and make it burn faster she lit it with a handful of straw. When she was emptying the beans into the pot, dropped without her observing it, and came to rest on the ground beside a straw. Soon afterwards a burning coal from the fire to the two jumped down. Then the straw began and said, "Dear friends, where do you come from?" The coal replied, "I'm Sprung by good fortune, the fire, and I had not escaped by sheer force, my death would have been certain: I should have been burnt to ashes." The bean said, "I'm still escaped with a whole skin, but would have brought me the old woman in the pot, I would have been cooked without mercy to mush like my comrades." - "Would it me a better fate been granted?" said the straw. "All my brothers have let the old in fire and smoke rise, She grabbed sixty at once and put to death. Fortunately, I slipped through her fingers." - "What should we do now?" said the coal. - "I mean," answered the bean, "because we are so fortunately escaped death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest should overtake us here a new misfortune, jointly emigrate and move to a foreign country." the proposal pleased the other two, and they set out together on the road. But soon they came to a small stream, and there is no bridge nor a walkway there, they did not know how they would get across it. The straw hit on a good idea, and said: "I will lay myself across, so as you can go over on a bridge on me." The straw therefore stretched from one to another bank, and the coal was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on the newly built bridge. But when she had reached the middle and heard rushing beneath the water, she was, after fear: She stopped and ventured no farther. But the straw caught fire, broke into two pieces and fell into the stream: The coal slipped after her, hissed when she got into the water, and gave up the ghost. The bean, who had prudently stayed behind on the shore had to laugh at the story, and could not stop laughing so powerful that they shattered. Now it was also to make it happen if that was not good fortune, a tailor on the tramp, had been resting at the creek. Because he had a compassionate heart, so he took out a needle and thread and sewed them together. The bean thanked him most prettily, but because he had used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.
Wishing-table, cash cow and stick out of the bag	345	563	German	Before time was a tailor who had three sons, and only one goat. But the goat, because they are all fed them with her milk, had to have good food and be taken every day to pasture. The sons did the same in turn. Once the eldest took her to the churchyard, where the finest herbs were, she let devour and jumping around. At night when it was time to go home he asked, "Goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered, "I'm so tired I do not like sheet meh meh!" "Come home," said the boy, she took on Strickchen, led her into the stable and tied her up. "Well," said the old tailor, "has the goat had food as she ought?" - "Oh," replied the son, "has eaten so much, it not a leaf." But the father wished to satisfy himself, and went down to the stable, stroked the dear animal and asked, "Goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered, "What should I be satisfied I just jumped over GräbeleinUnd found no leaves, meh meh?!" "What I need to hear!" cried the tailor ran upstairs and said to the boy: "Oh, you liar, telling the goat had had enough, and hast let her hunger!" And in his anger he took the yard from the wall, and drove him with blows hinaus.Am next day it was the turn of the second son, who was looking at the garden hedge a place, where nothing but good herbs grew, and the goat cleared them all off .Abends when he wanted to go home, he asked, "goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered, "I'm so tired I do not like sheet meh meh!" "Come home," said the youth, and led her home and tied her up in the stable. "Well," said the old tailor, "has the goat had food as she ought?" - "Oh," replied the son, who is so sick of it not a leaf "The tailor would not rely on it, went down to the stable and said," Goat, are you satisfied? "The goat answered.? "What should I be satisfied? I just jumped over GräbeleinUnd found no leaves, meh! meh! "" The godless wretch! "cried the tailor," to let such a good animal hunger, "Lief up, and fell with the yard youth out of doors hinaus.Die series now come to the third son, who wanted to do a good job ., sought out some bushes with the finest leaves, and let the goat because eating evening when he came home wanted, he asked, "goat, have you had enough?" said the goat, "I'm so tired I do not like sheet meh ! ! Meh "" Come home, "the boy said, led her into the stable, and tied firmly" Well, "said the old tailor," has the goat food as she ought? "-." Oh, "replied the son , "has eaten so much, it not a leaf." the tailor did not trust, but went down and asked, "goat, have you had enough?" the wicked beast answered, "What should I be satisfied I just jumped over GräbeleinUnd found no, meh! meh! "" Oh, the brood of liars! "cried the tailor," each as wicked and forgetful of his duty as the other! You shall not me longer to fools! "And with anger quite beside himself, he ran upstairs and tanned the poor boy with the yard back so powerful that he was the house hinaussprang.Der old tailor now alone with his goat. The next morning he went down into the stable, caressed the goat and said, "Come, my dear little animal, I will take thee to feed myself." he took her by the rope and conducted her to green hedges, and amongst milfoil, and whatever else goats like . eat "There thou mayest for once to your heart's content," he said to her and let her browse till evening as he asked. "goat, have you had enough?" she replied, "I'm so tired I do not mince , meh! !. Meh "" Come home, "said the tailor, and led into the stable and tied her up as he walked away, he turned around again and said," Well, art thou satisfied for once? "But the goat did it does not and called him better: "How should I be satisfied I just jumped over GräbeleinUnd found no leaves, meh! meh! "When the tailor heard that, he was shocked, and saw clearly that he had violated his three sons without cause." Wait, "he said," You ungrateful creature, is fortzujagen you still too little, I will mark thee that you do not let you see allowed to amongst honest tailors. "In great haste he ran upstairs, fetched his razor, lathered the goat's head, and shaved her as clean as the palm of his hand. and as the yard would have been too good, got it the whip and gave her such cuts that they are in huge leaps davonlief.Der Schneider when he so all alone sat in his house he fell into great sadness and would have liked again, but no one knew where they had gotten to his sons. the eldest had gone to a carpenter apprentice, he learned diligently and tirelessly, and worked as his time around, he should wander, the master gave him a small table that had no special reputation and ordinary m wood was; but it had a good feature. If you put down there and said, "Little table, you!" so the good little table was at one time with a clean handkerchief covered and there was a plate and knife and fork next to it and dishes with boiled meats and roasted meats, had so much space, and a large glass of red wine shone that made the heart. The young journeyman thought: So that you have enough for all your life, put good things in the world around and never troubled himself at all whether an inn and if something or had to find it good or bad not. If he liked it, he did not enter an, but in the field, in the forest, in a meadow, where he felt like he took his little table off his back, it introduced himself and said, "Cover yourself!" then everything appeared that his heart desired. Finally it came to his mind, he wanted to return to his father, his anger would have subsided, and "deck table you" with whom he would willingly receive him. It came to pass that he came one evening on the way home to an inn, which was filled with guests. They welcomed him and invited him to sit with them and eat with them, otherwise he would have difficulty in getting anything. "No," answered the joiner, "the few bites will I not take from the mouth, dear you shall be my guests." They laughed, and thought he was jesting with them. But he placed his wooden table in the middle of the room and said: "Little table, you!" Instantly it was covered with food, as well as the host could never have procured it, and the smell of which guests lovely nose rose. "Fall to, dear friends!" said the joiner, and the guests when they saw how it was meant to be did not let to be asked twice, but drew near, pulled out their knives and attacked it valiantly. And what surprised most when a dish became empty, then turned right from even a full into place. The innkeeper stood in a corner and watched the affair; He did not know what to say, but thought: Such a cook you could in your business probably need. The joiner and his comrades made merry until late at night, she finally went to sleep, and the young apprentice also went to bed and set his magic on the wall. The hosts but his thoughts have not revealed any rest, it occurred to him that in his lumber little old table, which looked just like he fetched very gently, and exchanged it for the wishing. The next morning the joiner paid for his bed, took up his table, never thinking that he had a false, and went his way. At midday he reached his father, who received him with great joy. "Well, my dear son, what have you learned?" he said to him. "Father, I have become a joiner." - "A good trade," replied the old man, "but what have you brought back from your travels?" - "Father, the best thing I brought with me is this little table." The tailor inspected it on all sides and said, "By this you made no masterpiece, this is a bad old table." - "But it is a 'wishing-table,'" answered the son, "when I place it and tell him that it should coincide so are the most beautiful dishes on it and a wine also, which gladdens the heart Just invite. all relatives and friends that you want to refresh once and marrow, for the table will give them all they. " When the company was assembled, he put his table in the middle of the room and said: "Little table, you!" But the little table did not move and remained as empty as any other table which does not understand the language. Then the poor apprentice noticed that the table had been changed, and was ashamed that he stood like a liar. but the relatives laughed at him and had ungetrunken and uneaten home walking again. The father brought out his patches again, and on tailoring, but the son went to a master in the second son work.The had come to a miller and went with him into teaching. When he had around his years, the master said, "Because you have so well kept you, I give thee an ass of a peculiar kind, which neither draws a cart nor carries a sack." - "Why is he put, then?" asked the young apprentice. "He spits gold" replied the miller, "if you put him on a cloth and sayest Bricklebrit so you spewing from the good animal gold pieces, back and forth." - "That's a beautiful thing," said the apprentice, and thanked the master, and went into the world. If he needed gold, he needed only to his ass "Bricklebrit" to say it rained gold pieces, and he had no more trouble than they pick up from the earth. Where he went, he was the best is good enough, and the more expensive the better, for he had always a full purse. When he for a time had a look around the world, he thought: You have to go to your father when you come with the gold-ass he will forget his anger, and receive you well. It came to pass that he came to the same inn in which his brother's table had been exchanged. He led his ass by the hand, and the host wanted to take him the animal and tie, but the young apprentice said: "Do not trouble my, gray mold I lead even in the stable, and tie him up myself, because I need to know where he stands. " The landlord came to the whimsical, and he said, one who would get his ass himself, did not have much to spend; but reached when the stranger into his pocket and brought out two gold pieces and said he was to provide something good for him, so he made big eyes, ran and sought out the best he could find. After dinner the guest asked what he was guilty, the host would not double the reckoning, and said a few pieces of gold he would have set. He felt in his pocket, but his gold was just at the end. "Wait a moment, sir host," he said, "I will go and fetch some gold!" but took the tablecloth. The landlord did not know what that was called, being curious, stole after him, and as the guest bolted the stable door, he peeped through a knothole. The stranger spread under the animal from the cloth, called "Bricklebrit" and instantly caught the animal on gold spewing from behind and from the front, it rained down money on the ground. "Oh, the thousands!" said the host, "ducats are quickly coined there! A purse is not bad!" The guest paid his bill and went to sleep, but the host sneaked into the night down into the stable, led away the master of the mint, and tied up another ass in his place. The following morning at dawn drew the journeyman with his ass, and thought he had his gold-ass. At noon he reached his father, who rejoiced when he saw him again, and gladly took him. "What happened to you, my son?" the old man asked. "A miller, dear father," he replied. "What have you brought back from your travels?" - "Nothing else but an ass." - "Donkey's enough here," said the father, "there would me a good goat have preferred." - "Yes," replied the son, "but it is no common ass, but a cash cow; when I say Bricklebrit !, so you spewing out the good animal for a whole cloth of gold pieces Let Just summon all our relatives, I will make them. rich people. " - "I'm glad of that," said the tailor, "then I do not need to torture myself with the needle on," and ran out himself and called the relations. Once they were together, she was called to make the miller place, spread out his cloth, and brought the ass into the room. "Now watch!" he said, and shouted, "Bricklebrit" but there were no pieces of gold, which fell and it became clear that the animal knew nothing of the art, because it does not bring any donkey's ready. Then the poor miller pulled a long face, saw that he was mocked, and asked the relatives for forgiveness, who went home as poor as they had come. There was nothing left, the old man had to reach back to the needle and the boy verdingen.Der a miller third brother had gone to a turner into teaching, and because it is a skilled trade, he had the longest to learn. His brothers, however, told him in a letter how badly things had gone them and how they could have put more on the last night of their beautiful wishing things the host. When the turner had now finished learning and should walk, so he gave his master because he was so well kept up, a sack and said, "There is a cudgel in it." - "The bag I can put on, and he can make me well, but why should the cudgel in it It only makes it heavy?". - "I want to tell you," replied the master. "Did you anyone any harm done, then say only:> stick out of the bag, 'then you the stick will pop out to the people and punched them so funny on the back around to eight days does not rain and move can, and likely he will not let off till you say:> stick in the bag < "the apprentice thanked him, hung up the sac around, and when someone came too close to him and wanted to the body, he said: "stick out of the bag!" Immediately the stick jumped out and knocked one after another skirt or jacket on their backs and did not wait until until he had taken it off; and was done so quickly that, is it the series anyway one knew already about him was. The young turner reached in the evening in the inn where his brothers had been cheated. He put his knapsack in front of him on the table and began to relate what he had seen anything strange in the world. "Yes," he said, "people may easily find a wishing-table, a cash cow, and the like, all good things that I do not despise, but that is nothing in comparison with the treasure that I have acquired and with me there in my sack there. " The landlord pricked up his ears: What in the world can that be? he thought the sack must be filled with nothing but jewels; I ought to get cheap also have, for all good things come in threes. it was bed, the guest stretched on the bench and put his bag as a pillow under. The landlord, as he said, the guest lying in a sound sleep, he went to him and pushed and pulled quite gently and carefully at the sack to see if he could possibly draw it away and lay another. The turner had already waited a long time; as now the host was about to do a hearty tug, he cried, "stick out of the bag!" Soon drove the Knüppelchen out the host on the body and rubbed his seams that it had a kind. The host cried for mercy, but the louder he cried, the harder the cudgel beat the time on his back, until he finally exhausted to the ground fell. Then the turner said, "If you deck the table and the gold-donkey dost not give back, the dance should begin afresh!" - "Oh no," cried the host, quite humbly, I will gladly produce everything out again, only make the accursed kobold let back into the sack creep "Then said the apprentice," I will let mercy take the right, but beware of damage. "Then he called" stick in the bag! "and left him came the next morning with the Tichchen deck and the gold-ass home to his father. the tailor rejoiced when he saw him ruhen.Der Drechsler, and also asked him . what it had learned in foreign "Dear father," he replied, "I have become a turner." - "a skilled trade," said the father, "what have you brought back from travels?" - "a precious piece, dear father, "answered the son," a cudgel in the sack. "-" What, "cried the father," a cudgel! It's worth the effort! Which you can watch from every tree cut off. "-" But not one like this, dear father. I say, 'stick out of the bag' the cudgel springs out and leads the one who means ill with me a weary dance, and never lets up more, until he lies on the ground and prays for good weather!. You see with this stick I have the wishing table and then brought in the gold-ass which the thievish innkeeper took away from my brothers. Now she leads both call and invite all our relatives, I will feed them and water them and they want to fill their pockets with gold. "The old tailor would not quite believe, but nevertheless got the relatives together. Then the turner spread a cloth in the room and led the cash cow in and said to his brother: "Now, dear brother, speak to him," the miller said, "Bricklebrit" and instantly the gold pieces fell down on the cloth, as would a downpour, and the donkey . stopped not more than until all had so much that they could no longer wear (I see thee on, you would also like to have been there!) Then the turner brought the little table and said, "Dear brother, speak to it "and scarcely had the carpenter" little table, "said it was spread and amply covered with the most exquisite dishes. and it was a meal held, as the good tailor had never yet known in his house, and all the relativesstayed together until late at night, and were all merry and glad. The tailor locked away needle and thread, Elle and iron in a closet and lived with his three sons in joy and Herrlichkeit.Wo but become of the goat who was to blame, that the tailor driving out his three sons? I want to tell you. She was ashamed that she had a bald head, ran to a fox's hole and crept into it. When the fox came home, he sparkled a few large eyes out against the darkness that he was frightened and ran back. The bear met him, and as the fox looked quite disturbed, he said, "What is it, Brother Fox, why dost thou look like?" - "Ah," answered Redskin, "a fierce beast is in my cave and stared at me with fiery eyes." - "We will soon drive him," said the bear, went to the cave and watched; But when he saw the fiery eyes, it also seized with fear, he wanted nothing to do with the fierce animals and took to his heels. The bee met him, and she realized that it probably did not feel it in his skin, she said: "Bear, you're indeed a formidable peevish face, where is your merriment remained" - "You can talk," said the bear, "there sits a furious beast with staring eyes in the house of the Red, and we can not figure out hunting." The bee said, "You pity you, bear, I am a poor, weak creature that you do not see Staring in the way, but I still believe that I can help you." She flew into the fox den, goat sat on the smooth, shaven head and stabbed her so violently that she jumped, "meh! Meh!" screamed and how great was running in the world; and no one knows to this hour when it is walked.
Verde Prato	3380	432	German	With so indescribable pleasure the tale Zezas was questioned that if it would have taken an hour, that the audience a moment would have seemed like. So now when then the turn of Cecca came, they began to talk: It truly is worth the trouble to consider the truth of the proverb that of the same wood both statues of gods as gallows beam, both royal thrones are made as a commode lid so as to no less strange way and come from one and the same rags both the paper that is described with love letters and kissed by beautiful women, ass Wipe; a circumstance that could cause the gescheitesten astrologers to his mind. The same can be said of the mothers, of which as both beautiful as ugly, both envious as a loving, both as Diana chaste like whores lewd, both unfortunate to be born as fortunate daughters good bad, both dissolute as economic and which all sprung from the same strain should be of a character, but. As I, however, consider these things leave the learned people, I will give you only in relation to what I indicated here, the example of three daughters of one and lead the same mother, where you will know the mentioned variety of manners, which the evil daughters that good but brought to the top of wheel of fortune into a fiery furnace. Once there was a mother with three daughters, two of whom misfortune so persecuted that they never succeeded in anything, that everything they carried themselves, their unsuccessful and all their hopes were to always give them water; the youngest, however, named Nella, happiness had brought to the world from the womb, and one could believe that at birth, everything combined to make are the very best and choicest her given; For heaven gave their eyes be the purest light, Venus she gifted with the tadellosesten beauty, Cupid with the highest degree of its violence, the nature with the most elegant manners, she never was doing something she did not go as desired vonstatten, they did nothing that would not been able to find the best, and they never attended a dance they had not left with all honor, she therefore indeed the envious sisters hated but loved from all others a lot more and respected, from their sisters want under the earth, but even more from all others was worn on hands. So it happened now that a sorcerous Prince, who lived in that land, and went out in the sea of ​​her beauty catching on as long threw out the hook of love apply to this beautiful Goldfischlein until he finally captured it in the pines of affection and got into his power. So they, however, another might enjoy their love without the knowledge of the mother, who was a very bad bite, the Prince made an underground passage from crystal which, though they were four miles apart, yet from his palace to under the bed Nella went, gave her then some powder and said to her: "Every time you feel like going atzen a sparrow with your gracious beauty me something cast of this powder into the fire, then I'm going as fast as a decoy by the transition to you come and rush to kristallenem paths to the enjoyment of your silver same countenance. "This appointment pursuant passed no night, where the prince of that passage would not have played the Out-and-pure and go-and-come-game with Nella means so that the sisters, who had spotted them in the strongest stalked and their nighttime pleasures decided to rob her of this good bite and to their love tissue zerrei SEN, destroyed the crystal aisle altogether. So when the poor thing again threw the powder into the fire to her lover to give a sign that he may come, be taught this, who used hasten always in blind haste and naked on the broken crystal pieces so bad about that true pity awakened to look at him. By he could not continue forward now in this way, he returned, slashed like the baggy trousers of a German who returned home and left after he put to bed, summoning all the doctors of the city; the enchanted crystal, however, had taught him so deadly wounds that no human means could help to make and the King, startled by the desperate situation of his son, had publicly announce that whoever the prince liberate from his evil if it were a woman , the same as her husband, but it would be a man, half was to receive his kingdom. Once Nella, which was due to the location of the Prince in despair, heard this, she painted her face, dressed up and left without the knowledge of the sisters the house to the prince to see again before his death. But as to took the gold of the sun god ball with which this tends to play in the corridors of the sky its course after the West, Nella was in a forest, very close attacked at the house of a wild man of the night, so them to avoid any danger, climbed up a tree, while just the wild man with his wife with the windows open at the table was in order to enjoy the fresh air. And when they had emptied the jars and put out the lamp, they started of this and that to speak, so that Nella that almost was not further away than the nose from the mouth, all could hear perfectly well, and among other things, how the wild woman to her husband, said: "What's new, rather Zottelbär? What you hear in the world, "whereupon he replied,". Not much good, dear wife, everything goes haywire and nothing, as it should "-" But yet, "said the woman," tell me what . you can hear "-" There would be much to tell, "the wild man replied" of all the confusion in the world; because you hear things that you want to get out, as buffoons wonderfully gifted, highly honored rogues, scoundrels rewarded protected robbers and murderers defended, but honest men despised or rather are not appreciated. but since you could also go with anger from the skin, so I will only mention what the king has happened to the son. This fact had built a crystal transition, on which he would always naked to go to a pretty young Weibsgesicht in order to drive with her time; But this transition is, I do not have like, broken, and by now he wanted to go again, he's so cut up that before he can go on as many holes, the life force will be completely discontinued it; the king has indeed made by public cry the one who cures him, big promises, but this is not remedy all just a waste of effort and the thing; . The best thing he could do would be to keep the mourning clothes and make hospital to the funeral "When Nella the cause of the disease heard of the prince, she began to weep bitterly, and said to himself:" What is that but been for a cursed soul that has the course on which meinhold blessed bird came to me destroyed so destroyed my spirits and my gears? "but as soon as the wild woman began to talk again, Nella remained quite quiet as a mouse to play to listen, so what are those saying, "is it really possible that the poor Prince of the world might be snatched and was to be found no remedy for their ills? Egg, so like all medicine hide, all doctors should take a rope around his neck and her students play the dues because the are not even able to prescribe the prince a recipe that will make him well again. "-" silence yet, little mother, "said the wild man," the doctors need indeed to discover that go beyond the limits of nature no cure. This is because not an Windkolik which is arranged with an oil bath, not a flatulence that you can distribute through laxatives of figs and mouse droppings, not a fever that passes through some medicine and diet soon; Also, it is not about ordinary wounds, the healing just something lint and field cypress oil is needed, because the magic that still adhered to the broken crystals, brings just the same effect as onion juice on an arrowhead, is incurable by the wound. Only a means could it sustain life, but do not ask me more later because the matter is important. "-" Tell me's only old large tooth, "said the woman," just tell me if I am not to die of curiosity . "-" Very well, "the wild man replied" I want it to tell you if you promise to entrust it to any living being, for it would have happened to our house and life. "-" Do not worry, my dear, allerliebstes males; . Because sooner one pig with horns, monkeys with wings and moles will see with eyes as a word to me in regard to this matter coming from the lips "After she swore with his hand on his heart to her husband secrecy, he said to her: "know therefore that nothing can free the Prince from the captors of death under heaven or on earth except fat from our body; because if you so sweeps up his wounds, so would his soul that wants to take already made by his body to his heels, must remain in their prisons even further. "Once Nella heard this, they waited quietly to talk to the two stopped what she rose from the tree, and, his courage collectively, knocked at the door of the wild man by proclaiming it: "Oh, my dear Lord, oh, dearest wife, but Bestow a gift, a charity, a sign of pity, a little mercy of a poor unfortunate wretches who persecuted by fate, far from home, deprived of all human help, has been attacked in this forest of the night and dying of hunger "; and she was pounding always something going on. As the wild woman, the ears heard stun in this way, she wanted to throw her a half roll and send her away; her husband but that curious by Christians meat was as the squirrels for nuts, the bear after honey and the cat for fish, the sheep of salt and the donkey bran, said to her: "Let but the poor thing to come in; because if they sleep in the open air, they could be attacked by wolves easy "; in short, he spoke until his wife opened the door while he was minded to devour them in three or four bites with his deceitful compassion. But this time he had strongly charged; because since both he and his wife were severely intoxicated and thus fell asleep soon, Nella took a knife from a cupboard so slaughtered both off and went after it done all the fat into a container, to the court of the king, woselbst they this introduced and offered to cure the prince. Full of the greatest joy was the king come into his son's room, and no sooner had this greased properly with the fat, as also immediately, as if she had poured water on the fire, closed the wounds and the prince was as healthy as a fish. When the king saw this, he said to the son: "This brave females earned that ye would given the publicly promised reward and you do take thee a wife," When hearing these words, however, the prince replied immediately. "With your REQUESTS comes your too late now; for I have not as a storage chamber of the heart that I could give away so many of which, as I want. . The mine is already pledged, and another is the same lady, "Nella heard this, they replied," You shall rather forgotten, because she's been your whole evil cause "-" The rather have her sisters did for me. " replied the prince, "and they shall suffer for me already" - "You do so really love" Nella began again, after which the prince replied.?. "More than my life" - "Well," Nella exclaimed ., "if that is so, so give me a hug, umschlinge me because I am the fire of your heart" However, since the prince did not recognize her equal because of their stained face, he replied: "You're more likely to coal as the fire; therefore remove thee, that thou make me black. "Nella which saw matters stood, quickly left a pool of fresh water coming, washed her face, and by banishing that cloud of soot, she showed the Prince the brilliant sun, which was recognized by the same soon, so that he embraced Nella as a polyp and then married without delay with her. But her sisters he left in a fiery furnace throw, so they can be cleaned like the leeches from the tainted blood of envy in the ashes, and should make the saying true: No offense without penalty
The fisherman and his wife	186	555	German	There was once a fisherman and his wife who lived together in a small fisherman's cottage, close to the sea, and the fisherman went out every day and fished: and fished and angelte.So he was sitting once with his rod and looking into the clear water into it: and so he sat and sass.Da went fishing to the bottom, deep down, and when he up high, he took out a large flounder. "Listen, fisherman I beg you, let me live, I'm not a real butt, I am an enchanted prince What does it profit you because if you kill me I would not be good to you, because the flounder said to him.? : put me in the water again and let me ". - "Well," said the man, "you do not have to make as many words: a butt that can talk, I'll be surely swim." That he put him back into the clear water. Then the flounder went aground and left a long streak of blood behind. Then the fisherman got up and went to his wife in the small hut. "Man," said the woman, "have you caught nothing?" - "No," the man said. "I did catch a flounder, who said he was an enchanted prince, so I let him swim again." - "Did you watch because nothing desired?" the woman said. "No," said the man, "what should I wish?" Say you had us may want to go again toward a small house and call him him that stinks and is so disgusting: - "Oh," the woman said, "this is surely hard to live here forever in the hut.. we want a small house have, he does so certain. " - "Oh," said the man, "why should I go again?" - "I," the woman said, "you had him but caught him and have floated again -.! He does certainly go down quickly" The man still did not quite, but would not oppose his wife and went to the See.Als he got there, the sea was all green and yellow, and no longer so clear. He stood and said, "little man, little man, Timpe Te, flounder, flounder in the sea, My wife, who Ilsebill, Will not the way I probably will." Then the flounder came swimming to him and said, "Well, what does she want?" - "Oh," the man said, "I had you but caught; my wife says, I'd want me wish you may no longer live in the hut, they would rather have a house.." - "Go," said the flounder, "she has it already." Then the man went home, and his wife did not sass more in the little hut, because in its place now stood a little house, and his wife was sitting at the door on a bench. Since he took his wife by the hand and said to him: "Come in and see now but that's much better." So they went in, and the house was a small porch and a small clean room and chamber where each stood his bed, and kitchen and pantry, all provided in the best of equipment and set up in the most beautiful, Zinnzeug and brass, which equally entails. Behind it was a little yard with chickens and ducks and a small garden with greenery and fruit. "Look," said the woman, "is not that nice?" - "Yes," said the man, "so it should stay; now we will live quite contented." - "We will see about that," said the woman. Then they ate something and went to Bett.So it went well for a week or fortnight, and then the woman said, "Listen, man, the cottage is far too small, and the yard and the garden is so small: the Butt hätt we can probably give a bigger house. I should like to live in a large stone castle. go to your fish and he will send us a castle. " - "Oh dear!" Said the man, "the cottage is good enough, why do we want to live in a castle?" - "I was," said the woman, "go along with you, the flounder can give us." - "No, madam," said the man, "the flounder gave us the cottage I do not like to come again, the Butt could annoy.." - "Go," the woman said, "he might just as well give us it as not; Just go there." The man was his heart so hard, and he did not want; he said to himself: "That's not right." But he still went hin.Als he came to the sea, the water was purple and dark blue and gray and thick, and no longer so green and yellow, but it was still quiet. As he stood and said, "little man, little man, Timpe Te, flounder, flounder in the sea, My wife, who Ilsebill, Will not the way I probably will." "Well, what does she want?" said the flounder. "Oh," said the man, half frightened, "she wants to live in a great stone castle." - "Go home, it is coming," said the Butt.Da the man went back and thought he wanted to go home, but when he got there, there stood a large stone palace, and his wife was standing on the stairs and wanted to go: she took him by the hand and said, "Come in." So he went in with her, and in the castle was a great hall with a marble floor, and there were so many attendants who pulled the big doors, and the walls were all equipped bright and beautiful wallpaper, and in the rooms louder golden chairs and tables, and crystal chandeliers hanging from the ceiling; All rooms and chambers were provided with foot ceilings. On the tables was the food and the very best wine, that they would almost break. And behind the house was a large yard with horse and cow barn, and carriages of the finest; also there was a large lovely garden with the most beautiful flowers and fine fruit trees and a beautiful park, probably half a mile long, with deer in it and everything you may only ever want. "Well," said the woman, "is not that beautiful?" - "Oh yes," said the man, "so it should stay Now let in the beautiful castle live and want to be satisfied.." - "We will see about that," said the woman, "and sleep upon." Then they went to Bett.Am next morning woke the woman on the first; it had just become day, and saw from her bed the beautiful country lying before him. The man still stretching himself, so joined him with his elbow in the side and said, "Man, get up and just look out the window Look, we can not be king over all the country Go to the flounder, shall we? be king. " - "Oh dear!" Said the man, "why we want to be king?" - "Well," the woman said, "you do not want to be king, and I will be king Go to the flounder, I will be king.." - "Oh dear!" Said the man, "what do you want to be king I do not like to tell him?". - "Why not?" said the woman, "go straight down, I must be king." So the man went, and was quite depressed that his wife wanted to be king. That is and is not right, thought the man. He did not want to go, but went but hin.Und when he came to the sea, the sea was all dark gray, and the water pushed so quite lazy up from below and stank. As he stood and said, "little man, little man, Timpe Te, flounder, flounder in the sea, My wife, who Ilsebill, Will not the way I probably will." "Well, what does she want?" said the flounder. "Oh," said the man, "she wants to be king." - "Go home, she's been around," said the flounder. As the man went home, and when he came to the palace, the castle had become much larger, with a big towers and splendid it: and the sentry stood before the gate, and there were so many soldiers and fanfare. And when he came into the house, so everything was of marble and gold, and many curtains with great golden tassels. Since the doors opened from the hall, where the whole court was, and his wife sat on a high throne of gold and diamonds and had a large golden crown and the scepter of pure gold and precious stones. And on both sides of her stood her maidens in a row, each one a head shorter than the last. As he stood and said, "Oh woman, you are king?" - "Yes," the woman said, "now I am king." As he stood and looked at her; and when he had looked for a time like this, he said, "Oh woman, what is it nice that you are king Now, let us also not want more!". - "No, man," said the woman, quite anxiously, "I will have time and while, I can bear it no longer go to your fish: king I am, now I must be emperor.." - "Oh dear!" Said the man, "why do you wish to be emperor?" - "Man," she said, "go be Kaiser the fish I want!" - "Oh dear!" The man said, "Emperor, he can not do, I like the butt is not to say that; Kaiser is only once in the realm Kaiser can not make the flounder." - "What," the woman said, "I am king, and you are only my husband,? Will you go equal Equal go your way - Can he make kings so he can make an emperor and I will and must be emperor! go immediately! " Since he had to go. But when the man went, it was quite bang; and when he went, he thought to himself: This is not going well: Kaiser is too outrageous, the butt is sick of the end. Meanwhile, he came to the sea. Since the sea was quite black and thick and began to lather up from below that they blistered; and it went down so a whirlwind over the sea, that they turned that way. And the man took a horror. He stood there and said, "little man, little man, Timpe Te, flounder, flounder in the sea, My wife, who Ilsebill, Will not the way I probably will." "Well, what does she want?" said the flounder. "Oh dear!" He said, "my wife wants to be emperor." - "Go home," said the fish, ". She is already" As the man went home, and when he got there was the whole castle of polished marble with alabaster figures and golden ornaments. Outside the door, marched the soldiers and they blew trumpets and beat drums and drums; but in the home, as the barons and earls and dukes went around and acted as if they were servants. Which made it to the doors, which were of pure gold. And when he came in because his wife was sitting on a throne that was of a piece of gold and was quite two miles high; and she had a great golden crown that was occupied three cubits high, and with diamonds and rubies. In one hand she had the scepter and in the other the globe, and on both sides next to her, there stood the guard in two rows, always one smaller than the other, from the very greatest giant who was two miles high, to to the tiniest dwarf, who was as big as my little finger. And before her many princes and dukes were. So the man stepped between them and said, "Wife, are you emperor now?" - "Yes," she said, "I am emperor." There he stood and looked at it is right, and when he after a little while, he said: "Ah, wife, as there is nothing left that you are emperor." - "Man," she said, "what are you standing there I am emperor, and next I will be pope; go to your fish?". - "Oh dear!" Said the man, "what you do not want because everything Pope you can not be, it's only once in the Christian world: he can not do that!" - "Man," she said, "I want to become pope, Go immediately, I must be pope today." - "No, madam," said the man, "I do not tell him that's not good, that's asking too much, to the Pope the flounder can not make you." - "Man, chattering no nonsense!" the woman said. "If he can make an emperor he can make a pope go out immediately;. I am emperor, and you are only my husband Want to go well.?" Since he was very anxious mood, and he went, but he was quite faint it; He shivered and shook, and his knees and calves were shaking him. And as such a great wind over the land, and flew the clouds, and it was as dark as to the evening: the leaves fell from the trees, and the water went up and roared as if it were boiling, and splashed on the shore, and in the distance he saw the ships that gave off Notschüsse, pitching and tossing on the waves. But the sky in the middle was still a bit blue, but on the sides as it went quite red on like a heavy thunderstorm. And he felt very desponding, and stood trembling and said, "little man, little man, Timpe Te, flounder, flounder in the sea, My wife, who Ilsebill, Will not the way I probably will." "Well, what does she want?" said the flounder. "Oh"; said the man, "she wants to be pope." - "Go home, she's been around," said the Butt.Da he went, and when he arrived because there was a large church surrounded by palaces. Since ersieh urged by the people; but inside everything was lighted up with thousands and thousands of lights, and his wife was dressed all in gold and sat on a much higher throne, and had three great golden crowns, and around them, there was so much spiritual state, and two side of it, there stood two rows of lights, the largest so thick and as large as the very greatest tower, to the very smallest kitchen light. And all the emperors and kings were in front of her on his knees and kissed her slipper. "Woman," said the man, and looked so right on, "you are now Pope?" - "Yes," she said, "I am the Pope." So he went and looked at her right, and because he felt as if he was looking at the bright sun. As he so for some time had considered, he said: "Oh woman, how well you is that you are pope!" But she sat stiff as a tree and did not move. He said: "Woman, was now satisfied that you are pope, because now you can be nothing more." - "I will see about that," said the woman. Thereupon they both went to bed. But she was not satisfied, and the greed they let not sleep; she always thought she still be könnte.Der man slept well and soundly, he had to run a lot on the day; the woman but could not fall asleep and fell all night from one side to the other and always thought about what she was could not be, and could yet call to mind anything more. Meanwhile, the sun began to rise, and when she saw the dawn, she sat up in bed and looked in there. And when they saw the sun come up so out of the window: Ha, she thought, I can not let it rise, the sun and the moon? - "Man," she said, and pushed him with his elbow in the ribs; "Wake up, go to your fish, I want to be like God." The man was still half asleep, but he was so horrified that he fell out of bed. "Oh woman, what do you say?" He said he had misheard, rubbed his eyes and said, - "Man," she said, "if I do not the sun and the moon to rise, I can not stand it, and I have no quiet hour, that I do not even can burn it." She looked at him very angry that he shuddered. "Equal go, I want to be like God." - "Oh dear!" Said the man, falling in front of her on his knees, "the fish can not he can make emperor and pope -. I'm you, go into yourself and stick to the Pope." She was seized with malice, and her hair flew so wildly around her head and she screamed: "! I can not stand it and I can not stand it any longer, go at once ?!" As he pulled his trousers and ran away like unsinnig.Draussen but storm was raging, and blowing that he could barely stand on his feet. The houses and the trees were blown down, and shook the mountains, and the rocks pieces rolled into the sea, and the sky was completely pitch black, and it thundered and lightened, and the sea went so high black waves like church towers and mountains, and had above all, a white froth on. Then he cried, and could not hear his own words: "little man, little man, Timpe Te, flounder, flounder in the sea, My wife, who Ilsebill, Will not the way I probably will." "Well, what does she want?" said the flounder. "Oh," he said, "she wants to be like God." - "Go home, she sits again in the fishing hut." They are still living to this day.
Of the Juniper Tree	450	720	German	This is now long ago, perhaps the two thousand years since was a rich man who had a beautiful religious woman, and they had each other very much, but had no children. but they wished greatly, and the wife prayed for one day and night; But they got and made war none. Before her house was a yard, it was an almond tree. Under which the woman was once in the winter and peeling an apple, and as she peeled the apple so because she cut her finger, and the blood fell into the snow. "Oh," said the woman and sighed deeply as right, and saw the blood on the right and was quite wistfully: "I wish I had a child as red as blood and as white as snow." And when she said that, since she was quite cheerful mood: She was so right when it should be something. Then she went home, and he went a month, that went by the snow; and after two months, everything was green; after three months since the flowers came from the earth; and after four months as shot all the trees in the wood, and the green branches were all grown together. Then sang the bird that the whole forest resounded and the blossoms fell from the trees, as the fifth month had passed, and she was always under the almond tree that smelled so nice. Since her heart leaped for joy, and she fell to her knees and could not be. And when the sixth month was over, the fruit was thick and strong, and it was very quiet. And in the seventh month, as she reached for the juniper berries and ate them greedily; and since she was sad and sick. Since the eighth month had passed, and she called her husband and cried and said: "When I die, bury me under the almond tree." Then she was comforted and happy until the ninth month was over there they had a child as white as snow and as red as blood, and when she saw this, she was so pleased that she buried starb.Da her husband crying under the almond tree, and he started so much; for a time took that, then the tears flowed even more smooth and had cried a little when he, as he stopped, and then he took another Frau.Mit the second wife he had a daughter; but the child of the first wife was a little boy, and was as red as blood and as white as snow. When the woman looked at her daughter so she loved her very much; But then she looked at the little boy, and went to her so the heart, and it seemed to her as if he were her all the way, and then always thinking how she would turn to her daughter all the assets, and the evil one was her that she was the little boy all gram, and she pushed him from one corner to the other, and pushed him here and cuffed him there, so the poor child that always in fear was. When he came home from school, he had no place where you left him alone hätte.Einmal had left the woman in the chamber high; because the little girl came up and said, "Mother, give me an apple." - "Yes, my child," said the woman and gave her a beautiful apple out of the box; but the chest had a great heavy lid with a large sharp iron lock. "Mother," said the little girl, "shall not my brother have one?" That was what the mother, but she said, "Yes. When he comes home from school" And when she became aware of him through the window, so it was just as if the evil thought crossed her mind, and she grabbed her daughter and took the apple back away and said; "Thou shalt not it more likely to have a brother." Then she threw the apple into the chest, opening the chest to. Then the little boy came to the door; since you were the evil one that they kindly said to him: "Son, do you want an apple?" and looked at him so irascible. "Mother," said the little boy, "what do you look so ghastly! Yes, give me an apple!" -. "Because she felt as if she should persuade him," Come with me, "she said and shut the lid on," you get an apple out "And when the little boy hineinbückte, since advised her of the evil; bratsch! beat her the lid that the head flew off among the red apples As they ran through the fear and she thought. "! Can I get that from me" and she went into her room to her dresser and pulled out of the top drawer a white cloth and fitting the head on the neck and tied the scarf so that you could not see anything and puts him in front of the door to a chair and gave him the apple in the Hand.Darnach came Marlene to her mother in the kitchen. the stand by the fire and had a pot of hot water on, she always stirred it. "mother," said Marjory, "the brother sitting in front of the door and looks quite white and has an apple in his hand. I asked him, he should give me the apple, but he does not answer me; . That I was quite scary "-" Go again to him, "said the mother," and if he does not answer you, give him a box on the ears "So Marjory went again and said," Brother, give me the apple. "But he was silent, because she gave him one on the ear, the head dropped: yet they frightened and began to cry and scream and ran to her mother and said," Oh, mother, I have my brother off the head, "and cried and cried and did not want to be satisfied." Marlene, "said the mother," what have you done! But keep quiet, that no one remembers; which is now not going to change, we want to cook it in sour. "Then the mother took the little boy and chopped him to pieces, put them in the pot and boiled it in acid. Marjory stood by and cried and cried, and the tears fell all into the pot, and they needed no Salz.Da came the father home and sat down at the table and said, "Where is my son," As the mother wore a big, big bowl of Schwarzenauer, and . "Where is my son?" Marlene cried and could not keep Then the father said again - "Ah," said the mother, "he is gone into the country to relatives of his mother; he wanted to stay there for a while. "-" What's he doing there? He did not even tell me good-bye "-" Oh, he wanted so much to go and asked me if he could stay six weeks there probably!; he is in good hands "-" Oh, "the man said," I feel very low mood sad. that's not right, he would have liked to say goodbye but "He began to eat and said,". Marlene, why are you crying? The brother is already coming back. "-" Oh dear! "He said," what tastes good the food beautiful! Give me more "And the more he ate, the more he wanted and said," Give me more, you shall none of this pick, it's as if that was my "And he ate and ate, and. bone he threw all under the table until he was done with everything. Marjory went to her dresser and took out the bottom drawer of her best silk handkerchief and took all the bones from under the table and tied them in the silk cloth and she wore out the door, weeping tears of blood. they put them under the almond tree in the green grass, and when she had put up where it was easy at once, and she did not cry more. because the almond tree began to move, and the twigs were always so another and another, quite as if one would be from the heart and beats up his hands. here, a mist came from the tree, and in the middle of the fog as it was on fire and out of the fire flew a beautiful bird out de r sang so beautifully and flew high in the air, and when he was gone, as was the almond tree as he had been before, and the cloth with the bones was gone. Marjory felt quite glad and light feel, quite as if it was still alive brother. Then she went back merrily into the house, sat down at the table and ate. but the bird flew away and sat down on a goldsmith's house, and began to sing: "My mother's battle me, my father who ate of me, my sister Marlenichensucht all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief, And laid them under the almond tree .Kiwitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I "The goldsmith was sitting in his workshop and made a gold chain!; when he heard the bird sitting on his roof, and sang, and that seemed to him so beautiful. And he arose, and when he went over the threshold, as he lost a slipper. He went into the middle on the street, with only one slipper and one sock; he had his apron on, and in which he had a hand the gold chain, and in the other the pliers; and the sun shone so brightly on the street. There he stood and looked at the bird. "Bird," he was saying, "how beautifully you can sing! Do sing that piece over again!" - "No," said the bird, "I not sing for nothing twice Give me the gold chain, and I will sing it to you again.." - "There," said the goldsmith, "you have the gold chain; now sing that to me again!" Then the bird came and took the golden chain in his right claw, sat down in front of the goldsmith, and sang, "My mother's battle me, my father is the ass me, my sister Marjory Who all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief, and laid them under the almond tree Kywitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I "Then the bird flew away to a shoemaker, and sits on his roof, and sang".! My mother's battle me, my father is the me ass, my sister Marjory Who all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief, and laid them under the almond tree. Kywitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I! "the shoemaker heard, he ran in his shirt sleeves before his door and looked up at his roof and had to hand over his eyes hold that the sun does not blind him. "Bird," he said, "what you can sing beautifully." He called through the door: "Wife, come out, there's a bird, but see the bird that can sing good times." Then he called his daughter and the children and the acquaintance, both young men and maidens, and they all came to the streets and looked at the bird, how beautiful he was; and he had such beautiful red and green feathers, and around his neck he was like pure gold, and its eyes twinkled like stars in the head. "Bird," said the shoemaker, "now sing me the piece again!" - "No," said the bird, "twice I not sing for nothing, you need to give me something." - "Woman," said the man, "go to the floor, on the top shelf, there are a few red shoes that bring it to me!" Then the woman went and brought the shoes. "There, bird," said the man, "now sing that song again!" Then the bird came and took the shoes in his left claw and flew back to the roof and sang: "My mother's battle me, my father is the ass, my sister Marlenichensucht all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief, puts me's among Machandelbaum.Kiwitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I "And had finished when he, as he flew away!; the chain had it in the right and the shoes in his left claw, and he flew far away to a mill, and the mill went down, flap cliff, cliff flap, flap cliff. And in the mill sat twenty Mühlknappen who knocked a stone and cut off: hack Hick, hick hack, hick hack; and the mill went cliff flap, flap cliff, cliff flap. Then the bird perched on a linden tree that stood in front of the mill, and sang "My mother who murdered me," as a stop; "My father who ate of me," there's two stopped and listened; "My sister Marjory" Here four more on; "Who all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief," now chopped only eight; "Puts it under," Now only five; "The almond tree" - now only one; "Kywitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I!" Since the last hearing on, and he had just heard the final. "Bird," he said, "how beautifully you sing!" ! Let me hear it all; I sing that again "-" Nine, "said the bird," I do not sing for nothing twice; give me the millstone, and I will still sing even me. "-" Yes, "he said," if it belonged to me alone you should have it. "-" Yes, "said the others," if he again sings, he shall have it. "then the bird came down, and the Müller summarized every twenty with trees and lifted the stone," hu uh uhp, hu uh uhp, hu uh uhp! "then put the bird's neck by the hole and took him to as a collar, and flew back to the tree and sang: "My mother's battle me, my father who ate of me, my sister Marlenichensucht all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief, and laid them under the almond tree .Kiwitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I! "and when he had finished the, as he spread his wings and having in the right claw the chain and in the left the shoes, and round his neck the millstone, and flew away to his father Haus.In the room sat the father, the mother, and Marjory at the table, and the father said, "Oh, what w ill be mine, mine is so easy to feel pretty good. "-" No, but "the mother said," I feel very low, quite as if a heavy storm were coming "Marjory sat and cried and cried.. Then the bird came flying, and when he sat on the roof, as the father said, "Oh, I so joyful, and the sun is shining so bright, I do not quite when I should again see an old friend!" - "No," the woman said, "I am in distress, teeth chatter me and I feel as if I had fire in his veins." And she tore her dress to get to air. But Marjory sat in a corner and wept, with her plate before the eyes and wept, the skirt completely wet. Since the bird perched on the almond tree and sang: "My mother killed me" - because the mother stopped her ears and squeezed her eyes shut and did not want to see and hear, but it roared in her ears like the very strongest storm and eyes burned and twitched her like lightning. "My father who ate of me" - "Oh, mother," said the man, "there's a beautiful bird singing so finely, and the sun is so warm, and the smells as sweet as cinnamon." (Cinnamon) "My sister Marjory" - Marjory hid her head on her knees and wept, and. But the man said, "I go out, I have the bird in close to see." - "Oh, do not go," the woman said, "I feel as if shook the whole house and was on fire." But the man went out and looked at the bird - "all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief, And laid them under the almond tree Kywitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I." That the bird let the golden fall chain, and they just fell to the man's neck, so the correct way to fit him quite beautifully. So he went in and said, "See what kind of a beautiful bird, has given me such a beautiful gold chain and looks beautiful." But the woman was so frightened that she fell long in the room, and her cap fell off his head. Then the bird sang again: "My mother's battle me" - "Oh that I were a thousand fathoms beneath the earth, that I did not need to hear!" - "My father who ate of me" - Then the woman as if she were dead. "My sister Marjory" - "Oh," said Marjory, "I want to go out, too, and see if the bird gives me something?" As they went out. "Who all my bones, they Bindt in a handkerchief" - Because he threw the shoes down. "Laid them beneath the juniper tree. Kywitt, Kywitt, wat vör'n beautiful bird am I!" Because she was so light and cheerful. She pulled the new red shoes and danced and jumped in. "Oh," she said, "I was so sad when I went out, and now I feel so easy. This is a charming bird, I gave a pair of red shoes!" - "No," said the woman, jumped up, and the hair stuck to her like flame, "I feel as should the world will end; I will also, so I will be easier." And when she came out the door, bratsch! Threw the millstone on her head that she was completely crushed the bird. The father and Marlene heard it and went out. Since a steam and flames and fire went out from the place, and when that was over, as the little brother was standing there, and he took his father and Marlene by the hand and all three were quite pleased, and went into the house, sat down at the table and ate.
The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage	221	85	German	There were once a little mouse, a bird, and a sausage in society come, had a budget out long lived well and delicious in peace, and admirably increased in goods. The bird work was that it would fly daily in the forest to fetch wood. The mouse should carry water, light the fire and lay the table, but the sausage did kochen.Wem is too well off always wants for new things! So one day the bird met on the way to another bird, which it told of his own situation boasted. But the same other bird it scolded a poor wretch, the great work, but if the two-to-door good days. Because, after the mouse had made the fire and carried the water, so they went to her closet to rest, until her name was set the table. The sausage was the harbor (pot), watching the food cook, and if it was dinner time soon, it schlingte a fours times by the porridge or the vegetables, so it was greased and salted and ready. Then came the bird home and put his burden down, as they sat at the table, and after supper they slept gehabtem the soundly until the next morning; and that was a gorgeous little bird life.The other day wanted from incitement no longer speaking into the wood, it would have been long enough servant, and would you have to be a fool to speak, they should even changing over and in a different way also try. And though the mouse and the sausage violently asked for it, so the bird was still champion: it had to be dared spieleten derowegen, and the lot fell on the sausage, carry the needed wood, the mouse became cook, and the bird was water holen.Was happening? The sausage trudged off toward the forest, the bird made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and expected only until sausages came home and bring wood for the next day. But the sausage stayed out so long that they seemed both to no good, and the bird a little air out to meet flew. Not far but there is a dog on the path that encountered the poor sausage as free booty, tackled and slain. The bird complained also its brazen abduction much against the dog, but it did not say a word, because the dog said he had found forged letters on the sausage, so it would fall to him of life gewesen.Das bird, sad, took the wood up, flew home and told what it saw and heard. They were very sad, but compared to doing the best and to stay together. Derowegen so covered the bird the table while the mouse prepared the food and wanted to serve, and wrap in the harbor, as before the sausage through the vegetables and slip of saying the same oiling: but before she came to the center, she was stopped and had skin and hair while life lassen.Als came the bird and wanted to apply the food, there was no cooking available. The bird looked dismayed the wood back and forth, recanted and searched, but his cook could not find more. Carelessness the fire came into the wood, so that heat created; the bird rushed to fetch water because it accounted for the bucket into the well, and go down, that it could not recover and drown as needed with.
The death of the chicken	765	2021	German	At a time the chicken went with the chicken in the Nussberg and they agreed together that should kill a Nutmeat should share it with the other. Then the hen found a large large nut, but said nothing about it, intending to eat the kernel alone. but the core was so thick that it could not swallow him and he got stuck in his throat that he was afraid it would suffocate. Then she cried 'Chicken, I beg you run what you can, and get me some water, or I shall choke.' The chicken ran as fast as he could to the well, and said 'Born, thou shalt give me water; the chicken is on the Nussberg, has swallowed a large nut kernel, and is choking. ' The well answered, "First run to the bride and give take your red silk. ' The cock ran to the bride 'bride, you shall give me red silk: red silk I will give the well, the well is to give me water, the water I will bring the chicken, which is on the Nussberg, has swallowed a large nut kernel and choking with it. ' The bride answered, "First run and bring me my little wreath which is hanging to a willow. ' As the cock ran to the willow, and drew the wreath from the branch and brought it to the bride, and the bride gave him red silk for which took it to the fountain, which gave him some water for it. Then the cock took the water to chicken, but when he got there the hen had choked in the meantime, and lay there dead and did not move. Then the cock was so sad that he cried aloud, and came all the animals and complained the chicken; and six mice built a little carriage to carry the chicken to her grave; and as the car was ready, they harnessed themselves to it, and drove the chicken. On the way but the fox was 'where are you going, chicken?' 'I want to bury my little hen chen.' "May I drive? '' Yes, but the fox get up behind the car in front of my horse skills not vertragen.'Da sat behind as well, then the wolf, the bear, the deer, the lion and all the animals in the forest , Then the procession went on, they came to a stream. 'How shall we get over?' said the cock. As a straw lay on Bach, who said 'I myself will lay across it, and you shall drive over me.' But when the six mice came to the bridge, the straw slipped and fell into the water, and the six mice all fell in and drowned. Since the plight of went again, and a coal came and said, 'I'm big enough, I will lay myself, and you shall drive over me.' The coal also laid itself across the water, but she touched it, unfortunately, a bit since she hissed, was extinguished and died. How it looked a stone, he had compassion and wanted to help the chicken, and lay down on the water. Then the cock drew the carriage himself, but when he got him over there, and was with the dead hen in the country and wanted the others who were sitting behind as well, also use because of their too had become, and the car fell back, and they all fell into the water and drowned. Because the chicken was left alone with the dead hen, and dug a grave and put it in, and made a mound above, on which he sat down and fretted until he died too, and since everything was dead.
How's the old man does is always right	2531	1415	German	A story I will tell you that I heard when I was a little boy. Every time I thought of the story, it seemed to me as if she was more charming; for it is with stories as with many people, they become more beautiful with age. In the country you were Surely ever; have you will probably also as a very old farmhouse with a thatched roof seen. Moss and plants growing wild on the roof; a stork's nest is the same on the ridge, the stork is inevitable! The walls of the house are sloping, the windows low, and only one window is set up so that it can be opened; the oven is pushed out from the wall, just like a little thicker abdomen; Lilac tree hangs over the fence, and in its branches is a pool of water located in the one or more ducks. A chained dog who barks at anyone and everyone is there, too. Just such a farmhouse stood out in the country, and in this house lived an old couple, a peasant and a woman. How little they had, a piece was among them, that was not expendable - a horse that fed on the grass, which is found on the fencing of the road. The old peasant rode into the city on that horse, often borrowed his neighbor and proved the old people some service to. But the most appropriate it was probably when they sold the horse or exchange it for something else that they could do more good giving away. But what could this be? "You will know the age, the best!" the woman said to him. "Today is just fair, ride into town, give the horse for money, or make a good exchange;.! How do you do it to me is it always right Ride to the fair" And she bound him his scarf around because she could better than him, they tied him to a double loop: this makes very pretty! She smoothed his hat with palm of her hand and then kissed him on his warm mouth. Then he rode away on the horse that was to be sold or bartered. Yes, the old man knew what he was! The sun was hot, not a cloud was in the sky. On the road was very dusty, the many people who wanted to visit the fair, went, riding, or the way back on foot. Nowhere there were shadows against the burning of the sun. Among others, one of the road and driving a cow to the market came. The cow was as beautiful as a cow can be. "The are certainly good milk!" the countryman thought, "That would be a very good exchange: the cow for the horse" "Heda, you there, with the cow!" he said, "you know what, a horse, I should think, costs more than a cow, but I do not matter, I have more benefits from the cow;! do you want, so we exchange" "Of course I want to," said the man with the cow, and now they exchanged. So that was settled, and the farmer would now be able to justifiably turn back, for he had done the business to what it was to do it; but, as he once had the fair in mind, so he wanted to go merely to look at him, so he went to the town with his cow. Leading the animal, he strode with it quickly, and after a short time they overtook a man who was driving a sheep. It was a good fat sheep, with good wool. "I would like to have," thought our good man, "it would in our fence find enough grass, and in the winter we could keep in the room. Actually, it would be reasonable to have a sheep than a cow." "Do you want to trade with me?" For this, the man was with the sheep at once ready and the exchange took place. Our farm was now with his sheep on the road on. Soon he overtook another man entering the road from a field, and was carrying a large goose under his arm. "That's a heavy thing that you have there; it has feathers and fat that it is a pleasure, which would exclude only good when home was going on a leash on the water with us that would be a little old for my. .. for which they could gather all waste How many times has she not said: 'If we only had a goose' now they can perhaps a get, and still is, they should have - we exchange I will give you that? sheep for your goose, and thanks into the bargain. " In contrast, the other had no objection, and so the exchange was made. Our farmer got the goose. Now he was quite close to the city; the crowd on the road had been gradually increasing; People and livestock crowded; they went on the road and along the fences, so, at the barrier they were even in the toll-potato field in where the one fowl was strutting on a string, so it does not scare over the crowd, get lost or run should. The chicken had short tail feathers, it blinked with one eye and looked very smart. "Kluck; Kluck!" said the chicken. What it was thinking, I do not know to say, but our peasant immediately thought when he got to face it: this is the best chicken I've ever seen, it is even more beautiful than our parson's brood hen. Potztausend! The chicken I want! A hen can always find a grain, it can almost feed myself, I think it would be a good exchange if I could get it for the goose. - "Do you want to trade with me?" he asked the toll. "To deceive?" he asked, "yes, that would not be bad!" And so they exchanged. The Einnehmer at the barrier kept the goose, the farmer the chicken. It was not much of what he had done on the trip to the city; Hot as it was, and he was tired. A liquor and a snack did not him; Soon he was at the inn. He was about to go in, emerged as the servant and therefore met in the door. The servant was carrying a sack. "What have you got in the bag?" asked the farmer. "Rotten apples," answered the servant, "fully a whole bag, enough for the pigs." "That's too big a waste of the sight I allowed my old home Last year was the old tree-plot only a single apple;... Was canceled and was on de cabinet until he spoiled completely disintegrated 'That's always property, my old woman said; but here they could see only prosperity, an entire bag of Yes, the sight I would give her "! "What you give for the sackful?" asked the servant. "What do I give? I give my chicken in exchange," and he gave the chicken in exchange, received the apples, entered the gas exchange with them. He leaned the sack carefully against the stove, and then went to the bar counter. But the stove was hot, he did not consider. There were many guests present; Horse dealers, cattle drovers, and two Englishmen, and the English were so rich that their pockets crammed with pieces of gold and almost burst, and bet they do, that you shall know. "Hiss-ss, hiss-ss!" What was the stove? - The apples were beginning to roast. "What's that?" "Yes, you know," said our peasant; - and he told the whole story of the horse, which he exchanged for a cow and so on down to the apples. "Well, your old woman will poke you when you get home, because it is something!" said the Englishman. "What? Cuffing?" said the old man, "she will kiss and tell me. how's the old man does is always right" "Wanna bet?" said the Englishman, "minted gold tons! hundred pounds make a ship pounds!" "A bushel is enough," said the farmer, "I can only set a bushel of apples against it and myself and my old woman into, I would think, would be a clustering of Mass!" "Done! Say!" and the bet was made. The carriage of the host pulled up, the English got in, and the farmer man joined; went along it, and soon they stopped the farmers from the cottage. "Good evening, old man!" "Good evening, old man!" "The exchange would be done!" "Yes, you know what you're about" said the woman, hugged him and noticed neither the bag nor the foreign guests. "I traded a cow for the horse." "God be praised! The beautiful milk that we have now are, and butter and cheese on the table! That was a capital exchange!" "Yes, but I changed the cow again for a sheep." "Oh, that's so much the better!" the woman replied, "You always think of everything; for a sheep we have just enough pasture! sheep's milk, sheep's cheese, woolen stockings and woolen jackets This gives us the cow, so she loses her hair As you but bedenkst everything!" "But the sheep I traded for a goose!" "So this year we will really have roast goose, my dear old man! You are always thinking of something to please me. What is wonderful that! The goose you can attach to a rope and they are even fatter leave before we roast her " "But the goose I traded for a chicken!" said the man. "A chicken that was! A good exchange!" replied the woman. "The chicken will lay eggs and hatch them, and we have chickens, we get a whole chicken! Why, I just finished watching especially desired!" "Yes, but the chicken I gave for a sack of shriveled apples!" "What? No, I need you certainly kiss!" replied the woman. "My dear, good husband, I'll tell you something. Do you see, as you continue were little this morning, I thought about how I thee tonight could make a pretty good bite. Bacon omelette with chives, I thought then. The eggs I had the bacon and the chives just missed me. so I went over to the schoolmaster who chives, I know, but the schoolmistress is very stingy, they sweet does. I asked them to give me a handful of chives to borrow. 'borrow?' . She exclaimed, 'Nothing, nothing at all grows in our garden, not even a shriveled apple; not even such I can lend you, dear wife!' Now I can but her ten, yes, fully lend a whole bag. I'm glad, too, that's hilarious! " And she kissed him that it smacked. "We like that!" cried the Englishman in unison. "Always downhill and always funny. That's worth the money!" So they paid a hundred-weight of gold to the peasant who does not cuffed, but has been kissed. Yes, it always pays when the wife sees and always says that her husband knows best, and his work is right. Look, this is my story. I heard it as a child, and now you have heard it too, and know that "What the old man does is always right!"
