elves gift	1734	503	Danish	A tailor and a goldsmith were traveling together, and one evening when the sun had sunk behind the mountains, the sound of distant music, which became clearer. It sounded strange, but it was so beautiful that they forgot all their weariness and stepped quickly onwards. The moon had already arisen when they reached a hill where they saw a crowd of little men and women who held hands and jumped around in a merry dance. They sang to it, and it was the music, the travelers had heard in the distance. In the middle sat an old man, somewhat larger than the others. He had a checkered coat, and his gray beard hung down over his chest. They were puzzled standing and so on dance. The old waved to them to come closer, and the little guys opened their circle them. The goldsmith, who had a hump and was great at it as all hunchbacks, stepped forward, but the tailor remained only slightly. But when he saw how merrily all was going, he took courage and followed. The circle closed again, and the little ones danced on with their wild leaps. The old however, took a large knife to his girdle, whetted it, and when it was sufficiently sharpened, he looked around at the strangers. They were scared but they had no time to think about the old grabbed in a hurry grab gold smith and shaved his beard and hair, and it went tailor. But their anxiety disappeared when the old then kindly patted them on the shoulder, as if to say that it was nice of them that they had not resisted against, but quietly put up with it. He pointed to a heap of coal, which was next door, and signified to them that they should fill their pockets with them. Both of them obeyed, although they did not know what they were to use coal to, and then went on to find shelter. When they came down into the valley, they heard a clock struck twelve. Instant song ceased all vanished, and the hill lay in solitude in måneskinnet.De two hiking men got into an inn lay on straw bed and covered himself with their coats, but they were so tired that they forgot to take the coal out of the pocket. The next morning woke up earlier than usual, because it was like there was something heavy on them. They reached into his pocket, but would not believe their eyes when they saw that it was full of pure gold. There were also both head hair and beard, as much as they would like. They were now rich folks, but the goldsmith, who was a greedy disposition, had filled his pockets better, was twice as rich as the tailor. But more always want more, and the goldsmith proposed to the tailor to be there another day and then at night go out on the mound of the old to grab some more treasures. The tailor would not. "I'm happy with what I've got," he said, "now I shall be, and marry my dear object (for so he called his sweetheart), and I am a happy man." To add the goldsmith, he promised, however, to stay there another day. In the evening the goldsmith hung a couple of bags over his shoulders that could rake in, and went out to the mound. It was like the night before. The old shaved him again and made a sign to him that he should take some coal with them. He did not hesitate, but stopped his bags, turned so happy, and covered himself with his coat. "Even if the gold presses, I will probably find me in it," he thought, and fell asleep in the sweet assurance, the next morning to wake an enormously rich man. When he opened his eyes, he stood in a haste to examine his pockets, but how astonished he was when there was nothing but black coal, how often he put his hands down. "I still have the gold I got the night," he thought, and took it out, but was terrified when he saw that it was turned into coal. He settled with his dusty black hand forehead, and when he felt that his head was bald and smooth as his face. But it was not enough with the accident. He felt now that he was at the chest had been a backlog that was twice as large as the one he had on his back. When he realized that he had been punished for his greed, and began to cry loudly. The good tailor, who was wakened by this, comforted him as best he could and said, "You have been my comrade in my traveling. You should be with me and share in my wealth." He kept his word, but the poor goldsmith had all his life to keep the two humps and cover his bald head with a cap.
The spirit of the bottle	940	331	Danish	There was once a poor woodcutter who worked from morning until late into the evening. When he finally had saved up some money, he said to his son: "You are my only child. The money I have earned sweat of my brow, to use for your education. Learn something properly so you can feed me when I am old and stiff and can sit at home and can no longer go to work. " The boy came to school and was industrious, and his teacher praised him. When he had gone through a few classes but still not quite trained yet, was his father's bit of money dried up, and he had to return home. "I can not give you anything," said the father sadly, "and in these hard times I can not earn a penny more than what we need for our daily bread." - "Do not grieve over it, little father," said the son, "I will find myself in it. When it is God's will, it is probably also the best." When his father would go out into the woods to earn some money by cutting cordwood, the son said: "I go with you and help you." - "It will be too hard for you," said the father, "you are not used to hard work, you can not stand it. And I have only one ax and no money to buy one." - "Just go to the neighbor," said the son, "he lends you enough an ax until I have earned me one." The father borrowed as an ax from the neighbor, and at daybreak they went out into the woods. Son helped his father and was happy and contented. As the sun stood in the sky, the father said: "Let us keep dinner and rest a little. Then it twice as well." The son picked up his bread and said, "Just you rest, father. I'm not tired, I walk around in the woods and look for birds' nests." - "Oh, you fool," said the father, "Why do you run about. You'll be tired, you can not touch her arms. Be rather quiet here." But the son went into the woods and looked into the green branches to look for birds' nests. He went back and forth until he finally came to an enormous oak that was certainly many hundred years old and so thick that not five people could trip on it. He stopped, looked at it and thought, "There must be many birds have built the nest." Suddenly he thought he heard a voice, and when he listened to, he heard that any harsh shouted, "Let me out, let me out." He looked around but could not find anything and it seemed to him as if the voice came from below ground. "Where are you?" he asked. "I sit here among the oak roots," the voice replied, "Let me out, let me out." The young man began to rummage under the tree from the roots, and finally he discovered a cavity a small glass bottle. He lifted it up and held it against the light, and then saw something that looked like a frog jumping up and down inside. "Let me out, let me out," it cried again. He took the cork and immediately rose to the spirit up and grew and grew and after a few moments a horrible fellow, half as big as the old oak tree. "Do you know what your reward because you let me out?" he cried in an awful voice. "How should I know," said the man, not a bit afraid. "Then I will tell you," he cried, "I break your neck for you." - "You should have said so sooner," the man said, "so I would have left you shut up inside. But to you, I will stand me there are probably other people who have a word to say." - "Blow with other people!" he cried, "you have to have your deserved salary. Do you think it was for my pleasure that I have been sitting there so long, no it was my punishment. I am the big Mercury, and he releases me, is I necks. " - "So Calm down," the man said, "so fast either. I must first know whether you are the right spirit. If you can get into the bottle again, I believe it, and then do with me what you will. " - "It is an easy trick," said the spirit superior, dwindled and was quite small and thin, so it again can get in through the bottleneck. But just as it was in there, pushed the cork, put the bottle down again among the oak roots, and such was the spirit narret.Han was about to return to his father, but the spirit cried out pitifully, "Let me out, let me out. " - "No," he replied, "I do not even have to. Do you think I let it loose, that will kill me when I finally got hold of him again?" - "If you let me go, I will give you so much that you have enough for your whole life." - "No, you are fooling me only again." - "Do your own good fortune," said the spirit, "I will not really hurt you, but give you a reward." - "I think I'll risk it," he thought, "perhaps keep his word, and it must not be allowed to hurt me." He pulled out the cork, and the spirit rose up again, and extended himself and was a great fight. "Now you get your salary," it said, and handed him a small patch that looked like a piece of plaster, and said: "When one end sweep a wound heals, and if you rub steel or iron with the other end, it becomes silver. " - "That I have to try," said the man. He went to a tree, scratched the bark with his ax, then rubbed the patch over it, and it grew bark back together. "Yes, that's right," he said to the spirit, "and we can part again." The spirit thanked him for his salvation, and he thanked for the gift and went back to his father. "Where have you been," said the father, "Why have you forgotten to order something. But I told you enough away that you were not for anything. " - "Do not worry, Dad, I'll catch up." - "Make it up," said the father angrily. "It's a bad manner." - "Just watch, should I cut down that tree, so it must creak and crack." Then he took his bandage, rubbed the ax and struck a mighty blow, but because the iron had turned into silver, the cutting edge itself. "What a bad ax you've given me, Dad, it's been quite lopsided." - "What have you done," said the father, "now I have to pay for the ax, and how should I take money from. It's all the good I have from your work!" - "Do not be angry, father," said the son, "I will pay for the ax." - "What will you pay for, you blockhead," said the father, "you have nothing else, but what I give you. You have students' tricks stuck in your head. But chopping wood you do not know anything. "Shortly after the son said," Let's call it a father. I still can not order more. " - "So you think I'll sit back like you," the man said. "I have to work more, you go for home." - "But I can not find your way in the woods, Dad, it's the first time you are here. Come on." And when the father's anger had subsided, he let himself be persuaded and went with. "Go and sell the damaged ax," he told his son, "and see how much you can get for it. I will have to earn in order to pay the neighbor." The son went into town to a goldsmith, who at the ax, weighed it and said: "It is four hundred dollars worth, but this much I do not have the cash." - "Give me what you have," the young man said, "so you can owe me the rest." The goldsmith gave him three hundred talers and owed him one hundred. "Now I have money, father," said his son when he came home, "Go and ask the neighbor what he wants for the ax." - "I know," said the father, "he will have three shillings and six pennies." - "Then give him two dollars and twelve shillings, it's just twice. You see, I have enough money." Then he gave the father a hundred dollars. "You must never lack anything, as long as you live," he said. "From whence comes all that money?" the old man asked astonished. The son told him how he had had good luck. The rest of the money he used to read on in school, and when he with his bandage could heal all wounds, he became the most famous doctor in the world.
The queen bee	592	554	Danish	There were once two royal sons who went off on adventures, and fell into a wild and dissolute life, so they do not come home again. Their youngest brother, who was called stupid Peter, then went on the road to look for them, but when he finally found them, they made only fun of him because such a stupid guy thought he could make his way in the know the world when it was not even managed cleverer as they. They all three went on together until they came to an anthill. The two oldest would stir up the order to see how the little animal was frightened and ran away with their eggs, but stupid Peter said, "Leave the creatures in peace, I do not like to do to them." They went ahead and got bit by a lake where swam number of ducks. The two brothers wanted to catch some of them and roast them, but stupid Peter sat against it and said, "Leave the creatures in peace. I do not touch them." And then they came to a beehive, where there was so much honey that it ran down the trunk. The two brothers would make a fire beneath the tree to suffocate the bees so they could take the honey, but stupid Peter sat down again against it. "Let the little animals in peace," he said. After some time they came to a castle where the stables were full of stone horses. They went through all the halls, but there was not a living person to see. Finally they came to a door, which hung three keys, and middle of the door there was a limb that they could look through and so when that inside the room sat a little gray man at the table. They called on him once, twice, but he did not hear it. The third time he got up and came over and opened the door. He did not say a word, but led them to a table loaded, and when they had eaten and drunk he showed to each his bedroom. The next morning he came to the eldest, beckoned to him and led him to a stone table on which was written three tasks that may be performed if the castle were freed. The first was to gather thousands of princess gems that lay out the moss in the forest, and if the sunset was missing a single one, was the one who had tried then to stone. The elder went in and searched all day, but at dusk he had only found one hundred and was immediately turned into stone. The next day would be the second oldest try his luck, but it did him no better, he found only two hundred pearls, and was also stone. Finally came the time for silly Peter. He searched and searched, but it went slowly, and he sat sadly on a stone and cried. While he was sitting there came the ant king, which he had saved, with five thousand ants, and it was not long before the little insects had collected all the pearls and put them together in a heap. The second task was to retrieve the key to the king's daughter's bedroom from the seabed. As stupid Peter came down to the water, came the ducks, he had saved swimming, and dived down and picked up the key to him. The third task was the most difficult. The king had three daughters, who were asleep, and he should now say who was the youngest. They resembled each other perfectly and there was no other difference than that just before they fell asleep had eaten a different sweetmeat, the eldest a piece of sugar, the second a little syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey. Now the Queen of the bees that stupid Peter had saved, flying and sat at the mouth of them. When the labeled who had eaten honey, it was sitting there, and so did the prince the right. Now the spell was broken, all woke up and they were turned to stone became human again. Stupid Peter married the youngest and best and became king when her father was dead and his two brothers received the two other sisters.
Bearskin	958	361	Danish	There was once a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier. He bravely, and was always the foremost when it rained bullets. As long as the war lasted, all went well, but when peace was made, he received his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where he wanted. His parents were dead and he had no home, and he asked as his brothers, he might be with them until the war broke out again. But his brothers were hard-hearted and said, "We really do not know what to do with you. You may even see to get along." The soldier had nothing left but his gun. It took him on the shoulder and went out into the wide world. He came out on a large moor, where there grew nothing but a circle of trees. There he sat sorrowfully and thought about his fate. "I have no money," he thought, "I can do nothing but to go to war, and now that peace they have no one needs me. I know in advance that I have to starve to death." Suddenly he heard a noise, and when he turned around, he saw that there was a strange man in a green coat. He was quite nice, but he had a hideous cloven foot. "I know what's wrong with you," he said. "Gold and possessions shall you have, but first I must know if you are not afraid of anything, so I do not give my money to no avail." - "A soldier afraid? How on earth would it be," replied the soldier. "Thou canst put me to the test." - "Yes, turn around so on," the man said. The soldier saw that there was a big, growling bear trotting toward him. "I will tickle your nose, so you need to lose the urge to growl," he said, aimed and hit the bear right on the nose, so it fell down and lay without moving. "I see quite well that you do not lack courage," said the stranger, "but you must fulfill another condition." The soldier felt enough who he had for himself. "If it does not endanger my salvation, it always," he said, "but otherwise I do not know." - "You can do it myself see," said the man, "in the first seven years, do not wash you, do not comb your beard and your hair, do not cut your nails, nor say one Our Father. I give you a coat and a envelope that you should go with the time. If you die within seven years have passed, you belong to me, but otherwise you are free, and enough money so long as you live. " The soldier thought of how miserable he was, and as he so often had gone to meet death, he decided to risk it this time, and said yes. Devil took off his green coat, handed it to the soldier and said, "When you have it on, you simply have to put your hand in your pocket, there is enough money." He pulled the skin off the bear and said, "It should be your jacket and your bed, you can not sleep anywhere else. And then you called bjørneskinds-man." Then disappeared djævelen.Soldaten put on his coat, put his hand in his pocket and saw that it was true what the man had said. He took so bear skins, went out into the world healthy and happy and pleaded not something that could be him good and his money harm. The first year it went fairly well, but next year he looked like a monster. The hair hung down almost over his face, his beard was like a piece of coarse felt, he had long claws on their fingers, and there was a thick layer of dirt on his face that if cress had been sown in it, it was grown up. Anyone who saw him, ran away, but as he everywhere gave the poor money, that they should pray that he might not die during the seven years and paid well for everything he still always a place to be. In the fourth year, he came to an inn where the landlord would not let him come in, not even in the house because he was afraid that the horses would be scared. But as Bearskin thrust his hand into his pocket and took a handful of ducats, the host let himself be persuaded to give him a room in an outhouse. But he had to promise not to prove anyone, because the inn should get vanrygte.Da Bearskin evenings sat alone in his room and the heart wished that the seven years were over, he heard a high wail from the next room of. As he had a compassionate heart, he opened the door and saw an old man who wrung her hands and wept. Bearskin went nearer, but the man jumped up and wanted to run away. When he heard a man's voice he let himself be prevailed on, and Bearskin spoke kindly to him, he opened his heart to him. His fortune was gradually dwindled, his daughters in distress, and he was so poor that he could not even pay the host, and now he had to be put in jail. "Is there something wrong," said Bearskin, "I have enough money." He called on the host, paid him and put in a purse full of gold in the pocket of the unfortunate mand.Den old man who now had all his care at an end, did not know how he was going to show his gratitude. "Will you go with me and from my daughters for a wife," he said, "are all miracles of beauty, and they will not say no when they hear what you have done for me. You look a little strange, but she will soon put thee. " It had Bearskin well, and he went with. When the eldest saw him she was so frightened that she screamed and ran away. The second stood still and looked at him from head to toe. "How can I marry a man who does not look like a human being?" she said. "Then I think, however, better The shaven bear that was released a man and showcased here. He had, however husartrøje and white gloves. If he even was only ugly, I might as well get used to him." But the youngest said: "It must be a good man who has helped you. And you have promised him a bride, you must keep it." It was a pity that Bearskin's face was covered with dirt and hair, otherwise they might have seen how delighted he was when he heard those words. He took a ring of, broke it, and gave her one half and kept the second. In her he wrote his name and in her he wrote her and asked her to hide it well. So he took his leave and said, "Once in three years, I wander about, and if I did not come back, you are free, for I am dead. But ask God to keep me alive." The poor bride herself entirely in black clothes , and when she thought of her husband, she got tears in her eyes. Her sisters mocked and taunted her. "Beware," said the eldest, "when her hand to him, he says claws into it." - "Beware!" Said the other, "Bears like sweet things, and if he likes you, he will eat you." - "Thou must always do as he likes," began the elder again, "or else he will growl." - "But the wedding will be a merry," said the other, "for bears dance well." The bride was silent and did not like their banter. Bearskin, however, around the world from one place to another, did good where he could, and gave generously to the poor that they might pray for him. When the last day of the seven years came, he went out on the moors, and sat under the trees. A little before the wind whistled, and the devil stood before him and looked really grumpy out, threw the old coat approached him and demanded the green back. "So far we are not there yet," said Bearskin, "thou must first make me clean." Whether the Devil liked it or not, he had to fetch water, wash and explain the man and cut his nails. He looked now like a brave soldier, and was much more beautiful than ever før.Da devil had gone, Bearskin was quite lighthearted. He went into the town, put on a magnificent velvet coat, seated in a carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove to his bride. No one knew him, the father thought it was a distinguished officer and led him into the room where his daughters were sitting. He got the space between the two elders, they poured wine for him, made sure he got the best food, and never seemed they had seen such a beautiful man. The bride sat opposite him in his black robes, did not look up and did not say a word. When he asked his father if he could get one of his daughters to wife, the two eldest jumped up, ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses, for each thought that she was the chosen one. As soon as the stranger had been alone with his bride, brought out his half of the ring, and threw it into a cup of wine and handed it to her. She took it, and when she had drunk it, and half of the ring on the bottom, her heart began to beat. She took the other half, which she wore in a belt around the neck, and it turned out that the two pieces fitted exactly together. "I am your groom who came to you as Bearskin," he said, "but by God's grace I have received my human form again." He hugged and kissed her, and however, the two sisters down in their best finery. When they saw that the youngest sister had won the beautiful warrior, and that it was none other than Bearskin, they rushed furiously out. One drowned in the well, the other hanged himself in a tree. In the evening there was someone who knocked on the door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it was the Devil in his green coat. "You see, now I got two souls instead of one," he said.
The peasant in heaven	1594	802	Danish	There was once a poor peasant who was very pious, and he became ill and died. When he came up to the gates of heaven there came just at the same time a very rich man and would also into the sky. Peter came with his key and opened the door and let the rich man come in, but not at the farmer. He stood outside and heard how the other was received with joy and gladness, and the sound of the loveliest song and music penetrated to him. A little later there was silence and then Peter came back and closed the peasant in. He thought that now would be sung as nice, but that did not sound a tone. Certainly went angels him kindly in the meeting and welcomed him, but singing was not there. He then asked Peter where it could be. "It'll be just as unfair in heaven as on earth," he said. "No," replied Peter, "we keep as much of you as from him, but you see how poor peasants like you come here every day, but it may take a hundred years in which there comes a single rich man. "
Table tires, the Gold Donkey and the Cudgel in the Sack	341	563	Danish	For many, many years ago once lived a tailor who had three sons, and only one goat. As the goat supported all of them with her milk, it had to be good, solid feed, and sons, therefore, to drive it out on the meadow. One day the eldest son of the churchyard, which was lovely, succulent herbs. When it was time to and eaten all day, he asked: "Are you now satisfied?" The goat answered, "Saturate and happy, can not eat a single leaf." "Let's go home," the boy said, and pulled it back to the barn. "Do it now had enough to eat?" asked the tailor. The boy said yes, but the father would, knowing that it was true, and went out and patted the goat and asked if it was full. The goat answered, "Wherewithal should I be satisfied? Over the graves and stones I jumped me tired, but not a single leaf I have eaten." "What I hear," cried the tailor, and ran upstairs and said to the boy: "You liar, you say, the goat is full, and then you let it starve." Enraged, he took off his sandal off the wall and chased the boy bort.Den next day it was the second son. He found a hedge, which was full of herbs and goat cleared them allesammen.Om evening when they go home, he asked: "Are you now satisfied?" And the goat replied: "Saturate and happy, can not eat a single leaf." "Let's go home," the boy said, and pulled it back to the barn. "Do it now had enough to eat?" asked the tailor. The boy said yes, but the father would, knowing that it was true, and went out and patted the animal and asked if it was full. The vicious goat answered, "Wherewithal should I be satisfied? Over the graves and stones I jumped me tired, but not a single leaf I have eaten." "The liars," cried the tailor, "where it is shameful to let the poor animal starve." Then he threw the second son of porten.Nu was the turn of the youngest son. He would do the thing well and led the goat to a scrub with fresh, succulent leaves. In the evening when they go home, he asked: "Are you now really enough?" goat replied: "Saturate and happy, can not eat a single leaf." "Let's go home," said the boy and pulled her into the stable. "Do it now had enough to eat?" asked the tailor. The boy said yes, but the tailor even went out and asked the goat, whether it was full. But it said, "How should I be satisfied? Over the graves and stones I jumped me tired, but not a single leaf I have eaten." "The rascals," cried the father, "one is not a hair better than the other. But now they no longer hold me for a ride." He ran upstairs and grabbed his yard and beating such loose on the boy, he ran away the best he kunne.Nu The old tailor was alone with the goat. The next day he went into the stable, stroked it and said, "Come my dear animals, today I will look for you." He took it with him to the rack, where there were plants that goats like to very much. "Now you can eat to their heart," he said, and let her browse till evening. "Are you now satisfied, small goat?" he asked. And the goat replied: "Saturate and happy, can not eat a single leaf." "Let's go home," said the tailor, and led her into the stable. Before he left, he turned once more and said, "Well, now you are for once satiated." But the goat answered, "Wherewithal should I be satisfied? Over the graves and stones I jumped me tired, but not a single leaf I have eaten." When the tailor heard that, he felt that he had done his sons watch. "Wait just, your ungrateful creature," cried he, "it is not punishment enough that you will be chased away. I'll make you so that you may not be familiar to show up for decent people." Then he lathered the goat in, took a razor and shaved her as clean. And when he thought that his yard was too good, he took a whip and gave her such cuts with it that she ran away as fast as it kunne.Skrædderen was now quite alone. He became more and more grief, and would gladly have had his sons back home, but he knew not where they were. The oldest was, however, come apprenticed to a carpenter, and was industrious and clever. When his years were over, his master gave him a table that looked like all the other tables, but there was nevertheless a brand like about it. When you said, "Cover thyself," was the instant a snow-white tablecloth on the table and then stood plate and knife and fork and a lot of wonderful food and wine. "Now I've got enough for the rest of my days," said the journeyman, and merry and happy he went out into the world and did not care whether the inn he came to was good or bad. Sometimes he felt like eating in the open, and then he took the table down the back and said, "Cover thyself," and immediately it was covered with everything your heart could desire. After some time, he intends to return to his father when he thought his anger probably had subsided. On the way home, he came to an inn that was full of guests, and they invited him to eat with. "Keep in only little food themselves," said the carpenter, "and be I'd rather my guests." The people laughed at him, but he put the table in the middle of the living room and said, "Cover thyself," and immediately stood the loveliest meal you could imagine. "Come on," said the carpenter, and they did not say twice but cut skillfully in itself. What surprised them the most was that when a dish had been emptied, came immediately another instead. The host stood in a corner and did not really know what to say to it, but thought, "How a chef I could probably need." The joiner and his comrades drank late into the night, so they went finally to bed, and the young companion asked the table by the wall of his room. The host had no rest, but suddenly he remembered that up at the lumber room stood an old table that looked utterly out as the carpenter. Hastily he retrieved it and crept softly in and swapped the two tables on. The carpenter went off the next morning without suspecting mischief reaching at noon home to his father, who was very glad to see him. "What have you learned, my son," he asked. "I have become a joiner." - "It's a good trade," said the old man, "but what have you brought back from your trip?" - "The best thing I took with is the table here," replied the son. Father looked at it and said: "Yes, it's not out anything further, it is both old and stale." - "But it is no ordinary table," said the carpenter, "when I say," Cover thyself, "is immediately the best food. Just invite all our relatives, so they must have something really good to eat." When the company was assembled, he put the table on the floor and said, "Little table, cover you." But the table was as bare as any other table who do not understand Danish. Then the poor guy that he had been robbed and was ashamed that he had to stand there like a liar. Everyone laughed him out, and they had to go back without getting either wet or dry. The tailor went back to her work, and her son gave themselves in the service of one mester.Den second son had been apprenticed to a miller. When his years were over, the master said, "Because you have been so well, I give you a donkey. But it is a very special kind, it can not pull carts or carrying bags." - "What can you use it for?" asked the young apprentice. "That makes gold," said Miller, "when you put it on a cloth and say briklebrit, drop gold out of it, both front and rear. "-" It must indeed be a nice animal, "said the journeyman, thanked him and went out into the world. When he needed money, he needed just saying briklebrit, then rained gold, and he did just that bend down and pick it up. he demanded always the best, where he was going, the more expensive the better, for his purse was always full. Because for some time he had seen round the world, he wants to return home to his father when he thought that he will forget his anger when he saw the gold donkey. Coincidentally, he came into the same house in which his brother's table had been stolen. the host would bring the donkey into the stable, but he said " Do you bother. I'll even tie my wolf. I like best to know where it stands. "The host thought it was very strange and I thought that that would even make sure his donkey, had been not much money in his pocket, but when the guest handed him two gold pieces and asked him to arrange for some good food, he made big eyes and bought the best he could get. After they had eaten, guest asked what he was guilty, and the host reckoning, and said he might have a few gold pieces . swain grip in your pocket, but it was empty. "wait," he said, "so I'll get some money." the cloth he took with him. the host could not imagine what it meant, and when the guest went into barn, he slipped peeped through the window. the stranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried briklebrit, and immediately began to rain down with gold pieces. "Hill Men," said the host, it was not a bad budget. " Swain paid, however, what he owed, and then went to bed. But the host slipped on overnight and put another donkey instead of gold donkey. By daybreak went journeyman of place. At midday he reached his father, who was very glad to see him again. "What have you learned, my son," he asked. "I have been mills." - "Have you not something to take home from your trip," he continued. "Nothing but a donkey," replied the son. "Donkeys have we will both promise enough of the old man said," I would rather have been a goat. "-" But this is no ordinary donkey, "said the son," when I say briklebrit, it gives me as much gold I will have. Let all our friends and acquaintances to come here, I'll do it to rich people. "-" It was wonderful, "said the old man," so I no longer need to sit and poke with the sewing needle. Then he hurried off to invite all her relatives. When the company was assembled, spread miller her dress out and led the ass into the room. "Briklebrit," he shouted, but there was no gold pieces. Miller pulled a long face and asked his relatives many times for pardon because they had to go home as poor as they had come. The old man had to get to grips with needle and thread, and the son fastened in service of a møller.Den third brother had apprenticed to a turner, and as it is a very artful craftsmanship, took his apprenticeship longest. His brothers wrote, however, and told how bad it had passed them, and that they had been robbed. When shifter was trained, his master gave him a bag and said: "There is a cudgel inside." - "The bag I probably need," said the journeyman, "but cudgel is so heavy, it's just a nuisance." - "Listen first," the master said, "if there is someone who will hurt you, you simply have to say" Quack truncheon, "then pops out and danced merrily on your enemy's back, he does not can move in eight days, and it will not stop before saying: "cudgel in the sack." swain thanked and went off with the bag. When there was someone who wanted him dead, he simply said, "Quack truncheon "and immediately the cudgel away at the guy, and before he knew it, he was so beaten up that he could not move. Toward evening came shifter to the inn where his brothers had been robbed. he put his knapsack in front on the table and began to talk about all the wonderful things he had seen and heard around the world. "a table tire you and a gold donkey is not to be despised," he said, "but it is nothing to what I have here in my sack. "-" What in the world would it be, "said the host, and pricked ears," it is doubtless full of gems. The I ought to get also have. All good things come in threes. "Later in the evening went on the guest bed and put the bag under his pillow. When the host thought he was asleep, he slipped in to take the sack and put another in its place. The turner had long awaited it and when the miller with a brisk tug to him, he cried, "Quack, truncheon," and immediately began cudgel to beat up the host, so it could propose. the host screamed and squealed, but the higher he screamed the harder cudgel beat, and finally he fell, exhausted. "If you are not in a hurry give back the table you and guldæselet, so we start a fresh," said turner. "Oh no," cried the host, quite humbly, "I want to give everything I have, only make the accursed kobold creep back into the sack. "-" then I will let justice with mercy, "said the journeyman, and then shouted:" cudgel in the sack. "Next morning the turner on the way home with table tire you and gold donkey. the tailor was very pleased when he saw him again, o g asked what he had learned abroad. "I have been concerns," he replied, "it is a beautiful craft," said the old man, "but you have not brought something home from your trip?" - "Yes," replied the son, "I have a club here in the bag." - "A cudgel," exclaimed the father, "it was also something. You can of course use every tree." - "But it is no ordinary truncheon, little father," said the son, "when I say," Quack, truncheon, "as it rushes away at it, that will hurt me. By its help I have gotten both board deck you and the gold donkey back. Just invite all our friends and acquaintances, then they get enough food and drink and pockets full of gold. " The tailor would not quite believe, but nevertheless got the relatives. Then the turner spread a cloth in the ass then, and Miller said: "Briklebrit." Now rained gold pieces into large piles, so they all could get as much as they could carry. Then he fetched the table, and the tailor said, "Cover up." Instant stood the glorious cuisine. Such a celebration had that have never been in the tailor's house, and it lasted long into the night. The tailor locked away needle and thread and yards in a closet and beat the beat, and they lived happily, and satisfied with their day ende.Nu you shall hear what happened to the naughty goat. It was ashamed of his bald head and hid therefore in a foxes den. When the fox came home in the evening, as the two great eyes sparkle in the darkness, and was so frightened that it ran away. It met the bear could look at it that there was something wrong going on, and asked: "What kind of a face, you put up." - "Imagine sitting a horrendously pricey in my cave," said the fox, "when I got home before, gazing on me with its fiery eyes." - "We'll probably get chased out," said the bear, and went with me to the cave and looked in. But when it saw the fiery eyes, it was also scared and dare not bind himself with the terrible animal, but took the passport On the way he met a bee who found it strangely upset, and said: "What a face you on. What have you done with your good mood? " - "Yes, you can easily talk," replied the bear, "there sits a terrible animals inside a foxhole and illustrious, and we can not get it chased out" - "Poor bear," said Bee, "now I will see to help you, although I am only a poor weak creature whom otherwise do not bother to look for. " She flew into the fox's cave, lighted on the goat's smoothly shorn head, and stung her so that the bleating of the cave and furiously ran out into the wide world, and nobody knows where it has gone.
Little brother and sister	101	450	Danish	Little brother took sister's hand and said: "Since our mother died, we do not have a happy hour more. Our stepmother beats us every day and kicking us when we come up to her. The dog has it better than us, it is however sometimes something good to eat, but we get nothing but dry crusts of bread. My God, if mom knew it! Come on, we go out into the wide world. " They walked all day through fields and meadows, and when it rained the sister said: "See, the good God weeps with us." In the evening they came to a large forest and was so weary with hunger and their long journey, that they climbed into a hollow tree and fell to sove.Da they woke up the next morning, the sun high in the sky. "I'm so thirsty," said the little brother, "you can not hear anything that trickles? Just it was a source so I could get something to drink." So they took each other's hands and went out to search for the source. But the stepmother was a witch and when the kids went, she had crept after them and bewitched all the springs in the forest. They soon came to one, and little brother would lie down and drink of it water, but the sister heard how it murmured: "He who drinks of me will be a tiger will be who drinks of me will be a tiger . " - "Do not drink anything," she would shout, "you will become a tiger and tear me." Although he was very thirsty, he said: "So I wait with drinking, the next time we come to some water." But when they came to a second brook the sister heard it say, "Whoever drinks of me, turning into a wolf, the one drinker of me turns into a wolf." - "You, do not drink," she cried, "you will become a wolf and eat me." Little brother drank failed again, but when they came to the next source said: "Now I can not stand it anymore, I must drink." The sister heard it say, "Whoever drinks of me will become a deer, the drinks of me will become a deer," and shouted: "Do not drink anything, so you become a deer and run away from me." But little brother had already settled down to drink, and as soon as the first drops passed his lips, he turned into a rådyr.Nu the sister began to cry, and the deer cried also. But the girl comforted and said, "I would never his leave you." She took her golden girdle and tied it around the neck of the animal. Then she braided a band of reeds and tied it on to it, and now they went on into the forest. When they had gone a long time, they came to a small house, and when the girl saw it was empty, she thought: "Here we stay." She did make a soft bed of moss and foliage to the deer. Every morning she went out and gathered roots and berries and nuts for herself, and fresh grass for the deer that ate from her hand. In the evening, when she was tired, she laid her head on rådyrets back and slept there. Had little brother just been human again, they could have had the great sammen.I some time, they were all alone in the woods. But once the king spent a large hunting out there. The horns sounded, barking of the dogs and hunters merry cries penetrated to them, and the deer was eager to run there. "Let me go to them," it said, "I can not stand it." - "You must promise me to come back in the evening," she said, "I will now close the door to the wild hunters should not come in here. When you return home tonight, you must knock and say:" Little sister, let up, "so I can know that it is you otherwise I close not up." Fawn sprang out, and felt happy in the fresh air. The king and his huntsmen saw the beautiful animal and started after it, but could not catch it; Just when they thought they had it, jumped over the bushes and disappeared. When it was dark he went to the house and shouted: "sister, let me." She opened the door for it, and he went in and slept soon on his soft bed. The next day the hunt began again, and the deer could not rest, but said: "Little sister, I must be there." She opened the door and said, "Yes, but you must come home tonight and knock on like yesterday." When the King and his hunters saw the fawn with the golden collar again, they chased it, but it was too nimble and swift. When they had pursued it throughout the day, it was almost evening wounded in the foot, and had to wobble slowly home. A hunter slipped after him to the house and heard it said: "sister, let me." and saw that the door was opened and immediately closed again. The hunter noticed all this carefully to it all and told the king what he had seen and heard. "Tomorrow we will hunt again," King said da.Søsterlil was terrified when she saw that her fawn was wounded. She washed his foot, laid herbs on and said, "Put now to sleep, small deer, so you can get well again." The wound was slight, so that it was completely healed next morning. And when the hunting sounded out there, said the deer: "I can not stand it, I have to get there. I'll make sure that they do not get hold of me." The sister began to cry and said, "I know you enough to death, and then j oak all alone in the world." But when the deer said: "I die of grief if I should be locked up here," she could not but with a heavy heart opened the door, and happy jumped it off. When the king saw this, he said: "Now, follow it all day, but nobody can do it harm." When the sun had gone down, the King said to the hunter, "Come and show me the little house." When he got there he knocked and shouted: "sister, let me." The door was opened and the King went in, and saw the most beautiful girl he had ever seen. The girl was very frightened when she saw a strange man with a gold crown on his head. But the King looked kindly hand out to her and said, "Will you go with me and be my queen?" - "Yes, I will," she replied, "but I will never leave the deer, it must follow." And the King said that it should stay with her as long as she lived, and feel good in every way. However it came leaping, she tied the rope onto it, took it in hand, and they went out of huset.Kongen took the beautiful girl in front of him on his horse and rode home with her to the castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great splendor. For a long time they lived happily together, and the deer was cared for and looked after and ran about in the castle garden. The evil stepmother had lived in the belief that the sister had been torn to pieces by wild animals in the forest, and little brother turned into a deer and shot by hunters. When she was told how good it was surpassed them, she was filled with envy and just wondered how she could hurt them. Her own daughter, who was ugly as sin, and had only one eye, complained to her, and said: "It was really me who should have been queen." The old tried to keep her happy. "Wait," she said, "when the time comes advice." While King was out hunting in the forest, the queen had given birth to a lovely boy. The old witch a stepmother undertook when bedchamber figure and went into the room where the Queen lay, and said to her: "Come on in and take a bath, it will strengthen you. But make haste before the water gets cold. " Her daughter was also present, and they carried the Queen into the bath house and put her in the bathtub, and then locked the door and ran away. And in the bath had turned so strong a fire, the queen before very long would be kvalt.Da they had done, put the ugly daughter in bed. The old witch gave her the queen's face and figure, but the eye that she was missing, she could not give her. To the king should not get it, she lay on the side where there was no eye. When he came home in the evening and was told that he had a son, he was very happy and went to his wife's bedside to see how she was. But the old woman cried hastily, "For God's sake, do not pull the curtain! The Queen can not stand the light." The king went away, not knowing that there was a false queen in sengen.Ved midnight, when all slept, so the nurse who sat beside the cradle, the door opened and the true Queen come in. She took the baby from the cot and gave it milk to drink. So she put the pads on, put the child down again and covered it well. She did not forget the deer, but went to the corner and patted it. Then she went softly away again. The nurse asked the day after the sentries whether any one had entered the castle at night, but they said nej.Dronningen came many nights, but never said anything. Nurse saw her every time, but did not dare speak to anyone derom.Efter some time began the queen a night to speak and said: "My child, my fawn twice more I come may." The nurse did not answer, but when the Queen had disappeared she went to the king and told it all. The king decided then that he would sleep in the child next night. At midnight the Queen appeared again and said: "My child, my fawn once more I come may." And she took the child up, as usual, and disappeared. The King dared not speak to her, but he watched also in there the next night. And when the queen said, "My child my fawn this once I come must," he could no longer hold back, but jumped up and shouted: "You can not be any other than my dear wife." - "It is I," she replied, and in that moment God gave her life back, and she was fresh and healthy. Then she told the king about the crime that the wicked witch and her daughter had committed. The king had them both brought to court. The daughter was led into the woods where she was torn by wild animals, the witch was sentenced to be burned at the stake. And at that moment, she was in ashes, was the deer turned into human again, and little brother and sister lived happily ever after.
Bridal spectacle	1477	1452	Danish	There was once a young shepherd who wanted to marry. He knew three sisters, but since they were all equally beautiful, he did not know whom he should give the preference. He therefore asked his mother for advice, and she said, "Invite all three, and set cheese for them, and note how they cut it." He did as she had said. The first ate cheese with rind and all, the second cut the crust in a hurry, so a great amount of good cheese was wasted, the third took neither too little nor too much. The shepherd told his mother and she immediately said: "Marry the third." He did, and lived many years happily with her.
The Bremen Town Musicians	256	130	Danish	There was once a man who had a donkey. It had for many years carried sacks to the mill, but whose strength began to take off, so it became more and more capable of work. The man thought when to dispose of it, but the donkey noticed enough, from what direction the wind was blowing, and went on their way to the city, because it thought that it could not be otherwise, it could probably be folk there. When it had gone some way he found a hunting dog, who lay gasping. "What's the matter?" Asked the donkey. "I get weaker every passing day," said the dog, "it comes after all with age. And now my lord to kill me because he can not use me hunting. So I ran my way." - "You know," said the donkey, "you should go with me to Bremen and become musician. I play the lute and you are beating the drum." The dog liked the idea and they went on together. Shortly after they passed a cat who lay on the road and cut the miserable faces. "What is the matter with you, old shaver," said the donkey. "Who can be cheerful when his neck is one," answered the cat, "because now I am old and I would rather sit behind the stove and purr than catch mice, my mistress wanted to drown me. I ran my way, but now good advice is expensive. " - "Go with us to Bremen and become a musician," said the donkey. The cat was willing to do that, and they went all three on the road. Shortly after the three travelers passed by a yard where there was a rooster and crowing with all his might. "Your cries are enough to pierce bone and marrow," said the donkey, "what's the matter." - "I have foretold good weather for Our Lady every day," said the cock, "but still must boil soup on me tomorrow, because it is Sunday, and strangers come. Tonight head chopped off me and now I'll scream as long as I can. " - "Come here, redhead," said the donkey, "Go with us to Bremen and become a musician. You seem to have a good voice, so when we are all performing together, surely it could be anything." They could, however, not reach Bremen in one day and in the evening they came to a forest where they decided to stay the night. The donkey and the dog lay down under a large tree, the cat and the cock sat up among the branches, the tap up to the top because it thought there was safest. Before he went to sleep, so it around on all sides, and when it seemed that the light shine in the distance, so she called his friends and said that there would certainly be a house nearby. "Then we go there, for here is not nice," said the donkey. The dog also felt that it could do well to get a few bones to gnaw. They set off in the direction of the light was growing and eventually led them to a brightly lit cutthroats. The donkey, which was the largest, went and looked through the window. "What can you see?" Asked the cock. "A table set," said the donkey, "and robbers sitting and making themselves very comfortable." - "It was something for us," said the cock. "Yes, only we were there," said the ass. Then they consulted together how they should get the robbers out and eventually found out. The donkey asked his forefeet on the window, the dog jumped on its back, the cat climbed onto the dog and the rooster flew up and sat on the cat's head. The moment they began their music, the donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat meowed and the rooster crowed, and so they rushed all together through the window, saw the broken glass clinking flew in all directions. The robbers of terrified, and when they thought it was a ghost, they fled as fast as they could into the forest. The four companions sat down at the table and took care of the dishes as if they had not had food for a whole måned.Da the four playing men were tired, put out the lights and went to bed. The donkey lay down on the dunghill, the dog behind the door, the cat in the chimney-corner and the rooster flew up to the top beam. They were tired of the long road, and it was not long before they fell asleep. At midnight the robbers saw that the light was off and everything appeared to be quiet, the captain said: "We should not have let ourselves be intimidated so easily," and he commanded now one of his men to go and examine the house. The man went into the kitchen to strike a light, and when he thought that the cat's fiery eyes were sparks, he put a match to them to fire. But the cat did not understand the joke; it jumped straight in the face and scratched him. He was beside himself with fear and would run out the door, but the dog bit him in the leg, and when he passed the dunghill, gave the donkey him a proper kick. The tap was also awakened and began to crow of all forces. But the robber ran as strongly as he could back to his captain and said, "There's a horrible witch inside the house. She scratched me in the face, and outside the door stands a man who stabbed me in the leg with a knife. In the farm is a huge monster that started beating me with a wooden club and rooftop sitting judge and shouting, "Give me hold of the thief." so I ran as fast as I could. " The robbers never ventured back to the house musicians found themselves so well to be there, they were there the rest of their lives. And the one who eventually told it, his mouth is still warm.
The four skilful brothers	1224	653	Danish	There was once a poor man who had four sons. When they were grown up, he said to them: "You must now go into the world and make sure yourself that I can no longer nourish you. Stand out and learn a trade, and see how you through." The brothers said goodbye to his father and went off. After walking for some time, they came to a crossroads. "Here we part," said the eldest, "but in four years we will meet again at the same place. Let us in the years to try our luck separately." They went their separate ways, and the eldest met a man who asked where he was going. "I'm going to learn a trade," he replied. "Come with me, I'll teach you to be a thief," the man said. "No," he replied, "it's not something honest craftsmanship, and the end of the game is that you get to dangle as knebelen in a bell." - "What you really no fear," said the man. "I just want to teach you how to get their hands on it, as no other people can get hold of, and no one will ever detect you." He allowed himself be persuaded, and was apprenticed to the man. After some time he was so skilled that he could get everything he wanted. The second brother also met a man who asked him where he was going. "I go out into the world at random," he said. "Come with me and be an astronomer," the man said. "It's the best of everything. Nothing is hidden one." He liked the crafts, and after some time he was trained and so skilled that his master gave him a telescope and said: "With it you can see everything going on in heaven and on earth." The third brother apprenticed to a hunter and got as good an education that he was very skilled. When he went away, his master gave him a gun and said: "With it you can never fail. It affects everything you are aiming at." The youngest brother also met a man who asked him where he was going. When he heard it, he said: "Do not you want to be a tailor?" - "I do not want to sit bent from morning to evening and poke with a needle," he replied. "You talk as you've been meaning to," the man said. "When you teach me the art of, you can win both fame and fortune." He let himself be persuaded, and went with the man who learned his art from scratch. At parting, he gave him a needle and said: "With this needle, you can sew everything together, whether it is as soft as wax or as hard as stone, and nobody could find the seam." When the four years were over, brothers again at the crossroads, embraced and kissed each other, and went home to their father. "What wind has blown you back again?" asked the old happy when he saw them. They told him what they had learned, and he decided to put them to the test. They were just sitting under a big tree, and he said to his first son: "Can you tell me how many eggs are in the nest that is in your top?" Stargazer took his binoculars. "There are five," he said. "Can you take them all down here without the bird feel it," said the old now to his second son. The thief climbed up the tree and came shortly after down with the eggs and the bird was quite quiet up in its nest. Then, his father one egg in the middle of the table and the other on each corner and said to the huntsman, "Can you hit them?" The hunter laid the gun and hit all the eggs with a shot-one can believe he must have had some of the gunpowder that can shoot the corner. "Now it's your turn," said the father to the youngest son, "you can sew the eggs and the young birds so well that the shot did not have anything to them." The tailor took his needle forward, and when he was done, the thief back up the tree with eggs and put them under the bird without being aware of it. The bird sat on them a few days, climbed the kids, and the neck, where the tailor had sewn them together, they had a red stripe. "Yes, I have used your time well," said the old man, "and it is impossible for me to say which of you who are the most capable. But it may prove even know occasion. Shortly thereafter came the country in turmoil, the king's daughter had been kidnapped by a dragon. the king lamented over, and made known to the one who brought her back should have her to wife. "Here we can show what we pigeons," said the brothers to each other, and decided to go out together to find her. "I'll soon get to know where she is, "said stargazer and put his binoculars to his eyes." Now I see her, "he said after a pause," she is far from here on a rock in the sea, and the dragon is beside her watching her. "He went to the king and asked for a ship that they could sail to the rock. When they got there was the dragon and slept m ed head in the princess's lap. "I dare not shoot, for I should kill her," said the hunter. "Then I'll try my luck," said the thief, and got her deftly pulled out the dragon without being aware of it. They hurried now happy down to the ship, but when the dragon woke up and saw that the princess was gone, it flew away, snorting with rage. When it was just above the ship, term hunter on it and hit it in the heart. The monster sank down dead in the water, but broke with the whole ship. Fortunately, they got hold of a few boards, by which they could stay afloat, but it had been out with them if the tailor is not in a hurry had gathered all the planks and stitched them together with his needle, so they could sail hjem.Da king saw his daughter again, he was very happy and told the brothers: "One of you shall have my daughter in marriage, but you must decide which of you it should be." But they could not agree, because they all wanted to marry the beautiful princess. "If I had not seen her, had never found her," said stargazer. "What had it worked, if I had not taken her from the dragon," said the thief. "And if I had not killed the monster had torn us all," said the hunter. "And I had not sewn the ship together, we lay all along the ocean floor," said the tailor. But now the king made the controversy. "You all have equal right to her," he said, "But you can not all four marry her and therefore, none of you have her. Instead, I will give you each half a kingdom reward. " The brothers were pleased with this and said: "It is better than we are enemies," and they lived happy and happy in their realms for many, many years.
The leaky shoes	1264	306	Danish	Once there was a king who had twelve daughters, each one more beautiful than the other. At night they slept in a large room where the beds stood next to each other, and each night locked king door behind them. But when the morning he opened it, there were big holes in their shoes, as if they had been dancing all night, and no one could get to know how it had happened. He allowed it to be proclaimed that whoever could get clarity on the matter, should be allowed to choose one of them to wife and after his death inherit the kingdom. But if the one who volunteered, had not figured it out within three days, had forfeited his life. Soon after came a prince who would dare attempt. The king received him kindly, and in the evening he was led into a room adjoining the room where they slept. His bed was placed there, and he was to whether they went to dance, and that they should not be able to sneak away, but that he saw it, was the door to the hall open. But his eyelids were as heavy as lead, and he fell asleep, and when he awoke the next morning and saw that there were holes in their shoes, he could see that they had danced at night. The second and third night went just the same, and then his head was struck off without mercy. There were several who embarked on the enterprise, but they had all forfeited their lives. However it happened once that a poor soldier who had been wounded and could not be in service more, was coming to this city. There he met an old woman who asked him where he was going. "I hardly know myself," he said, and for løjers guilt he added: "I would probably want to find out where the princesses dance, and become king." - "It's not difficult," said the old man, "you just do not drink the wine they bring you at night, and must pretend as if you are sleeping." And she gave him a cloak and said, "When you put it on, you are invisible and can steal after them." The soldier took now seriously courage and went up to the king. He was as well received as the others, and was wearing magnificent clothes. In the evening he was led into his room, and when he was about to go to bed, the eldest came and brought him a cup of wine, but he had tied a sponge under his chin and let it all run into it. Then he went to bed and began gradually to snore of all forces. He heard now that princesses laughed, and the eldest said, "He could also have saved his life." Then they stood up, opened cabinets and boxes and pretty dresses. "I welcome all of you," said the youngest, "but I am so anxious, as if that would happen to me an accident." - "You're a real fool," said the eldest, "have you forgotten how many Kings' sons have already come here in vain? I had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping draft; the clown would not have awakened." When they were all finished, they looked carefully at the soldier, but he had closed his eyes and did not move, and they believed then, there was peace and no danger. The eldest went over and gave a blow on his bed, immediately sank into the ground and there was an opening, where she descended the head of the other. The soldier who had seen it all, got in a hurry mantle, and followed them. On the steps, he just trod a little on her dress and she said, startled: "Who is it that takes hold of me?" - "Do not be so stupid," said the eldest, "you have caught it on a nail." When they came down the stairs, stood in a lovely garden, where the leaves were of silver, and shone and shone. "It is best, I'll take one of them as evidence," said the soldier, and broke a branch off with a huge bang. "Did you hear that?" cried the youngest, "there is something wrong going on." - "Talk," said the eldest, "we are pleased shots, because we have got rid of our prince." Then they went to another garden where all the leaves were of gold, and lastly into a third where they were of bright diamonds. He broke off a branch of each of the trees and it creaked as the youngest princess in terror, but the eldest still with that they were salutes. Soon after they came to a deep water where there were twelve boats, and in each of them sat a prince. They took each one of the princesses down to him, and the soldier came with the youngest. "Where the boat is heavy today, said the prince," I must use all my strength to get it off. "-" It's probably because it's so hot, said the youngest, "I am also so called in cheeks. " On the other side stood a brightly lit castle and merry music sound to meet them. They docked and went into the castle. Each prince danced with his beloved, and the soldier danced with, without anyone could see him. When one of them took a cup of wine, he drank it out, so it was empty when he put it to his mouth. The youngest was frightened, but the eldest always made her to be quiet. They danced all night now, and when they stopped, the shoes worn completely broken. The princes rowed them back across the water, and this time the soldier seated himself to the oldest. On shore they took leave of their princes, and promised to come back the next night. When they reached the stairs the soldier ran on in front and lay down in his bed, and when they tired and out of breath, came up in the House, he was snoring so loudly that they all heard it, and the elder said: "Him do we not to be afraid. " They took off their beautiful clothes, put the shoes under the bed, and lay into them. The soldier was resolved not to tell what he had seen, but also went to the other night to see the whimsical notion. Everything went as before, and they danced again, the shoes were broken. The third time he took a cup with him, and when he day after went to the king, stood the twelve princesses behind the door to hear what he said. "Who are my daughters so danced with?" the king asked. "With twelve princes in an underground palace," replied the soldier, reported what he had seen, and showed him the tokens. The king summoned his daughters and asked if it was true what the soldier said, and when they saw that it was no good to deny it, they went to confession. Thereupon the King asked who he would have to wife. "I am no longer young," he replied, "let me the eldest." The wedding was celebrated on the same day, and he was promised the kingdom when the old king died. But the princes were bewitched for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve princesses.
The wise people	985	1384	Danish	A farmer took a day's oak stick out of the corner and said to his wife: "Now I go to the countryside, Trine, and shall not return for three days. If the cattle dealers come in the time and want to buy our three cows, you can leave them run with them, but not for less than two hundred dollars, you hear. " - "Just go in God's name," replied the woman, "I will manage." - "Yes, God help us all thirteen," the man said, "even when you were little, fell on your head, and you can even now. But I tell you to do stupid things, I let my stick here color your back blue, and you can rely on, the color should be so real that it stays a year. " Then went han.Næste morning the cattle dealer, and the woman had to agree with him. When he saw the cows and heard the price, he said: "So much I want to give. This is the probably worth between brothers. I take them away with me." He unfastened them and pulled them out of the barn, but as he was going out of the gate, the woman clutched at his sleeve and said: "I must have the two hundred dollars, otherwise I can not let you go with them." - "It's fair enough," the man replied, "but I forgot to get my purse with. But you should not be afraid, I'll get your money. The two cows, I take with me, and the third will I leave here, then I pledge. " It was quite obvious, she thought, and let the man go away with the cows. "How pleased Hans will be when he finds how cleverly I have been," she thought. On the third day peasant came home as he had said, and asked if the cows were sold. "It's dear Hans," she replied, "and for two hundred dollars, like you said. They are scarcely worth so much, but the man took them without a fuss." - "Where is the money?" asked the farmer. "Those I have not yet," she replied, "he had just forgotten his wallet, but he has good security for them." - "How?" asked the man. "One of the three cows he will not until he has paid. I was so cunning to keep the least. It eats at least." The man became angry, took his stick and would give her the beating he had promised her. But suddenly he let it sink and said, "You are the stupidest goose that can walk on God's green earth. I really feel sorry for you. I will go out on the road and wait there for three days and see if I find any which is dumber than you. If I do, you get off the hook, but otherwise you need to get your entire hard-earned wages. "so he went out on the road, sat on a stone and waited to see what would happen. Then he saw a waggon coming. The woman stood up in the middle of it, instead of sitting on a bundle of straw which lay beside, to guide oxen. "That is certainly one that I am looking," said the man, and ran in front of the cart back and forth as someone who is not sane. "What want, my friend," said the woman, "I do not know you, where you come from?" - "I have fallen down from the sky," he replied, "and I do not know how to get back up. Can not you drive me up?" - "I do not know the way," she replied, "but when you come from heaven you can surely tell me how my husband. He's been there for three years. Have not you seen him?" - "Yes, I have. Yes, it can not go all people equally well. He keeps sheep, and the sheep give him a great deal to do. They run up the mountains and get lost in the thicket, and he has to run for them to drive them back together. ragged, he is also. the clothes are just about to fall off his body, and I know enough from the fairy tales that in heaven there is no tailors. St. Peter will not have them there. " - "Who'd be thinking," shouted the woman, "but listen again, I'll pick his Sunday coat, hanging at home in the closet, the he may well go up there, I will probably take it?" - "That will not do," replied the farmer, "you must not take clothes into Heaven, they are taken from the door." - "Then hark you," said the woman, "yesterday I sold my wheat and got a pretty penny for them, I will send him. When you hide the purse in your pocket, there's really no one to notice it." - "Yes, when it can not be otherwise, I will do you that favor," replied the farmer. "Just sit here," she said, "I run home and fetch the money, I'm here once again. I stand as the beasts easier than when I sit on the straw." She whipped oxen and the farmer thought: "She is as well on the way to become mad. If she really brings the money, my wife praise his fortune, so she lets the beatings." Shortly after she came running with money, put them in his pocket and thanked him for his venlighed.Da wife came home, she found her son, who had been out on the field. She told the wonderful, she had experienced, and added: "I'm really glad that I was allowed to send my poor man anything, who would have thought that someone could suffer in heaven." The son was beside himself with wonder. "Him, I also see," he said, "I will immediately go and look for him. Such a you do not get to see every day. He has to tell me how that looks up there, and what to order." He saddled his horse and rode off in a hurry. When he came out on the peasant who was sitting under a willow tree in the process of counting the money in the purse. "Have not you seen a man who has come from heaven?" the boy asked. "Yes," replied the farmer, "he goes home again. He went up the mountain over there, there he is no closer to heaven. When you hurry you can still catch him." - "I've worn as a beast all day," the boy said, "and I've become even more tired of riding here. I know the man. Do me a favor and put you on my horse and look to get him down here . " - "It's probably also one that has not invented gunpowder," thought the peasant and said, "Why should I not do you this favor," and then he rode off in a quick trot. The boy sat and waited until night fell, but the peasant never came back. "The man from Heaven must certainly have been busy and would not turn back," he thought, "and the peasant has no doubt given him the horse to my father." He went home and told everything to his mother and said he had sent his father the horse so he does not always have to run around. "It was done well," said the woman, "you have young legs, the ones you can use." When the farmer came home, he put the horse in the barn next to the third cow, and then went into the room to his wife . "You can praise your happiness, Trine," he said, "I have found two that were even stupider than you. This time you avoid beatings, the ones we save so for another time." He lit his pipe and sat in the grandfather chair. "It was a good business," he said, "a bold horse and a big bag of money for two lean cows. If stupidity always brought in as much, I would be quite hold it in honor." So thought the peasant, but I am sure that you feel better about those who are not so clever.
The six swans	465	451	Danish	There was once a king who was hunting in a great wood, and he pursued a wild animal so eagerly that none of his people could follow him. In the evening he discovered that he was lost and how much he tried, he could not find the exit. Suddenly he saw an old woman with rocking head come limped toward him. "Can you show me the way, my good wife," he asked. "I could probably, Lord King," she replied, "but if you do not agree to my conditions, you will never out and die of hunger." - "What is the condition?" the king asked. "I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as beautiful as the day's light. If I want to take her to the queen, I will show you the way." King, who had completely lost the courage, said yes and the old woman to her house, where her daughter received him as if she had been expecting him. She was very pretty, but the king could not look at her without his heart snøredes together in fear. He however made the girl in front of him on his horse, the old showed him the way, and they rode back to the castle, where the wedding was fejret.Kongen had been married once before and had with his first wife seven children, six boys and a girl he loved all over the world. As he was afraid that the stepmother had hurt them, he took them to a castle that was deep in the woods. It was well hidden, and the road was so hard to find that he could not have found it if not a wise woman had given him a key yarn that had the wonderful property that once he threw it in front of her, rolled it up by itself and showed him the way. The King, however, went so often out to visit her children that the queen would suspect. She bribed servants, so they betrayed her secret, and told the keyed who showed the way. The queen had now no rest until she discovered where the king hid it. Then she made some little white silk shirts and when the king one day was hunting, she went into the forest with them and let keyed guidance. When the children saw her in the distance, they thought that it was their father who came and ran happy towards her. At the same moment she threw the shirts over them, and immediately they were changed into swans, and flew away over the forest. The queen went home very pleased and thought she was rid of her stepchildren. The little girl had not run out with her brothers, and the mother did not know she existed. When the king next day came to visit his children, he found only the little girl. "Where are your brothers?" he asked. The girl told him that she had seen from the window, her brothers as swans flew over the forest, and showed him some feathers, which she had picked up after them. The king was distressed, but it never occurred to him that the Queen might be able to commit so did the crime, and he was afraid to let the girl be left alone, he would take her home with him to the castle. But she was afraid of her stepmother and asked if she could stay a night in skoven.Jeg will go out and look for my brothers, thought the poor girl, and when it was dark she set out on the road. She walked the whole night and the next day, and when she was so tired that she could not go a step further. Then she saw a little hut among the trees, went in and got into a small room where six little beds. She dared not lie in any of them, but lay down on the floor and fell asleep. Just before sunset awoke she heard a rustling, and saw six swans come flying in at the window. They sat on the ground and blew at each other, then all their feathers off, and took svanehammen like a shirt. The girl recognized her brothers again and crawled out from his hiding place. The boys were very excited to see her, but their joy did not last long. "You can not stay," said the eldest, "this is some robbers, and when they come home, beats you to death." - "Can not you protect me?" she asked. "No," he replied, shaking his head sadly, "only fifteen minutes every day we throw svanehammen and people, but then we turn to the swans." - "I can not save you," asked the girl crying. "It's too hard," he replied, "six years shalt not speak nor laugh, and in that time, make six shirts out of flowers. And if you say one word, all your work wasted." The time had passed, and as soon as he spoke the last words, they were changed into swans and flew out of vinduet.Men girl decided to save his brothers, though it should cost her her life. She walked away from the hut and slept at night in a tree. The next morning she began collecting star flowers and sew the first shirt. There was no one she could talk to and laugh she felt no urge. And she worked and worked from morning to night. After a long time the king went hunting in the woods and some of his huntsmen came to the tree where the girl sat. "Who are you?" they asked, but she did not answer. "Come down," they cried, "we must not do anything." She only shook her head, and when they were to intrude on her, she threw her necklace down to them to make them happy. As they continued to plague her, she threw her belt down there, and since it did not help her garters and gradually all her clothes so she kept other than her shift. The hunters did not settle for that, but climbed the tree, carried the girl down and brought her to the king. "Who are you?" he asked, but she did not answer. He tried to speak to her in different languages, but she just shook her head. Yet the king was so captivated by her beauty that he put her on his horse and rode home with her to her castle. There he gave her beautiful clothes, and she was as beautiful as the bright sun, but she did not say a single word. She sat beside him at the table, and gradually he came to hold her so much that he decided to marry hende.Kongen had a wicked mother who was very unhappy with this marriage and spoke ill of the young queen. "God knows what kind of a slut," she said, "she's probably not worthy to be queen." One year after, when she gave birth to her first child, took the old it from her, and covered the her mouth with blood. Then she went to the king and accused her of being a cannibal. But the king did not believe it and would not have the need to do her any harm. She sat continually sewing at the shirts and thought of nothing else. When she gave birth to a child the wicked mother used the same way, but the king would not believe what she said. "She is innocent," he said, "she was not dumb, she could vouch for his innocence." But when the old for the third time robbed the child and accused the queen, the king had to ask her to court and she was ordered to brændes.Den day, judgment should be enforced, they were six years just past and the shirts were finished, only on the last were missing one sleeve. As she was led to the stake, she took them on her arm, and just as the fire had turned on, they came six swans migrating through the air. When she saw that her salvation was approaching, filled her heart with joy. The swans came down so she could throw the shirts over them, and immediately, as they touched them, fell svanehammene and brothers stood, but the youngest had a swan's wing instead of his left arm. They embraced and kissed each other and the Queen said to the king, who was very surprised at what he had seen: "Now I may speak, and say that I am innocent." She told him that his mother had stolen children. To the king with great joy they have, and the old had to come up with them. She was now tied at the stake and burned, but the king and queen lived happily for many, many years.
The six servants	1274	513A	Danish	Do you want to hear the story of the six servants? For many, many years ago once lived an old queen who was an evil witch. She had a daughter who was beautiful, you could see his eyes. The old just wondered how she would make as much mischief as she could. When volunteered a suitor she demanded that he should first put to the test, and if he did not pass it, he had to die. Princess's great beauty had already lured many risked, but none of them could do what the old demanded, and no mercy was shown putting his head on the block. The rumor about the princess's great beauty also reached even for a prince: "I will go and woo her," he said, but his father advised him of it. "It will be your death," he said. As the son mortally ill and remained so for seven years, and no doctor could help him. When the father saw that there was no more hope, he said sadly: "Go thither, and try your luck, it's probably the best thing that can help you." When the son heard this, he was immediately recovered, and got up and went on vej.En time when he was riding across a heath, he saw from a distance what looked like a haystack. When he got closer, he saw that it was a human being, but his stomach was so thick that it looked like a small mountain. When he saw the traveler, he stood up and said, "Can not you use me in your service?" - "What should I do with such a block," said the prince. "What you see here is nothing," the man replied, "when I stretch myself out, I am three thousand times fatter." - "Well then, I might need you," said the prince, "come with me." Together they journeyed, and when they had gone a little way, then the other, lying with his ear to the ground. "What are you doing there?" asked the prince. "I listen," the man replied. "What you hear then?" - "I hear what is going on around the world, for nothing escapes my ears, I can hear the grass grow." - "Can you then hear what is going on at the old queen who has the beautiful daughter?" asked the prince. "I hear the whizzing of the sword. It cut off the head of a suitor." - "I can use you," said the prince, "come with me." They went onwards, and then saw a pair of feet lying and part of a pair of legs, but they could not see. When they had gone a long way, they came to the body, and finally to the head. "You are what a tall rascal," said the prince. "That would indeed nothing to talk about," the man replied, "when I really stretch my limbs, I am three thousand times as long. I'm taller than the highest mountain on earth. If you will take me in your service, I to." - "Just come in," said the prince. Shortly after they found a man sitting on the road with a bandage on his eyes. "Do you have bad eyes?" asked the prince. "No," the man replied, "but I dare not remove the bandage for my eyes is so strong that when I look at someone, he jumps into a thousand pieces. If you can use me, I do not mind taking service with you." - "Come with me," said the prince, and they went on. When they had gone some distance, they found a man lying in the middle of the sun and trembling with cold. "How can you freeze when the sun is shining so warm?" asked the prince. "I have it in a whole different way than in others," the man replied, "The hotter it is, the colder I am, and the cold bothers me to the marrow, but when it's cold, I'm always hot. In the middle of the ice I can not stand it for heat and fire I'm dying of cold. " - "You are a strange fellow," said the prince, "but if you want to serve me, then come with me." Shortly after they saw a man who stood and craned his neck and looked far out over the mountains. "What are you looking at so eagerly?" asked the prince. "My eyes are so clear," the man replied, "I can see the fields and forests, mountains and valleys throughout the world." - "It's just such a I lack," said the Prince, "came also with me." Now came the prince with his six servants to the city where the old queen lived. He did not say who he was, but said: "If you will give me your beautiful daughter, I will do whatever you demand." The sorceress was delighted that the beautiful young man should fall into her net, and said, "I will ask you three tasks. If you solve them, my daughter is yours." - "What's the first?" he asked. "You must get me my ring which I have lost in the Red Sea." - "It is not so easy," said the prince. Then he said to his servants, "Can you help me get hold of a ring, located in the Red Sea?" - "Now I see how it is," he said with the good eyes, "the hanging on a pointed stone." The long bar them there and said, "If only I could see it, so I should probably grab it." - "Is there something wrong," said the thick, lay on his stomach and put his mouth into the water and drank and drank, to the sea was completely exhausted. The long stooped down a little and took the ring. The prince took it to the old one, was astonished, and said: "Yes, it is the right ring. The first test you have passed, now comes the second. Down there on the meadow in front of the castle grasses Three hundred fat oxen them you eat with skin and hair and horns, and in the basement there is three hundred casks of wine, them you need to drink. If there is a single bit left over, you may lose your life. " - "May I ask a guest?" asked the prince, "the food tastes a non when eating alone." - "A must you take with you," said the old man, and grinned maliciously, "then you have company, but no more." The prince went out to his servants and said to the head: "Today you must be my guest and allowed to eat you really satisfied. " He is now so thick he could, and ate the three hundred oxen to the last mouthful and even asked if there was more, the wine he drank straight from the barrels without using glasses and emptied them to the last drop. When he finished, the prince went to the old and said that now he had solved the second problem. She was astonished and said: "So far yet never met, but you are missing one more thing," and if she thought to herself: "Do not get so good at." Then she said: "I will bring my daughter to you, and you must hold her in your arms, but be careful that you do not fall asleep. At twelve I come, and is she not with you, it out with you. " - "It's easy enough," said the prince, "I'll make sure to keep my eyes open." He called his servants and told them what the witch had said. "You can never know what sticks behind," he said, "it can not hurt to be careful. It's best that you keep watch outside the door and careful, she can not escape." In the evening brought the witch his daughter to him. The long lay around them in a circle, and the thick stood outside the door, so that no living creature could enter. The moon was shining into the room so he could see how lovely she was, but she did not say a word. He could not get tired of admiring her beauty, but when the bell was eleven, got the old ones by witchcraft to fall asleep, and at the same moment the princess forsvundet.Da bell was missing a quarter to twelve, woke up the back. They were all in despair, but he belonged as well, saying, "Be still, and I hear how she is." A little later he said: "She's in a rock three hundred leagues from hence, bewailing her fate. If you long that will, you can be there in a few steps." - "Yes," replied the long, "but the one with the sharp eyes must go with and help me." The long train him now on the shoulders, and a moment later they were on the rock. He took the bandage from the other's eyes, and immediately the rock shivered into a thousand pieces. Then he carried the maiden back and fetched his companion, and as the clock struck twelve, and sat there all along. The witch came in with a malicious grin, and thought her daughter sat velforvaret 300 miles away. "Now he is when my," she thought, but when she saw the girl, she said, horrified: "He can do more than I do." She dared not but give him his daughter, but without he saw it, she whispered to her: "It's a pity for you that you should settle for the tacky guy and do not choose a husband for your heart." the proud virgin became angry and thought only of how she should take revenge. The next morning she caused three hundred loads of firewood run together in the yard and said to the prince, she would be his bride, if someone would sit inside the fire and endure the melting heat. She did not think he could get any of his servants there, and felt that his love for her was so great that he would do it, and then she would be free of him. "Now we all have done anything for you except frozen stick," said the servants, "now he must to it." The fire burned for three days, and when the flames died down, he sat in the center of hot ash and said: "Never in my life have I known such cold. If it had lasted much longer, I was frozen to death." Now helped no excursions. The beautiful maiden was now forced to take the unknown young man. As they drove to the church, the old man said: "I can not endure the disgrace," and sent soldiers after them, to cut down for food and bring her daughter home. But one of the servants had heard it all: "What shall we do?" he said to the head, and he knew how. He spat something out of all the water he had drunk, and it was to a large lake, which the warriors drowned. When the witch knew it, she sent armed riders of place, but the servants heard it again, and he with the strong eyes took the bandage and looked at them, and immediately broke in two as if they were made of glass. When they came to the church, they took six servants farewell: "Now ye no longer need us," they said to the prince, "now we head out into the world and try our luck." Half a mil from the royal son castle lay a small village where there was a pork shepherd with his flock. "You do not know really who I am," he said to his bride, "I am no prince, but a swineherd. It is my father who goes over there. We must also help him to feed the pigs." They went into the inn, and the prince said to krofolkene that night to take the princess's clothes away. When she awoke in the morning, she had to pull the landlady's old dress and woolen stockings, and the woman even pretended that it was a great nådessag that she got them. "If it had not been for your husband's sake, had I not at all got them," she said. The princess thought now really, that she had been married to a swineherd and helped him with the herd. "I have not deserved this for my haughtiness and pride I have been," thought hun.Efter eight days, she could not endure it anymore, her feet were sore and swollen. When a man came and asked her if she knew who her husband was. "Yes," she replied, "he is a swineherd, and has just gone out to see to earn a little by selling some ribbons and braids." - "Come, I'll bring you to him," the man said. She went with him, and he led her to the palace. There stood her husband in splendid robes and she did not know him before he kissed her and said: "I have suffered so much for your sake, so I also wanted to put you to the test." Then the wedding was celebrated again with great splendor, and they lived happily together.
The seven ravens	236	451	Danish	There was once a man who had seven sons but no daughters. Finally his wife gave birth a baby girl. They were very happy, but the child was small and sickly and had to be baptized at home. Father sent in a hurry one of the boys to a source to fetch water, the other six races with, and then they all would have hold of the mug to scoop, it fell in the water. There they stood and did not know what to do, because they did not dare go home. The father waited and waited and eventually became impatient and said: "Now they skarns boys probably indulged in play and forget it all." He became more and more afraid that the girl would die without being baptized, and shouted finally annoyed: "I wish all the boys would turn into ravens!" No sooner had he said it, before he heard a whirring in the air above his head, and when he looked up, he saw seven coal-black ravne.Faderen could not take that intention, but how sad they were at the loss of their seven boys, consoled, however, by now with their little daughter, who soon grew strong and became more beautiful every day that passed. She knew for many years, not that she had had brothers, for her parents took care not to tell her, but one day she heard random one wife said that the girl was probably beautiful, but she was out in one way to blame for her seven brothers' misfortune. She was very distressed when she heard it, and asked his father and mother what had become of her brothers. The parents could no longer hide it from her, but they said that it had been the will of heaven. Her birth had only been the innocent cause. But the girl seemed anyway, it was her fault and that she would do whatever she could to save them. One night she crept quietly out of the house and set out to go out into the wide world to find his brothers and save them, whatever it would cost. She took nothing with her but a little ring in memory of his parents, a piece of bread and a jug of water and a small chair to sit on when she was træt.Hun went and went straight to the end of the world. So she came to the sun, but it was so hot, so hot and ate little children. So fast she could she ran her way to the moon, but it was so cold and angry, and when it saw the child, said: "I smell human flesh." She hurried to get away and went to the stars, which were kind and good, and each of them sat on a small chair. Only the morning star arose, and gave her a little leg and said: "Without this leg you can not enter the glass mountain, and there are your brothers." The girl took the bone, wrapped it up in a cloth, and went straight to her came to the glass mountain. The door was closed, and when she would take the leg instead of closing up, scarf empty. She did not know what she should do, she would save his brothers. Then took the good little girl a knife, cut off his little finger, put it in the lock and the door opened. She went in and took a dwarf who asked, "What are you looking for, my little girl?" - "I'm looking for my brothers, the seven ravens," she replied. "They are not at home," said the dwarf, "but come inside and wait a little, then they come soon enough." The dwarf sat now food for the ravens of seven plates and poured water for seven cups. The girl took a mouthful of each plate and drank a sip from each cup. In the last she placed the ring she had taken med.Kort after she heard a whistling in the air. "Now they come home," said the dwarf. Then they came and sat down to eat. "Who is it who have eaten and drunk out of our food," they shouted. "It is a human." And when the seventh had emptied his cup, he found the ring on the bottom and saw that it was his mother's. "Just it was our sister, so we were saved," he exclaimed, and when the girl heard this, she came forward and immediately became the ravens to people again. They embraced and kissed each other, and went joyfully home to their father and mother.
The two brothers	572	567	Danish	There were once two brothers, one rich and the other poor. The kingdom was a goldsmith and evil-hearted, the other was good and pious and lived by tying cost. He had two sons who were twins and like each other as two drops of water. The two boys went to their rich uncle and got something to eat what fell in the house. One day, when the poor man went out in the woods and overall risk showed he spotted a bird which was quite golden and so beautiful that he had never seen anything like it. He picked up a stone, threw it at it and hit it too, so one of its golden feathers fell down. But the bird flew away. The man took the feather to his brother, who immediately saw that it was pure gold, and gave him a lot of money for it. Next day the man climbed into a birch tree to chop some branches of. He saw the same bird flew out and soon he found a nest in which to lay a golden egg. He took it and brought it to his brother, who gave him a lot of money for it. "The bird I could probably want to get their hands on," he said. The next day the poor man back into the forest and watched as the golden bird sitting in a tree. He threw a stone at it. The bird fell down dead, and he brought it to his brother, who gave him a lot of money for it. "Now I am as a dependent of my life," thought he, and went contentedly hjem.Guldsmeden was a clever guy and knew what it was for a bird. "Roast me," he said to his wife, "but beware that you get it all in. I want to eat it all alone." For there was the strangeness of the bird, that he who ate its heart and liver found every morning a piece of gold under his pillow. The wife did the bird capable, and put it on the spit. She had also other things to do and was therefore even have to go out of the kitchen. While she was gone, came brush tie the two little boys in there and began to turn slightly on the spit. I immediately fell two small pieces of meat on the floor and one said, "Let's just eat it. I am so hungry, and there is really no one who brands." When the woman came in a moment later, she saw that they were chewing on something and asked what they ate. "It's just a few small pieces that fell down," they replied. "God, it has been the heart and liver," said the woman, frightened and that her husband would not find it and get angry, killed her in a hurry one cock, heart and liver with golden bird. When it was ready, she carried it in for her husband and he ate the last mouthful. But when he next morning put his hand under the pillow to take gold piece was no more gold than ellers.De two boys had no idea where their luck had been good to them. When they got up in the morning, dropped something on the floor, and then they would see what it was, they found two gold pieces. They gave it to their father, who absolutely could not imagine where they came from, but since it was such in every morning, he walked over to his brother and told him the strange story. Goldsmith at once knew how it had happened, and to avenge himself he said: "Your children are in covenant with the devil. Do not take the gold, and you can not keep the boys at home, the evil has them in his power and can also bring you in depravity. " The father was afraid, and how heavily it fell over him, he went with the two boys into the woods and left them der.De two boys now ran around the woods and could not find his way home. At last they met a hunter who asked who they were. "Our father's brush," replied, and told that they no longer had to be home because every morning was a gold piece under their pillow. "It's nothing really bad," said the hunter, "as you otherwise nice guys and do not lie idle." The good man liked the children, and when he did not even have any, he took them home. He brought them to hunters and saved the piece of gold he found every morning because he thought that they might need them in fremtiden.Da they were grown up, took their foster them a day out in the woods and said: "today you must do your sighting shot, so I can see if I have learned." They went with him to the place where they take care of the game, but they were long waiting without showing anything. Suddenly the hunter spotted a flock of Snow Geese, flying in the triangle just above them. "Shoot me down one from each corner," he said to one. He did it, and now he had passed the test. Soon after came another bunch of flying as a total. The other brother shot now one from each corner, and the hunter also declared his trial. The two brothers went into the forest, where they spoke with each other without the hunter heard it. When they came home in the evening and had to sit at table, one of them said: "We did not touch a bite before I said yes to it, we ask you." - "What is it?" asked the hunter. "Now we want to look around the world," he said, "will allow us to go away?" - "I have two real hunters," said the old man joyfully, "this is how it should be. Go ye only of place and hope it may go well with you." Before they left, gave the old ones every gay and a dog and let them take as many gold pieces they would. Then he accompanied them part of the way, and at parting he gave them a bright knife, and said: "If ever you separate, then plug this knife into a tree, then whoever of you coming back there to see how it is passed his brother. If the side of the knife facing the edge where he is drawn to, is polished, he is alive, but the blade is rusty, he's dead. " The brothers went on and on and eventually came to a large forest, which they could not get through in a day. They were therefore forced to stay the night and eat what they had in the bag. Next day they went on, but the forest was no end. "We've got to shoot something, otherwise we die the hunger," said one, and when he saw a hare, he put the gun to his cheek, but the hare cried, "Dear hunter, let me go, two of my kids should get. "then came the jumping with two small cubs hare, but they were so sweet that the hunter could not have the heart to shoot them, and as they walked on, ran the two young ones right behind dem.Lidt afterwards the sight of a fox who slunk past, and aimed at it, but the fox cried: "Dear hunter, let me go, two of my kids should get." but the hunter thought it was a sin to kill small animals, and the trudged now with. A moment later a wolf trotting, but when the hunters wanted to shoot, cried: "Dear hunter, let me go, two of my kids should get." The two little Cub Scouts came now with the hunters, and when they gradually met a bear, and cried: "Dear hunter, let me gåto of my kids should get." So there were eight small animals. Finally came a big lion shook his mane, but the hunters were not afraid and aimed at it. "Dear hunter, let me go, two of my kids you get," he said, and now hunters had both lions and bears and wolves and foxes and hares. They were the however just hungry yet, and one of them said to the foxes, "Listen, I have some crafty guys, can not you get us something to eat." - "There is a village just honor," they replied, "that we have already brought us many a fowl, now we show you the way." They went into the village and bought food for herself and beasts, and then on. The foxes were familiar with the area and knew all where the poultry farms were so they could show the hunters way overalt.De marched around for some time but could not find any place where they both could get service and they agreed that it was best to part. They divided the animals, so that they each got a lion, a bear, a wolf, a fox and a hare. Then they said goodbye to each other, put the old hunter's knife stuck in a tree, and one went east and the other towards vest.Kort while later the youngest of his animals to a town which was all hung with black crape, and that he went into an inn and asked the host if he could accommodate his animals. The host closed them in a barn, where there was a hole in the wall. And the hare crept out and fetched himself head of a cabbage, fox fetched himself a hen, and when he had devoured it got the cock, but the wolf, the bear and the lion was too big to get through. The host let them be taken out of the field, where there was a cow grazing, that they may eat their fill. When the huntsman had taken care of his animals, he asked why the city was hung with black crape. "That's because the king's only daughter should die tomorrow," replied the host. "Is she ill?" asked the hunter. "No," replied the host, "she is vigorous and healthy enough, but she must die anyway." - "How can it be?" - "Outside the city lives a dragon on a high, high mountain," the man replied. "The demand every year a young virgin, otherwise destroy the whole country. But now there is not other than the princess back, so there is no mercy, tomorrow she must like the dragon." - "Why is the dragon not killed?" said the hunter. "Yes, replied the host," there are many knights who have tried then, but they all had to pay with their lives. The king has promised his daughter and after his death the whole kingdom to the person who kills the dragon. "The hunter said no more, but the next morning he went with his animals up to take the mountain. He came to a small church and the altar were three cups, on which was inscribed: "Whoever empties these cups, becoming the strongest man in the world and can lift the sword that lies before the threshold." huntsman did not drink, but went out and dug until he came to the sword, but he could not budge it from its place. he went in and emptied the cups and then became so strong that he could easily wield it. the king, Marshal and the whole court followed the princess out of the city. from afar she saw the huntsman who stood up on the mountain and waited for her and would not go up, because she thought it was the dragon, but when the country would otherwise be lost, she decided finally to the sad journey. the king and courtiers turned sadly home; only Marshal stood for the AFS tooth to see what would ske.Da king's daughter came up the hill, it was not the dragon, but the young huntsman, who comforted her and said that he would save her, and let her inside the church. Then came the seven-headed dragon rushing with great noise. It was very surprised to see the hunter and asked him what he was doing there on the mountain. "I will fight with you," replied the hunter. "Now I have killed so many knights and will probably also probably the better of you," said the dragon and he breathed fire out of seven jaws. It was supposed that the fire would kindle in the dry grass and the hunter were smothered in smoke and flames, but the animals came up and entered the fire down. Dragon rushed upon the huntsman, but he swung his sword until it sang through the air and struck the three heads. Now the dragon was beside himself with rage, flew high into the air, spewed flames out of the hunter and would throw at him, but he drew his sword again and cut another three heads of it. The monster was dull and sank. However, it would again plunge loose on the hunter, but he gathered all his strength and struck the tail of it. Now it was unable to fight more, and he called his animals, that they might tear it. When the struggle was ended, the huntsman unlocked the church. The princess had fainted with fear and emotion and lay on the floor. He carried her out, and when she came to herself and opened his eyes, he showed her the dragon and said that now she was saved. She rejoiced and said: "I'll marry you. Father has promised me to him who killed the dragon." Then she took off her necklace of coral, and divided it amongst the animals, and the lion received the golden clasp. The hunter gave her a handkerchief, which was her name, and he cut the seven tongues of the dragon heads and hid them deri.Han however, was tired and included after the game, and the princess said thus: "Let us sleep a little. We can view both to penetrate. " They then lay down into the grass and the huntsman said to the lion: "You must keep watch so that nobody comes and attacks us." The lion lay down beside them, but it was also tired of the fight and called the bear and said, "Lie down beside me, I can not keep your eyes open, and wake me if anything happens." The bear did, but it was too sleepy, and soon after said to the wolf: "I am skrupsøvnig. You may lie here and keep watch, but away let me know if there would be something on." The wolf, however, was just as tired as the other two, and called the fox and asked the guard. But even Fox could keep your eyes open and therefore asked the hare watch over them. The poor little hare was so tired, so tired that he fell asleep and had no one, it could get to guard itself. So now they lay there in a row, the princess, hunter, lion, the bear, the wolf, the fox and the hare, and slept fast.Marskallen had become standing to take care of what happened, and when he did not see the dragon fly away with the princess and everything up there seemed to be quiet and peaceful, he finally courage and went up the mountain. There he found the dragon, which was torn apart on the ground next to the princess and the huntsman and all the animals. He was a very evil man and marched his sword and cut off the head of the hunter, then took the princess on his arm and carried her down the mountain. When she awoke, she was dismayed, but Marshal said: "You are now in my power. You should tell that it's me who killed the dragon." - "I can not," she replied, "that's a hunter and his animals who did it." He went because his sword and threatened to kill her if she did not obey, and she was then have to love it. Then he took her to the king who did not know what to contain himself for joy that he had his own child again. "It is I who killed the dragon," said the Marshal, "I have saved the princess and the whole country, and now require that you fulfill your promises." - "Is it true what he says?" the king asked. "It may well be," she replied, "but I ask, however, that the wedding must wait a year." Before that time, she hoped that her dear hunter would let hear from sig.Oppe on the mountain was, however, the animals are sleeping beside their dead master. A large bumblebee flew and sat on the hare's nose, but the hunted him with its paw and went back to sleep. Bien came again, but the hare chased it away again. Third time put it on so strong in the nose that woke up. Instant woke the fox, the fox woke the wolf, the wolf woke the bear and the bear the lion. When the lion saw that the princess was gone and his master was dead, he began to roar and shouted: "Who did this? Why did not you wake me, bear?" - "Why did not you wake me?" the bear said to the wolf, and said to the fox: "Why did not you wake me?" - "But you had to go wake me up," said the fox to the hare. The poor little animal did not know what to answer, and were therefore to blame for it all. The others would rush over it, but asked: "Do not kill me. I will bring our master to life again. I know a mountain where there grows a herb that heals all wounds and diseases. But it's two-hundredths mil from here." - "About twenty-four hours you have to be here again with the herb," ​​said the lion, and the hare of the place and really came back in time. Leo sat now head of the body, the hare placed the root in his mouth and immediately started the blood flowing through the veins and the hunter was alive again. He was horrified when he saw the maiden, and thought, "She must have gone away whilst I was sleeping, to get rid of me." Leo had hastily put his head on the wrong, but he was so distressed that he does not notice it. Only when he was going to eat for dinner, he discovered that his face turned to the wrong side and asked the animals what had happened while he slept. The lion told him that they all had been so tired that they fell asleep, and when they woke up, they found him with a severed head. Haren had so downloaded the healing herb and they had the bar haste sharply wrong. To make amends, tore the head of the hunter and turned it on, and the hare was using the herb to grow together igen.Jægeren went however grieved around and made his animals dance for people. Coincidentally, he came just a year later to the city where the princess whom he had saved, lived. The whole town was hung with scarlet, and he asked the host: "What does that mean? A year ago, the whole town was hung with bloom and now the rays of the reddest scarlet." - "It must be all my heart tell you," replied the host, "last year were the king's only daughter handed over to the dragon, but the marshal fought with it and saved her and tomorrow their wedding day. Therefore hung back then crape and now scarlet." the following day, when the wedding was celebrated, said the hunter at noon to the host: "Do I believe that today I will eat bread from the king's table here?" - "The jump I do not," replied the host, "I'll bet a hundred pieces of gold." The hunter put as much contrast and called the hare, "Listen little giddy," he said, "can you get me some of the king's bread. Haren had not, as it might leave it to, but had themselves to it." I get probably butcher dogs after me when I run alone on the street, "he thought. and so it went well. the dogs came running and would make holes in his good coat. it bounded away at lightning speed and slipped into a sentry box, without the sentry saw it. the dogs after it, but the man did not understand the joke, and beat them with bøssekolben, so the screaming and howling ran away. When the hare saw that the way was clear, he ran straight into the castle, sat down under princess's chair and scratched her foot. "Will you away," she thought it was her dog. Haren scratched her again, but she still thought it was the dog. Third time she looked down and finally knew the hare by its collar. She took him on her lap, carried it into his room and asked what it would. "My master, who killed the dragon has sent me," said he, "I had to ask for some of it broke, the king eats." She was very happy and immediately left the baker bring what it demanded. "But he can also wear it up for me, so the dogs do not do me anything," said the hare. The baker carried it straight to the inn, then took the hare bread in the forepaws and brought it to his master. "You see," said the hunter to the host, "may I ask for the hundred gold pieces." The host was astonished. "But now I also want some of the king rose," said the hunter. "I could probably like to watch," said the host, but bet he would not. The huntsman called the fox and said, "Can you go and fetch me some of the king's rose." The known better slipped roads and crept up to the castle without a single dog saw it, sat under the princess's chair and scratched her foot. When she looked down, she knew immediately fox on the collar, took him into his room and asked what it would. "My master, who killed the dragon, sent me up here," said he, "I must ask anything of the king rose." She immediately called the chef, and he had to bring the roast and carry it straight to the inn. Then the fox took the dish, waved flies away with its tail and brought it to his master. "You see," he said to the host, "I now have both the king's bread and meat, but I also have some vegetables. Then he called the wolf and said," Go up and get me some of the king's vegetables. " the wolf did not need to be afraid of anyone, but went straight to the palace and into the king's daughter and tore her dress, so she turned around. she knew immediately the collar and asked what it would. "My master, who killed dragon, has sent me, "said he," I would like some of the king's vegetables. "She immediately left the chef make some and he had to bring them to the inn that took the wolf dish and brought it to his master." there can I see, "he said to the host," now I have bread and meat and vegetables, but now I also have some pastries. "and he called the bear and said," Come here, candy mouth. Can you go up and fetch me some of the king's wares. "The bear trotted off and everyone went out of the way, but when it came to the guard, they presented their muskets, and would not let him go into the castle. So got up on his hind legs and gave them a few boxes on the ears, as they tumbled to the right and left, went into the palace, stood behind her, and growled a little. When she turned around, she knew the bears, let him go into in his room and asked what it would. "My master, who killed the dragon, sent me up here," said he, "I would like to have some pastries." She left because the baker bake some cakes and bring them down to the inn . the bear first licked up the comfits which had rolled down, and brought the dish to his master. "you see," he said to the host, "now I have bread and meat and vegetables and confectionery, but I will also want some of the king's wine. "He called the lion and said:" You keep probably a f get you drunk sometimes. Go up and get me some of the king's wine. "Leo went with commendable steps down the street, and all the people fled terrified. The sentries would obstruct it, but it excluded just a roar, then ran away. Leo went up the castle and struck its tail on the door. the princess came and opened the door and was almost afraid, but then she knew it at the collar gold clasp and took it with him into his room and asked what it would. "My lord, who killed the dragon, sent me up here, "said he," I would like some of the king's wine. "She called when the cupbearer that he would give it some of the wine, the king used to drink." It is best I go in and see that I get it right, "said the lion and went down into the basement. bearer wanted to draw some of the wine waiters used to drink." Let me taste, "said the lion, tapped one halvpot and swallowed it in one mouthful. "It's not right," said the lion. the man frowned on it and would give it another fad that Marshal used to drink. "Let me taste," said the lion, drew half a measure and drank it, "yes, it's better, but it's still not right." - "Bilderberg such a stupid animals themselves, he understands on wine," said cupbearer furious, but at the same lion gave him such a slap in the face, he fell on the floor. When he came to his feet, he led the implied into a small cellar where the king's wine lay that no other human being tasted. Leo tapped half a pot, drank it and then said: "It is the right" and bade the cupbearer fill six bottles. When they came out in the air, the lion was not free to be a little drunk and swaying back and forth, as the cupbearer had to carry the wine to the inn. So took the lion cart and brought it to his master. "You see," he said to the host, "now I have bread and meat and vegetables and wine from the king's table. Now we want to eat." He then sat down at the table and also gave the animals something to eat, and he was very glad, for he saw that the king's daughter still loved him. When they were filled, he said to the host: "I have eaten and drunk king's food, now I go to the palace and marry the princess." - "How will it go to?" The host said, "Today she holds the wedding with another." The hunter took the princess's handkerchief with seven drawn cubs and said, "This will help me to it." The host then on the scarf and shook his head. "No," he said, "I can rather get me to believe anything other than that. I stake my house and courtyard on it." The hunter took a purse with a thousand gold pieces. "The ones I put on the other hand," said han.Kongen asked, however, her daughter what all the wild animals had had to do at the castle. "I dare not say so," she replied, "but send for their master, so do you manage wisely." The king sent a servant to wait on him to invite the stranger, and he came just as the huntsman had bet with the host. "You see," he said, "now sends the king sent for me, but I do not go the way I look." Then he went out to the waiter and said, "Tell the king that I ask him to send me royal apparel, a carriage with six horses, and servants to attend me." When the king heard this answer, he asked his daughter what he should do. "Do as he demands," she replied, and the king sent royal apparel, a carriage with six horses, and servants to wait. "You see," said the hunter to the host, "it happens that I demand." Then he took the beautiful clothes on, took the handkerchief with drawn the kids and drove to the castle. When the king saw him coming, he asked his daughter how he should receive him. "Go out to meet him," she replied. The king did so, and led him in his animals followed. The king gave him a seat himself and his daughter, Marshal sat on the other side, but did not know him again. However, the dragon's seven heads paraded around to appear forward, and the king said: "The seven heads are carved Marshal of the dragon, and therefore I give him today my daughter to wife." When the huntsman opened the gap and asked, "Where are the tongues go?" Marshal was pale with fear and knew not what to say, but finally he said, "Dragons have no tongues." - "Liars should not have tongues," said the hunter, "but drawn cubs are victory-brands," and now he closed the scarf up, stuck his tongue into each gap, and they fit quite. Then he showed the princess the handkerchief on which the name was embroidered, and asked who she had given it. "It gave me the one who killed the dragon," she replied. He called his animals, took the necklace with the golden lock, showed the princess and asked if it was. "It's mine," she replied, "I gave it to the animals who helped to overcome the dragon." The hunter now said: "When I get tired of the game had fallen asleep came marshal and cut my head off. Then he abducted the Princess and said that it was he who had killed the dragon. Tongues, scarf and collar proves clearly enough that he has lied. "And he revealed that his animal had healed him with a wonderful herb, and he a year had gone around with them until he came back here, and the host told him the marshal fraud. "is it true that he killed the dragon?" the king asked his daughter. "Yes," she replied, "now can I reveal the marshal shameful acts because without my sake has come to light, for he had forced me to promise to keep quiet. Therefore, I asked whether the wedding had to wait years and days. "The king called his twelve rulers that they should judge marshal, and they agreed that he was torn by oxen. The sentence was carried out, and the king gave his daughter and appointed him governor of the whole kingdom. the wedding was celebrated with great splendor, and the young king sent for his father and his foster father and gave them rich gifts. He did not forget the host, but let him up and said: "you see, sir host, I have married the princess and your house and yard are mine." - "Yes, I have the right to it," replied the host. "But I will let justice with mercy," said the young king "keep his farm and the thousand pieces of gold." the young king lived happy and pleased with his queen. He often went hunting and they believe animals followed him. near the castle was, however, a forest which recounted many nasty things about. When you first came in, relax can not easily get out again, they said. Kon gene had a great inclination to hunt in it and tormented her father until he allowed him. He rode with a great following, and when he came to the forest, he saw a snow-white hart over. "Wait till I come again, I will chase that beautiful creature," he said to his people and rode into the woods, followed only by his animals. The people waited until it was dark, but when he did not come back, rode home and told the young queen: "The king has chased a white hind in the enchanted forest and has not come out yet." The queen was very scared when she heard it. The king had chased the animal without being able to catch up. When he thought it was within firing range, it was the moment far away, and finally disappeared. He felt now that he had gone deep into the forest, took his horn and blew into it, but there was no answer, for his people could not hear it. As night fell, he had to give up looking for the road and lit a bonfire at a tree to spend the night there. When he sat down by the fire with his animals, he seemed suddenly heard a human voice, but he could not discover whence it came. A little later he heard someone who moaned above him, and when he looked up in the tree, he saw an old woman who sat and wailed: "Oh, how cold I am." - "Come on down and warm yourself," he said. "I dare not," she replied, "your animals will bite me." - "They make you nothing," replied the king, "do come down." The old woman, however, was a witch. "Now I throw a sprig down to you," she said, "when you beat them with it on your back makes me nothing." But the moment he did so, they were turned to stone. When the witch did not have to be afraid of the animals, she leapt down and touched him also with a wand, and he was also to stone. Then she laughed and dragged him and the animals into a vault, where there was already a whole bunch of these kinds sten.Den young queen grew more and more unhappy when the king did not come again. Coincidentally, his other brother, who had turned to the east, just at this time come to the Kingdom. He had not been able to get something to do and had then traveled around with his animals and had let them dance. Once he wanted to learn what had happened to his brother, and when he came to the tree in which they at parting had stuck the knife, he saw that half of it was rusty and half outright. "There must have happened to my brother a great misfortune," he thought frightened, "but maybe I can save him, half the knife is still blank." He marched the West with his animals, and when he came to the city gate guard came up to him and asked if he should join him with the Queen. She had in the past always been beside herself with anxiety, and thought he had perished in the enchanted forest. The brothers looked for each other so much that the sentry took him to the young king, and then he would also animals with them. The sentries, indeed, that it was his brother who was involved, and thought, "It's best I publish myself to him, maybe I can easily save him." He followed as the sentry into the castle and was received with great joy. The young queen thought it was her husband, and asked why he had been away so long, "I was lost in the forest and could not find my way out," he replied. At night he went to bed he laid a two-edged sword between him and the young queen. She could not understand what she meant, but did not dare ask about det.Han were even a few days and explored carefully, what had happened to the enchanted forest. "I want to hunt there again," he said. The young queen begged him not to, but he stood firm by his decision and rode out there with a great company. He fared just like his brother. When he saw the white hind charged he his people to wait until he came back, and rode in, followed only by his animals. But he could not catch up with it and got so deep into the woods, he could not find out again, and had to be there at night. When he had lit a fire and sat thus he heard the same groans from the top of the tree: "Uh, how cold I am." When he looked up there he saw the witch and said, "Come down here and warm yourself." - "I dare not," she replied, "your animals will bite me." - "No, they will not hurt you," he said. "Now I throw a sprig down when you turn them on, they do not matter to me," said the old man. When the hunter heard it, he suspected. "I do not turn my head and if you do not come down, I'll get you." - "You can not hurt me," she said. "If you do not come, then I'll shoot you," he shouted. "Shoot away," she laughed, "I'm not afraid of your bullets." He aimed at her, but she was proof against all lead bullets and laughed as it resounded through the forest and shouted: "You hit me." But the hunter knew how he should behave, tore three silver buttons of his coat, and loaded his gun with them, and on the other hand helped no witchcraft. He shot, and with a loud cry rushed her down. He sat now stand at her and said: "If you do not immediately say where my brother is, I throw you on fire." She was horrible anxiety, prayed for him and said, "He's turned into stone and lies yonder in the grave with his animals." He forced her queen thought I was her husband, and I sat beside her at the table and slept in your bed at night. "When the king heard this, he was so jealous that he furiously grabbed his sword and cut off the head of his brother . But when he saw him lying dead there and the red blood gushed out, he changed his mind. "he has saved me," he cried, weeping, "and to thank you, I have taken his life." then his hare came and offered to download of life herb sprang away and came back in time, and the dead were brought to life again and did not notice anything såret.De journeyed onwards, and the youngest said, "You look like me and have just as splendid garments and the animals follow us. We will go in by opposite gates, and arrive at the same time the old king. "They separated, and came the watchmen from both ports at once, and announced that the young King and the animals had returned from the hunt." It is impossible, "said the old man," the gates lie quite a mil apart. "However, the two brothers into the courtyard and went to the palace." they look exactly like, "said the king to his daughter," I can not tell them apart. You must say who is your husband. "She was stunned and could not find it out, but then she came to think of the collar, as she had given the animals. When she found the lion with gold clasp, she cried happy "it is my husband who owns this lion." - "Yes, that's it," said the young king, laughing, and they sat down to the table and ate and drank. When the young king went to bed, she asked: "Why are you the last nights always laid a two-edged sword in our bed? I thought you wanted to kill me? "Now he realized how true his brother had been.
The two hiking men	1014	613	Danish	Mountain and valley come together, but the men do, good and evil. Thus came once a tailor and a shoemaker traveling together. The tailor was a handsome little fellow, happy and in good spirits. He saw the shoemaker was walking and he in his knapsack could see what his trade was, he began to sing a smædevise "Put in, pull out butter pitch then, and forget not pløkkenned to beat." The shoemaker could not tolerate joke. He put a face up as acidic as vinegar, and made mine to go away at the tailor. But the little fyrgav to laugh, gave him his flask and said, "It was not so bad thought. Rinse rather the bile down." The shoemaker took a long draft, and his face began to clear up. He gave the tailor bottle back and said, "Yes, I have the civilly to you. You talk so much about all the drinking, but not about the great thirst. Should we follow?" - "Let's just it," said the tailor, "if you will into the big city, where we can get decent work." - "Yes, that is exactly what I want," said the shoemaker, "in a small town, there is nothing to earn, and in the country, people like to go barefoot." They went so far together and were a constant one foot before the other, like the weasel in sneen.Tid had both of them fully up, but much to put in their mouths they would have not. When they entered the city they went around and saluted their comrades, and when the tailor so happy and contented out with its fresh, red cheeks, gave him work willingly. When happiness was he really good, gave the master's daughter him a kiss on the road. When he met with the shoemaker again, he always had something in his knapsack. The shoemaker was envious and made a sour face up. "The greater the rascal the more the luck," he said. The tailor laughed and sang and shared all he got with his comrade. When he had just a few pennies in his pocket, he demanded unceremoniously in and beat with joy at the table till the glasses danced, and his motto was: "What comes easy goes easy." When they had walked for some time, they came a great forest through which the road to the capital. There were two paths, one was to finish in two days, the other took a whole week, but none of them knew which one was the shortest. They seated themselves beneath an oak tree and talked about what to do and how much bread they should take. "You have to think a little bit beyond the moment," said the shoemaker, "I take bread for seven days." - "What an idea," said the tailor, "we get the to lug as brutes and can not touch us. I trust God and do not care about the rest. The money in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, but when it is hot, the bread dry or moldy, and so you had to bargain slide his good coat to pieces. Why should not we be able to find the right path? bread for two days and let it be good. " They bought his own bread and went haphazard into skoven.Der was as quiet as a church. No wind stirred, no brook murmured, no bird sang, not a sunbeam came through the dense foliage. The shoemaker said not a word. The bread which he carried on his back, weighed him so that sweat ran down his cross and gloomy face. The tailor was in a good mood, he jumped about, whistled in a magazine or song and thought, "God must rejoice in his heaven that I am so happy." They set off in two days, but then the forest would not come to an end, and the tailor had eaten his bread, sank his mood a little. However, he did not lose courage, but relied on God and his happiness. In the evening he lay down hungry to sleep under a tree, and the next morning he was hungry up. Thus went the fourth day, and when the shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner, the tailor content to look for. When he asked for a small piece of bread laughed the other scornfully and said: "You have always been in such a good mood. Now you can even try how it is to be sad. The singing in the morning, going to cry before night. " He had no pity, and the fifth day could tailor not stand on his legs and was so weak that he could hardly say a word. His cheeks were white, and his eyes red. "Today you get a piece of bread," said the shoemaker, "but only on the condition that I get to poke your right eye." The poor tailor who wanted to live at all, did not know what to do. He wept once more with both eyes, and the shoemaker stack so it right out with a sharp knife. The tailor remembered what his mother had said when he licked the pantry: "Eat what you like and trust what you need." When he had consumed his dearly bought bread, he forgot his misery and comforted himself with the thought that he could see enough of the other eye. But the sixth day stages hungry again in his intestines. In the evening he fell down a tree, and the seventh morning he was so weak he could not stand up, and death was already lurking on its prey. "I will deal kindly with you," said the shoemaker so, "you must again get some bread, that is, you must give something for it, I will be allowed to also poke your left eye out." When realized tailor how careless he had behaved, asked God for forgiveness and said, "Make it so, and I will find myself in it, but keep in mind that God does not judge the moment, but there comes a time, where your evil deed will be punished. I have not deserved it of you. in the good days I've shared with you what I had. My craft is such that I have each stitch. When I do not have eyes, I can not sew, and then I go out and beg. Let me just does not lie exclusively and blind here, so I shall die of hunger. " But the shoemaker took the knife and stabbed his left eye out. Then he gave him a piece of bread and a stick and led him sig.Da sun sank, they came out of the woods and open country stood the gallows. Thither the shoemaker guided the blind tailor, leaving him and walked away. By fatigue, hunger and pain dropped the poor man asleep and slept all night. At dawn he woke up, but did not know where he was. Hanging on the gallows two crooks and on their heads sat two crows. One said: "Are you awake brother?" - "Yes," replied the other. "So I'll tell you something," said the first. "The dew that has fallen in the night here from the gallows, has strange properties. If a blind man washes himself with it, he gets his eyesight back. They should just know it, all the people who have given up trying to get to see again." When the tailor heard that, he took out his handkerchief, made it wet with the dew on the grass and washed his eye sockets thereby. Immediately he got a couple of good, clear eyes. Shortly after the sun rose behind the mountains, and the tailor saw that just in front of the plain lay the big city with its magnificent gates and hundred towers. The golden domes and crosses began to glow in the sun. He could see all the leaves on the trees, the birds that flew by, and mosquitoes, which danced in the air. He took a sewing needle from his pocket, and when it went just as easy as before to enter the heart danced for him with joy. He threw himself on his knees, thanked God for his goodness and his morning prayer. He did not forget to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging there swinging against the wind like the pendulums of clocks. Then he took his knapsack on his back, soon forgot all his grief and went whistling and singing videre.Det first living creature he met was a brown foal running around the field. He grabbed it withers and would soar up on it, but the foal asked whether it would retain its freedom. "I'm still young," it said, "even a light tailor you break my back. Let me go till I have grown strong. I may reward thee for it." - "Run off," said the tailor, "thou art not a giddy." He gave it a rap with his whip over his back, so the joy flung his legs and jumped off the hedges and grøfter.Skrædderen had not had anything to eat since the day before. "The sun is probably good for the eyes," he said, "but it puts nothing in their mouths. The first I meet who is even half edible will I do." Then came a stork stepped solemnly over the meadow. "Stop a bit," cried the tailor and grabbed the leg, "I do not know if you are to eat but I am so hungry that I have to make do with what I can get. I will have to decapitate of you and roast you. " - "You should not do," said the stork, "I am a sacred bird that nobody makes mischief and I are of great use. If you leave me my life, maybe I can do something for you another time." - "Go, Cousin Longlegs," said the tailor. The stork rose up, let its long legs hang down and flew gently away. "What should however be to" thought the tailor, "I become more ogmere hungry and my stomach is terribly empty. The first thing I can now grab should not get. " He saw now that in a pond swam a few ducklings. "You come just as you were called," he said, "grabbed one and would wring your neck on it. The old duck which was hidden among the reeds, began to scream loudly, and swam, and asked him to spare her dear children. "you think not how your mother would cry if they came and took you and would kill you." - "Ten now just quiet," said the good-natured tailor, "you should be allowed to keep your children. "Thereupon he again duckling into vandet.Da he turned around he saw an old hollow tree. Wild bees flew in and out." Now I immediately paid for my good deed, "he thought," the honey will refresh me . "But the queen bee flew threatened him and said:" If you touch any of my people or destroy my nest, then you are affected by our stings, like ten thousand glowing pinpricks. But if you leave us in peace and go your way, we need another time do you a favor. "Tailor saw that neither was nothing to be done here." Three dishes empty and now probably a "thought he, "it is a bad dinner." he trudged so for the city, with all his flabby stomach, and the bell rang just twelve when he came to the inn, so the table was covered. he sat there and ate and drank. "Now I will look to get something to do, "he said, when he had had enough. he went into the city to find a champion, and he managed to get the service of a good situation. when he had learned his trade from the ground, it was not long before he became famous, and everyone would have their clothes made by the little tailor. for each day that passed, he became more thought. "I can go no further in skill," he said, "and yet things improve every day." eventually, the King appointed him court skrædder.Men strange things do happen in the world. The same day his former comrade the shoemaker been appointed hofskomager. Because this so the tailor again with two healthy eyes, his conscience troubled him afraid. "It's the best, he perishes before he takes revenge on me," he thought. But he who digs a pit for others, falls into it himself. When it was closing time, he slipped into the darkness up to the king and said, "Lord King, the tailor is a very proud guy. He has claimed that he could get the gold crown that has been gone for a long, long time ago. " - "I would be very happy," said the king, called the next morning tailor up to him and ordered him either to obtain the crown or also permanently leave the city. "A rogue gives more than he has," thought the tailor, "when the grumpy King wants me to do what no man can, I do not want to wait until tomorrow. I'll go immediately." He packed up his bundle. But when he was outside the door, he thought anyway, it was boring him to leave the city where he had such good luck. He came to the pond where he had found the ducklings and their mother was sitting on the shore and plastered herself with her beak. She recognized him immediately and asked why he was hanging his head. "Thou wilt not be surprised when you hear what has happened to me," he replied, and told it all to end. "Is there something wrong," he said, "I can help you. The crown has fallen into the water and is located at the bottom. It should soon I grab. Meanwhile, you can spread your handkerchief on the bank." It appeared in with his kids, and five minutes later it again. The crown had the neck, it rested on the feathers, and the twelve pups swam around and supported it with their beaks. They swam to the shore and placed the crown on the handkerchief. It was the greatest thing you could imagine when the sun shone on it, it gleamed like a thousand gems. The tailor tied the four corners of the scarf together and brought it to the King, who was very happy and gave the tailor a golden halskæde.Da shoemaker saw that he had not succeeded this time, he found something new and went to the king and said: "the important tailor now claims that he can make a wax castle, exactly similar to this, with everything here." The king called the tailor and ordered him to make such a slot, and if just lacked a nail in the wall, he should, as long as he lived, allowed to sit in a dark prison underground. "It gets worse and worse," thought the tailor, "it may well not any man." Then he took his knapsack on his back and went. When he came to the hollow tree, he sat there and was of course a little sad. The bees came flying out, and the queen asked if there was something wrong with his throat since he was hanging his head. "No, something quite different sorrows that plague me," said the tailor and told them what the king had demanded of him. The bees began to buzz and hum, and eventually the Queen said: "Just go home again, but come back tomorrow at this time, and bring a large sheet with, so we'll deal with the peas." The tailor then returned to the city. The bees flew through the open windows into the castle, examined everything most carefully, and crept into the smallest corners. So they returned to the forest and made a wax castle in such a hurry that it seemed as if it was growing before one's eyes. In the evening it was finished, and when the tailor came next morning, stood all the magnificent castle there and there was not lacking a nail in the wall and not a stone on the roof. It was all white and smelled sweet as honey. Tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and brought it to the king. He was very surprised, placed it in his largest hall and gave the tailor a large stenhus.Men shoemaker did not give up and went third time to the king and said: "The tailor has been told that the water in the courtyard will not bounce, and he has said that he can get a shine forth, as clear as crystal and as tall as a man. " The king sent for the tailor and said: "If the water in the morning does not pop with such a beam as you have said, then the executioner immediately make you a head shorter." The poor tailor did not hesitate long, but rushed out of the gate. Tears rolled down his face, for now it was after all his life. As he sadly went along the way, there came a horse regularly. It was the foal that he had once bestowed freedom, it had now become a beautiful horse. "Now I can reciprocate your kindness," it said. "I know what's wrong, but I'll help you. Get on my back, now I can carry you and more." The tailor took courage again, jumped on his horse and went full speed into the city, right into the courtyard. Quick as lightning for the round three times, and the third time it fell on. The moment gave it a terrible bang. In the middle of the courtyard tore a piece of land free and flew like a ball up in the air over the castle. Immediately after cooking a beam up, as tall as a man on horseback, clear as crystal, and the sunbeams struggled together within it. When the king saw it, he was so astonished that he went down and embraced the tailor in all human påsyn.Men the happiness did not last long. The king had many daughters, one more beautiful than the other, but no son. The shoemaker went for the fourth time to the king and said: "tailor has to be equally proud. Now he has said that if he wanted to, he could obtain the king a son who came flying them through the air." King commanded the tailor, and said: "If you within nine days you bring me a son, you shall have my eldest daughter to wife." - "It is indeed a good salary," thought the tailor, "it was probably worth it to venture anything but the cherries grow too high. If I wanted to climb up after them, would branch shown crack and I fell down. " Then he went home and sat down on the table and pulled his legs under it and thought about what he should do. "That is impossible," he cried at last, "I must go, here I can never have peace." He packed his knapsack and went out of town. When he came to the meadow, he saw his old friend the stork, go up and down like a philosopher. Now and then it stopped, carefully considered a frog and then swallowed it. When it saw him, came over and said hello. "You're probably going to leave the city, since you have your knapsack on his back," it said, "How can this be?" The tailor told him what the king had demanded of him. He could not possibly meet, and he lamented his bad luck. "Let it not grow any gray hairs," said the stork, "I'll help you. I have now for so many years brought young children to the city, so I can probably also get a little prince. Do you quite quiet home. And do so for nine days to the palace, and I will come. " The tailor went home, and the ninth day he went to the palace. Then came the stork flying and knocked on the window. The tailor opened it. Cousin Longlegs came carefully in, and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble floor. In its beak it had a child so lovely as an angel, and stretched out its little hands to the Queen. The laid it in her lap, and she pressed and kissed it, and was beside himself with joy. Before the stork flew away, he took his traveling bag off his shoulder and gave it to the Queen. It was full of parcels with colored sugar balls, and those were the little princesses. The oldest got nothing of it but got the merry tailor for a husband. "I'm into fashion, as if I had won the highest prize," he said, "Mom was right, however. She always said: He who believes in God and luck, will never be short of something. "the shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced at the wedding, he was commanded to leave the city. The road to the forest led him to the gallows, and when he was tired of the anger and the heat, he threw himself down there. When he closed his eyes to sleep, the two crows flew down from the hanged heads and pecked out his eyes. As his madness he ran into the woods, and there have died there of hunger, for no one has seen or heard from him since.
The twelve brothers	81	451	Danish	There was once a king and a queen who lived happily together. They had twelve children, but it was all boys. One day the king said to his wife: "If the thirteenth child you give birth, being a girl, the twelve boys shall die, so that she can get the whole kingdom." He left immediately make twelve chests, and was put wood shavings in them and pillows as they died was to be in. So he let them put into a room, locked the door and gave the Queen the key, but forbade her to speak to anyone derom.Dronningen sat all day and mourned, and her youngest son named Benjamin after the Bible and always was with her, asked her then: "Why are you so sad, little mother?" - "My beloved child," she replied, "I do not dare say it." But he let her have no rest until she went and unlocked the room and showed him the twelve coffins with the shavings. Then she said: "Dear Benjamin, these chests have your father made for the you and your eleven brothers, and if I give birth to a daughter, ye shall all be killed and put in it and buried." She wept as she told it, the son comforted her and said, "Do not cry, little mother, we'll manage, we run our way." But she said, "You must take your eleven brothers with you into the woods. There must be one of you climb the tallest tree I can find, and keep looking for the tower here in the castle. If I give birth to a boy, hoist I a white flag, and then you must come home again, but feeds me a girl, hoist me a red flag, and then fly hence as quickly as you can. The good God protect you. Every night I get up and pray for you, in the winter I pray, that ye may fire to warm you know, and in the summer that may not faint you. "She blessed his sons, and they went into the woods. They took turns now to sit up on the highest oak and keep looking for the tower. When eleven days had passed and it was Benjamin's turn, he saw that here was hoisted up a tab, but it was the red blood banner that proclaimed that all of them would die. When the brothers heard this, they were furious and shouted: "We will not die for a girl's fault. We swear that we will avenge us. Where we find a girl, her red blood shall flow." They went deeper into the woods and far, far inside, where there was the darkest, they found a small abandoned house. "Here we will stay," said the eldest, "Benjamin is the youngest and weakest, he should stay at home and look after the house. The rest of us must try to get food." They went out into the forest and shot hares and deer and birds, and what they could get at, and brought it home to Benjamin, who made it so they could have enough to eat. For ten years they lived in the little house, and the time dropped them never lang.Imidlertid was the little girl that the queen had given birth, grew up. She had a good heart and a beautiful face, and in the middle of the forehead, she had a gold star. Once, when they had the great washing, she found the clothes twelve men's shirts and asked her mother: "Who belongs to these twelve shirts, they are as far too small for father." - "They belong to your twelve brothers, dear child," said her mother grieved. "Where are my twelve brothers, the ones I've never heard anything about," said the girl. She replied: "Only God knows where they are. They walk around in the wide world." She now took the girl with him up in the living room with the twelve coffins. "These coffins were destined for your brothers," she said, "but the boys went away secretly before you were born," and she related to her how everything had happened. The girl comforted her and said, "Do not cry, dear mother. I will go and seek my brothers." She took the twelve shirts with and went on his way. She just came to the great forest and went all day in it. In the evening she came to the little house. She went inside and found a young boy, who asked, "How come you here? Where are you going?" He was surprised that she was so beautiful and dressed like a princess with a star on his forehead. "I am a princess," she replied, "I am seeking my twelve brothers, and I will go as long as I have the sky above me, until I find them." She showed him the twelve shirts she had brought. Then Benjamin saw that she was his sister, and said, "I am Benjamin, your youngest brother." They both cried for joy and hugged and kissed each other. But then he said: "Now there is only one thing wrong, little sister. We have agreed to kill all the girls we met on our way, because it was a girl's fault that we had to leave our kingdom." - "I want to die," she replied, "if I can save my brothers so." - "No," said Benjamin, "you will not die. Thyself beneath this tub, and be there for our brothers come home, so I'll talk to them." She did. Since it was dark, the others came from hunting, and their dinner was ready and waiting for them. As they sat at the table and ate and drank, they asked: "Is there anything new to tell?" - "Do not you know anything?" asked Benjamin. "No," they replied. "I've been in the woods," he said, "and I have stayed at home and do know more than I." - "Tell us," they shouted. "But promise me that you will not to kill the first girl you meet?" asked Benjamin. "Yes," they all cried, "she must be allowed to live at all. Tell us just what you know." Benjamin stood up and walked over to the tub and lifted it up. "Our sister is here," he said. The princess appeared in her royal garments with the golden star on her forehead and looked so beautiful and good out that they all immediately became fond of her and hugged and kissed her.She was now at home with Benjamin and helped him. The eleven brothers went into the forest and caught the deer and birds that they could get something to eat, and her sister and Benjamin did it. She gathered firewood and herbs and set the pan over the fire, so the food was always done in a timely manner. She kept the house in order and combing the beds soft and white, and the brothers were still satisfied and lived in the largest enighed.En day they had two home made great food, and when the others came home, sat down at the table and ate and drank . Next to the house there was a small garden, which was twelve lilies, and when the girl wanted to do her brothers pleasure, she went out to pick the twelve flowers to give them every one when they had eaten. But in the same moment that she plucked them, they were twelve brothers were changed into ravens, and flew away over the forest. The house and garden vanished likewise. Now the poor girl all alone in the great forest. When she turned around, she saw that there was an old woman, who shook his head and said, "Child, child, what have you done? Now they are for ever changed into ravens." - "I can not do anything to save them," said the girl crying. "No," said the old man, "there is only one thing that can save them, but it's so hard, you can not do. For seven years you must not speak or laugh, and if you say a single word , missing just one second in seven years, it is all in vain, and your brothers must die. "But the girl thought," I will save my brothers. " She climbed up to a tall tree and sat there and purred and purred and did not say a word and never laughed. Now it happened once that a king was hunting in the woods. He had a big dog, and ran to the tree where the girl was sitting, sniffed it and ran around it and barked. King came by and saw the beautiful princess with the golden star on her forehead. He was so captivated by her beauty that he called to ask her if she would be his wife. She did not answer, but just nodded. He climbed so even up the tree, carried her down, placed her on his horse and rode home with her. The wedding was celebrated with pomp and circumstance, but the bride neither spoke nor laughed. When they had lived happily together for a few years, began the king's evil stepmother to slander the young queen, and said to the king: "It is a simple tiggertøs you have taken with you. Who knows what the wicked things she secretly does. Even if she can not speak, she still might laugh sometimes. Those who do not laugh have bad consciences. " King would not listen to her, but the old were so long, and accused her of so many evil things that he eventually persuaded and sentenced her to døden.Der was now a great bonfire in the courtyard, and there were she burned. King stood above at the window and looked on with tears in his eyes, for he loved her still. But right at that moment, she was tied to the pole and the red flames began licking up at her, it was the last second of the seven years past. There came a hiss of air, and twelve ravens came and sank down. When they touched the earth they for the twelve brothers, whom she had saved. They tore the fire asunder, extinguished the flames, set their dear sister and hugged and kissed her. And now as she dared to speak, she told the king why she had been dumb, and had never easy. The king was so happy when he was told that she was innocent, and they lived happily together until their death. The evil stepmother stood before the judge, and put into a barrel filled with boiling oil and venomous snakes, and died miserably.
The twelve huntsmen	637	884	Danish	There was once a prince who had a bride whom he loved very much. One day, as he sat and talked happily with her, a messenger arrived that his father was dying and wanted to see him. He took leave of his beloved, saying: "I have to leave you. This ring must save to remind me, and when I am King, I will get you." Then he rode home and arrived just in time to find his father alive. "Thank God I get you to see before I die," he said, "promise me that you will marry as I have chosen for you," and he mentioned the name of a princess. The prince was so distressed that he forgot everything else and said yes, and then the King shut his eyes and døde.Da prince was proclaimed king and mourning was over, he had to keep the promise he had given his father, and asked for King's daughter and got her yes. His first betrothed heard about it, she was very distressed and was about to die of grief over his infidelity. "Why are you so sad, my little girl?" said her father, "is there anything you want?" She thought for a moment and then said: "I wish for eleven girls whose face and figure exactly like myself." - "If possible, I will get you," said the king, and was sought in the whole kingdom, until eleven girls were fundet.Da they came to the princess, she made twelve quite similar hunter costumes that she and the girls went on. Then she took leave of his father and rode off to his beloved bridegroom castle and asked if he would take them all in his service. The king did not know her, but liked them, and they come all twelve in service as hunters in ham.Kongen had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew all things. One evening he said to him: "You really believe you have twelve huntsmen." - "Yes, I certainly do," he replied. "But you're wrong," said the lion, "the girls." - "It is impossible," cried the king, "you can prove it." - "You can just sprinkle peas in anteroom," said the lion, "then you should probably see it. Men have a firm step, and when they walk over the peas none of them stir, but girls tripper and lists, and then rolls peas about. " The king thought this was good advice, and decided to follow det.Kongen had a servant who liked the hunters, and when he heard the trial they had to put on, he went and told them, saying " Leo wants the king to believe that you are girls. " The princess thanked him, and said to her maidens, "and step firmly on the peas." When the king next morning had the twelve huntsmen summoned, and they go through the anteroom, where the peas were, they went so fast and sure that not a single rolled. "You have lied to me, they walk just like men," King said to the lion, when they were gone. "They knew that they were put to the test, and have restrained themselves," said the lion, "let twelve rocking out into the hall, then they will go to them and rejoice over them, and it makes no man . " The king liked the advice and decided to follow det.Men waiter who meant well with the hunters went and told them that, and when they were alone, the princess said to her maidens, "Do not look to the side where spinning wheels stand. " When the king next morning had his twelve huntsmen summoned, they went through the hall without a glance at the spinning wheels. "You have lied," the King said to the lion, "it is men, they have not looked at the spinning wheels." - "They have known that they were put to the test, and have restrained themselves," said the lion, but the king did not mere.De twelve huntsmen always followed the king hunting, and he came to hold more and more of them. One day when they were out in the woods, came to bid on that you could betrothed. When the true bride heard that, she was so distressed that her heart was about to burst, and she fell fainting to the ground. The king thought that his dear huntsman, ran to help him and pulled his glove off. When he saw the ring he had given his first bride, and when he looked at her face, he recognized her back. He was deeply moved, bent down and kissed her, and when she opened her eyes he said: "You are mine and I am yours, and nothing in the world can alter that." He sent a messenger to the other bride, and entreated her to return to his kingdom, for he had a wife already, and who have found an old key that does not need any new one. Then the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken into favor, because, after all, he had told the truth.
The three brothers	1174	654	Danish	There was once a man who had three sons, but the rest had nothing except the house in which he lived. They would all three would inherit the house after his father died, but the father loved them and did not know how he should behave, so he did not do any of them wrong. He could probably have sold the house and split the money between them, but he would not, because his ancestors had owned det.Men eventually found his advice. "Go out into the world and learn a trade," he said, "and come back." He who can do the best masterpiece shall have the house. "His sons were very pleased with it. The oldest would be a blacksmith, the other barber and the third fencing master. they fixed a time when they come home again, and went away. they all found a skilled master and learned their craft well. blacksmith had to shoe the king's horses and thought, "now it is as impossible otherwise than that I get the house. "the barber shaved sheer lords, and was equally certain that he got it. the fencing-master got many a tough blow, but clenched his teeth and did not go in." If I'm afraid a hug, I'll never house, "he thought. When the appointed time had passed, came back home to their father, but now they had to put their heads in common in order to discern in what way they could best show their mettle to. as they sat and talked, ran suddenly a hare across the field. "it comes after all, as it was ka outdated, "said the barber, took basin and soap and whipped it to the hare was right. While it was at full speed soaped he it in and shaved it a mustache, without cutting it a bit or pull a hair out of. "It was well done," said the father, "if the others do the tremendous efforts, the house is yours." Soon after, a gentleman moving along at full speed. "Now you will see what I can," said the blacksmith, tore the fly four horseshoe of the horse and struck again on. "You are a fine fellow," said the father, "you do your cases just as good as your brother. I really do not know who to give the house." - "Now, let me try again," said the youngest. At that moment it began to rain, he drew his sword and swung it backwards over his head so as not a drop fell upon him. The rain became stronger and stronger, it was pouring buckets down, but he flourished his sword faster and faster, and remained as dry as if he were sitting in a house. The father was very puzzled and said, "You have done the best masterpiece, the house is dit.De two other brothers were satisfied with the arrangements as they had promised in advance. They were so fond of each other that they all three stayed in the house and their trades. because they were so clever and talented, they earned a lot of money. they lived together happily until they were old, as was the one sick and died, and the others grieved so sorely that they also became ill and died soon after. and when they had kept so much of each other, they were all three buried in the same grave.
The three feathers	602	402	Danish	There was once a king who had three sons. The two were clever and wise, but the third did not speak much, and was simple. He called the Simpleton. When the king was old and weak and felt that his death was approaching, he did not know which of his sons should inherit the kingdom, and he said to them, "Go out into the world. He who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be king after my death. " For that they should not be divided, he went with them outside the castle blew three feathers in the air and said: "I shall go in the direction they fly." One flew east, the other to the west, the third flew straight up into the air and fell down a moment later. One went to the right and the other to the left, and they mocked Simpleton, who had to stay at home, where the third feather had faldet.Tosseper sat down and was very distressed. Suddenly he saw that there was a trapdoor right next to the feather, and when he lifted it up, there was a staircase as he went down. He came to a door, and when he knocked, he heard someone shout, "Little green maiden glow sprinkelben dear sprinkelbens dog Sprinkel, do not late, look for who is there, use your legs." The door opened, and there sat a large toad and a whole lot of small. The thick asked what he wanted, and he said, "I would like to have the most beautiful carpet in the world." The big toad called when one of the little and said, "Little green maiden glow sprinkelben dear sprinkelbens dog Sprinkel be not late, the big box here, use your legs." The little brought the box, and the fat closed the and gave Simpleton a carpet which was very beautiful and finer than anything blanket up on the ground. Simpleton thanked him, went up igen.De two other brothers, had thought that the youngest brother as so stupid that he never would try to find something. "Why would we do us any further trouble," they said, and the first peasant wife bought one of the coarse scarves she wore, and brought it to the king. At the same time came Simpleton with his beautiful carpet. The king was astonished when he saw it, and said, "Yes, if I have to be fair may kingdom after all be yours." But the other two were to imagine him that Simpleton, who did not know about anything, impossible could become king, and asked him to make a new agreement. "Then the hereditary kingdom, which brings me the most beautiful ring," said the king, went out with his three sons and blew three feathers into the air. The two eldest again went east and west, but Simpleton feathers fell again right down near the door. He opened it and went down to the fat toad, and asked for the ring. She once ordered her great box to be brought and gave him a ring, which sparkled with jewels and was so beautiful that no goldsmith on earth could make similar to it. The two eldest laughed at Simpleton had to find a gold ring, and gave themselves no trouble, but knocked the nails out of a wagon ring and brought it to the king. When Simpleton came with his gold ring King said again: "The kingdom belongs to him," but the two oldest were in tormenting the king until he made yet a third condition. Whoever found the most beautiful bride, shall inherit the kingdom. He blew again the three feathers into the air and fell as før.Tosseper went right down to the fat toad, and said, "I must win the loveliest woman in the world." - "Yes," said the toad, "she's not like to get, but you must have her." She gave him a hollowed carrot, drawn by six mice, and Simpleton said quite mournfully, "What can I do with it?" - "Put one of my little toads into it," said the stout. He grabbed one of them at random, but hardly had he put it in the yellow tub before it was the loveliest girl, turnip into a cart and the six mice into horses. He kissed her then and brought her to the king. Then came his brothers, who absolutely had not made any trouble, but take the first peasant girl. The king said instant, the kingdom belongs to the Simpleton. But the two oldest hooted him again ears full and said they could not possibly find himself in that he received the crown. Eventually they got him to decide that he should be king, whose wife could leap through a ring which hung in the hall. "Bond girls are so strong, so they can probably tolerate it," they thought, "but the delicate, little girl kill himself." But when peasants girls should jump bar were so stout ad that they fell and broke his arms and legs. But Simpleton lovely bride jumped as easy as a hind, and now had brothers bow. Simpleton became king and ruled long and wisely.
The three happy children	665	1650	Danish	There once was a man who called his three sons and gave the first a cock, the second a scythe, and the third a cat. "I am now old and would like to make to you before I die," he said. "Money I have not, and what I now give you seems of little worth, but it comes just depends on a sensible use. Find a country where such things are unknown, and your fortune is made." When his father died the eldest went away with his cock, but it was well enough known where he went. In the distance he saw the sitting upon the steeples and turning in the wind, in the villages he heard the mad and not a single man fell to wonder about his animals, so it so it did not look as if he had to do his happiness thereby. Eventually, however, he out on an island where the people had never seen a cock and could not even divide the time. They knew when it was morning and evening, but when they slept at night, they could not find out the time. "What a nice animal," he said, "it has a ruby ​​red crown and spores as a knight. At night call it three times at certain times, the last time just before the sun comes up. And when it shouts a day, I, knowing that the weather is changing. " The people were well on the tap and did not sleep a whole night and amused himself royally by hearing the cock tell them loudly and vocally pm. two and four and six, how time passed. They asked if the creature were for sale, and what he wanted for it. "So much gold as an ass can carry," he replied. "It's a ridiculously small price for such a precious creature," they all cried and gave him what he ønskede.Da he came home with his wealth his brothers were astonished, and the second said: "I will also out and see if my le can mow as much of me. " It did not look for it, everywhere he met peasants who might as well had a laugh on the shoulder as he. Eventually he came to an island where the people had never seen a laugh. When the corn was ripe there, they took cannon out to the fields and shot it down. But it was not appropriate for some shots went in the air, others hit the ears instead of the straw, and then did it a terrible noise. So the man to mow quite quiet so quickly that, and the people were just about to dumbfounded amazement. They wanted to give him everything he wanted for the scythe, and he received a horse laden with as much gold as it could bære.Den third brother would now try his luck with the cat. He fared just like the others, so long as he stayed on the mainland there him nothing, for they had cats everywhere and there were even so many that the children were thrown into the water. Eventually he sailed over to an island, and it happened so fortunate that they did not know cats. The mice had spread quite freely and danced around on benches and tables without caring that people were at home. All the people were in despair over, and not even the king of his castle could prevent this plague. The mice squeaked in every nook and gnawed whatever they could get hold of. The cat began her chase, and soon cleared two large halls. The King willingly this strange animals and the third brother demanded and got a mule laden with gold and came home with the utmost skatte.Katten made themselves merry with the mice and killed so many that they did not count. Eventually, the breathless and thirsty work and stopped, craned his neck and shouted: "Meow." This whimsical screams frightened the king and all his people, that they rushed out of the castle. Took counsel about what to do, and finally agreed to send word to the cat to ask if it would leave the palace or whether to use force. "We'd be plagued with the mice, the misfortune we are accustomed, than give up our lives to such a monster," they said. A page was sent to ask the cat to hear the answer, but it was even more thirsty and simply replied: "Meow, meow." Pagen thought it said: "No, no," and went down and told the king. "So we use power," said the rulers. There Cannon were brought up, and the palace was soon in flames. When the fire reached the room where the cat was, jumped out of the window and escaped unscathed from it, but the people continued to shoot straight to the palace was shot in the gravel.
The three doctors	1120	660	Danish	There were three doctors who traveled around the world and thought they knew their art gavns. They came one evening to an inn and would stay there at night. The host asked where they came from and where they were going. "We are doctors and draws the world," they said. "Let me once see what I can," said the host. The first said he would cut off his hand and put it on the next morning, the other would tear his heart out and put it back in, the third would cut out his eyes and put them in again. "Yes, if I may, you are indeed clever," said the host. They had a salve that healed all wounds, and the bottle in which it was constantly with him. They cut the hand, heart and eyes away, put it all on a plate and gave it to the host, and he let the girl put it in the cupboard. However, she was secretly engaged to a soldier. As the host, the doctors and all the people in the house were asleep, the soldier came and wanted something to eat. The girl opened the cupboard and brought him some food, but she was so in love that she forgot to close the door, and sat down at the table and talked with her boyfriend. While she was quite delighted sat there, the cat came creeping, so that the door was open, and grabbed the three doctors hand and heart and eyes, and ran. When the soldier had eaten, and the girl would put things away and shut the closet, she saw that the plate which the innkeeper had given her was empty. "What shall I do," she said frightened for his girlfriend, "hand and heart and eyes are gone. What will become of me tomorrow." - "Be silent," said the soldier, "I'll help you. There is a thief hanging on the gallows, I will cut off our hand. Which hand was it?" - "The right," replied the girl gave him a sharp knife, and a little later he came in with the poor sinner's right hand. Then he put out the eyes of the cat, now they lacked just the heart. "Is there no pigs in the cellar?" he asked. "Yes," replied the girl, and the soldier went down and fetched a pig's heart. The girl lay it all on a plate and put it in the closet, and when her boyfriend was gone, she went quietly to seng.Da doctors arose next morning, they told the girl that she should bring them hand, heart and eyes. The girl went to the cupboard and took the plate, and the first the thief's hand, stroking salve, and it grew fast. The second set cats eyes on the third took the pig's heart. The host stood admiring alongside and said something he had never seen before. He would recommend them to all people. Then they paid what they owed, and went videre.Men he with pig's heart did not stay with the others. Every moment he ran into a corner and sniffed around like a pig. The others grabbed him and would keep him, but it did not help, he broke loose and ran into the worst dirt. The second also behaved very strangely; he rubbed his eyes and said, "What's the deal, comrades, that's not my eyes. Lead me, otherwise I fall." Then with difficulty they went on, and in the evening they came to another inn. They went into the living room and over in a corner sat a man counting money. He with the thief's hand went around him, there came a few times a twitch in his arm, and when the stranger turned around, he grabbed a handful of money. The second of them saw this and said, "Shame on you. You shall not steal." - "I can not do," he replied, "it pulls in my hand, and then I resort to, whether I will or not." They went to bed and it was so dark that they could not see the hand in front. Suddenly he woke up with cats eyes, woke the others and said: "Can you see the white mice running about there?" They sat up in bed, but could not see anything. "It is not right with us," Then said he, "we have not got our own again. We must return to the innkeeper, he has deceived us." The next morning they went back to the inn and told the host they had played their own again. One had a thief's hand, the second cat's eyes and the third a pig's heart. The host said it had to be the girl's fault, and called her. But when she saw them coming, she was in a hurry slipped out the back door and did not return. The three doctors said now that the host should give them money or they would leave the house on fire. He gave them everything he could scrape together, and thus they went on. They had enough for all their lives, but they would rather have had their own eyes and hand and heart again.
The three snake leaves	151	612	Danish	There was once a poor man, who could no longer get food for his only son. The son said to him, "I am a burden to you, dear father. I'd rather go out and have to earn my bread." The father gave him his blessing, and with great sorrow took leave of each other. At this time there was a mighty king who waged war, and the youth took service with him. He came before a great battle. It rained with bullets, and around him fell his comrades dead to the ground. When the leader also had fallen, would the rest of the army to flee, but the youth encouraged them and said, "We will not let our fatherland be ruined." They followed him all together against the enemy and won the victory. When the king was told it was only him, he could thank why he was elevated to the first man in the country and got big rigdomme.Kongen had a daughter who was very beautiful but a strange one. She had made the promise to marry only with that which would be buried alive with her when she died. "If he loves me with all his soul," she said, "can life be worth to him when I'm dead." If he died first, she would also be the grave with him. This promise had heretofore discouraged all suitors, but the youth was so captivated by her beauty that he sought her hand from her father. "Do you know now what you must promise," asked the king. "Yes," he replied, "but my love is so great that it does not frighten me." Then the King consented, and the wedding was celebrated with great pragt.De now lived for a long time happily together, but suddenly the young queen very ill and no physician could save her. When she died, the young King remembered what he had promised, and shuddered when he thought that he was down in the dark grave, but he could not get free, for the king had put the guard at every door, that he should not try to evade his fate. When the day came where the body had interred in the vault, where kings were buried, he was also brought down, and the door was locked after ham.Ved beside the coffin stood a table with four candles, four slices of bread and four bottles of wine. When he had eaten it, he had to die of hunger. He ate only a bit of bread every day and drank a little wine, while death came closer and closer. He sat still and stared in front of her, but suddenly he saw a snake came creeping toward the corpse. He thought it would gnaw at it, drew his sword and said: "As long as I live, you must not touch her." Then he cut it into three pieces. After a time a snake slithering, and when it saw that the other was dead, climbed the back, but soon came back again with three green leaves in the mouth. It did so the three pieces together and put a leaf on each of the wounds. The snake immediately became alive again and they crept now both fast away. The leaves were lying on the ground, and the unhappy young man who had seen it all, come to think of whether the leaves did not also have the power to make a man live again. He then laid one on the dead queen's mouth and one on each of her eyes. No sooner had he done so than the blood quickly through the veins, her cheeks had color and she opened her eyes and said, "Where am I?" - "You are with me, dear wife," he replied and told how it had happened. He gave her some wine to drink, and when she had been strengthened, they went and pounded so heavily on the door, the guard heard it, and told the king. He even came down and opened the door and was just as happy as when he saw that they were living both. The young man gave the three snake leaves to a servant and said, "Take care of them and carry them constantly about you. We might get to do with them." There was, however, taken place a big change with the queen since she was alive again; every spark of love for her husband was extinguished. Since some time after went on a boat trip across the ocean to visit his old father, she forgot entirely his great kindness and faithfulness, and took love for the skipper. And once when the young King slept, they took him and threw him overboard. When they had done this shameful deed, she said: "Now is the best we return home, saying that he died on the way. I'll tell my dad so much good about you that he consents to the we marry, and then you can inherit the crown. " But the faithful servant who had witnessed it all, sat in silence a small boat in the water and rowed off to find his master. He also found his body and was fished up, put hose leaves in his mouth and eyes and called him so alive igen.De rowed with all their forces, and the boat flew so swiftly, that they reached the old King before the ship. He was astonished when he saw them come alone, and asked what had happened. When he heard of his daughter's evil action, he said: "It is impossible for me to believe it, but the truth will probably for a day." He closed as the two inside a room and made sure no one got them to see. Shortly after came the big ship home, and the evil woman walked up to his father with a sad face. "Why are you home alone?" he asked, "Where is your husband?" - "I am very unhappy, dear father," she replied, "my husband became suddenly ill and died, and if the good skipper had not helped me, I had gone ill. He was present at his death, and can tell it all . " - "Now I will make the dead alive again," said the king, opened the door and called out to the young king and his servant. When she saw her husband, she was thunderstruck, and fell on her knees and begged for mercy. But the king said: "You deserve no mercy. He was prepared to die with you and gave you life back. But you've killed him while he slept, and you should get the punishment you deserve." Then she was placed with her accomplice in a ship that was leaking, and it drives out to sea and soon disappeared in the waves.
The three little birds	912	707	Danish	For many thousands of years ago, the country was divided into many small kingdoms. One of the kings lived on Køter mountain, and he was very fond of hunting. One day, as he rode out with his hunters went there below the mountain three girls were watching their cows. When they saw the king and all his men, pointed the eldest of the girls at him and said: "If I can not have him for a husband, I have none." The second oldest, who went on the other side of the mountain pointed to the one that went in the king's right hand and shouted: "If I do not get him, I have none." The youngest pointed to the one that went to the left of the king and shouted: "And if I can not get him, I have none." However, it was the two ministers. The king heard it all, and when he came home, he sent for the three girls and asked what it was, they had said yesterday. They would not say it, and the king then asked the eldest if she would marry him. She said yes and ministers married the two sisters. All three were beautiful, especially the Queen, who had hair as hør.De two sisters had no children. Once when the king had to go away, he let them come to the Queen to cheer her, for she was about to have a child. She had a little boy, and he came into the world with a red star. But the two sisters agreed that they would throw the beautiful boy into the water. When they had done so, a little bird flew up into the air and sang: "So many small flowers cradled blidtpå sea waters, they wear well too you go, for saving beaches." When they heard this, they got a fright and hurried away. When the King came home they told him that the Queen had given birth to a dog. But the king said: "What God does, is well done." A fisherman who dwelt near the water, did however hold of the little boy, and when he had no children, he took him home and brought him up. Some years after the Queen again bore a son, while the king was traveling. The two evil sisters threw him in the water and flew back a little bird up and sang, "So many small flowers cradled blidtpå sea waters, they wear well too you go, for saving beaches." When the King came home they told him that the Queen had given birth to a dog. "What God does, is well done," he said, but the fisherman got hold of the little boy and took him away hjem.Nogen time after the king traveled away again, and the queen gave birth while a little girl. The evil sisters also threw her in the water, and again flew a bird up and sang, "So many small flowers cradled blidtpå sea waters, they wear well too you go, for saving beaches." When the King came home they told him that the Queen had given birth to a cat. Then the king was angry and ordered his wife into prison, and that she had to sit in many år.Børnene grew, however, and when the eldest once was fishing with some other boys, they would not be with him and said, "Go your way, foundling." When he went sadly home and asked the fisherman if that was true, what the boys said. The fisherman told him that he had pulled him out of the water one day when he was fishing. The boy would go forth and seek his father. The fisherman asked him to stay, but eventually he had to give his consent. The boy went on his way and walked for many days and eventually came to a mighty big lake, on which stood an old woman fishing. "Good day, mother," the boy said. "Good day." - "You can wilt fish long enough before you catch anything." - "And you can search long before you find your father. How are you going to get over the water?" - "Yes, God knows." They took the old woman his back and carried him off, and he went a long time without finding his parents. Since there had been a season, drew the other brother out to search for him. He also came to the deep water, and it went quite that way. Now the girl was home alone, and she longed so much for her brothers, she asked the fisherman's permission to go out and look for them. She also came to the deep water, where the old woman was standing. "Good day, mother," she said. "Good day." - "God bless your work." The old woman liked her, carried her over the water, gave her a wand, and said: "Go ahead on this road, my little girl. When you get to a big, black dog, you must quietly go by, but you Do not laugh or see you. Then you come to a castle, and you must let the wand fall on the threshold. you have to go straight through the castle and out the other side. there is an old well and leave open a tall tree. Therein hangs a cage with a bird, take it. you must also take a glass of water from the well and then go exactly the same way back. Kvisten need to take up again, and once you get past the dog, turn it with attic in the face, but beware that you hit it. then come back to me. " It all went, as the woman had said, and on the way home she met her two brothers who had gone through half the world. Together they journeyed, and came to the black dog, she struck it in the face attic. It turned into a handsome prince and went with them to the water. It said the old woman. She was very glad to see all four of them. They went so above the water, and the old woman went away, for now she was saved. The others went back to the old fisherman, where there was great joy when they all came together again. The bird was hung on the wall in his bur.Den second son could not settle at home, and took his bow and went hunting. When he was tired, he took his rørfløjte forward and blew on it. The king was just too hunting, and when he heard the music, he went after the sound. "Who gave you permission to hunt here?" he asked the boy. "Nobody who has," he replied. "Who are you?" - "Jeger a son of the fisherman." - "Talk, he has no children." - "If you will not believe me, cereal grains with." The king went with the boy. The fisherman told him how everything had happened, and the bird on the wall began to sing: "Your poor wife behind the prison wall that traps the bitterest tårer.Kys your children - your royal blood flowing in their årer.De evil sisters threw them into the realm of deep water , to certain death, but the poor fisherman saved the the småog shared with them their daily bread. " They were all frightened. King took the bird, the fisherman and the three children back home, let the prison open and Queen lead out. She was sick and poor, but her daughter gave her water from the well to drink, and immediately she was healed. The two evil sisters were burnt, and the prince married the princess.
The three little men in the forest	121	480	Danish	There was once a man whose wife died, and a woman, whose husband died. The man had a daughter, and his wife also had a daughter. The girls knew each other, and one day when they had been for a walk together, they went home to his wife. She then said to the man's daughter, "Tell your father that if he marries me, then you every morning wash in milk and drink wine, but my daughter to wash herself in water and drink water." The girl went home and told her father what the woman had said. "Yes, what should I do," he said, "Marriage is a joy and sorrow." When he could not agree with himself, he took a boot and said, "Take this boot and hang it on the big nail. It has a hole in the bottom, and now you pour water in and see if it runs out . Running it out, so I marry, otherwise I let be. " The girl did as she was told, but the water held the hole to shrink together, and the boot was full to the brim. She went in and told his father what had happened, and when he had seen for himself, and saw that it was real enough, he proposed to the widow, and so they held bryllup.Da girls stood up the day after, there was milk to wash in and wine to drink for the man's daughter and water to wash in and water to drink for the woman's daughter. The next day was the water well to the one as to the other. The third morning there stood water to the man's daughter and milk and wine to his wife's daughter, and that was that for the future. The woman hated her stepdaughter and did not know all the evil that she would do her. She was also envious because her stepdaughter was beautiful and her own daughter was ugly and ulykke.En Once in winter when it was freezing hard, and snow lay deep on hill and valley, the woman made a dress of paper, called stepdaughter and said, "Take this dress on and go out in the woods and pick me some strawberries. I have such a craving for strawberries." - "Oh dear," said the girl, "the winter growing there are no strawberries. The ground is frozen and there is snow everywhere. And why should I take the paper dress on? It's so cold that your breath is frozen. The wind will blow through it and thorns tearing it. " - "Would you leave it to contradict me," said the stepmother. "See you come away in a hurry, and do not you dare come home without the strawberries." She gave her a piece of rock hard bread: "You can eat today," she said. But when she thought to herself: She dies enough out of the cold and sult.Pigen took obedient paper on the dress and went on the road with a little basket on her arm. She lying everywhere than snow, not a single place stack a blade of green up. When she came out into the forest, she saw three young men who looked out of a small house. She said hello and knocked modestly at. "Come in," they cried, and she went in and sat by the stove to warm up and eat his lunch. "Give us a little," said the little men. "With pleasure," she said, and gave them half of the bread. "What are you doing out here in the middle of winter with thin frock?" did they ask. "I'm picking strawberries," she replied, "and I dare not go home until I found some." When she had eaten, they gave her a broom and said: "Sweep the snow away from the door." While she was out there, they said to each other: "What shall we give her, because she is so sweet and good shared his food with us." - "I'll give her that she is beautiful every passing day," said the first. "And I give her that falling gold pieces out of her mouth at every word she says," said the other. "I give her a king to man," said the tredie.Pigen swept the snow away, however, as the men had said, and underneath it she found the loveliest dark red strawberries. She joyfully filled her basket full, gave the young men hand and thanked them many times and hurried home to bring his stepmother berries. When she came in and said good evening, gold fell further out of her mouth. She told him what had happened to her in the woods, but every word she said, gold pieces fell out of her mouth. "What a wastefulness to sprinkle money so batty," cried the sister place, but in her heart she was jealous and would also be out in the woods and pick strawberries. Her mother thought it was too cold, but she had no rest, and the mother had to last yield. She made her first a nice warm coat and gave her cakes and sandwiches med.Pigen went into the woods and came to the small house. The three young men looked out, but she gave to them, and without looking right or left, or say hello, she went straight into the room, sat down by the stove and began to eat his cake. "Give us some of that," cried the little men, but she replied: "I really can not do without something that is barely enough for myself." When she had eaten, they gave her a broom and said, "Go out and sweep the snow away from the door." - "Sweep yourself," she replied, "I'm not your girl." When she saw that she did not get something, she went her way. "What shall we give her, because she is so vicious and avaricious," The little men said to each other when she was gone. "I give her that she gets uglier every passing day," said the first. "I give her that a toad shall jump out of her mouth at every word she says," said the other. "She will die a miserable death," said the third. The girl was looking outside for strawberries, and when she found none, she went sulkily home. When she would tell her mother what had happened to her, jumped a toad out of her mouth every word she said, and everyone took an abhorrence of hende.Mandens daughter, however, was beautiful every day that passed, and the stepmother became more and more and thought only of how she was going to hurt her. One day she took a kettle, set it on fire, and boiled yarn in it. When it was ready, she called on the poor girl, gave her an ax and told her to go down and break a hole in the ice, and rinse the yarn. She did as her stepmother said, and when she was down on the ice and was about to break a hole in it, came a king, dashing along at a stately carriage. He stopped and asked: "Who are you my child, and what are you doing here?" - "I am a poor girl who washes yarn," she replied. King felt pity for her, and when he saw how beautiful she was, he asked: "Will you go with me?" - "Heartfelt like," she replied, glad to get away from the mother and søsteren.Hun then sat up in the king's carriage, and they drove home to his castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great splendor. A year after the queen gave birth to one son. When the stepmother heard how she had luck, she went with her daughter to the palace and pretended that she wanted to visit her. But one day, when the king had gone out, and there were not any nearby, the bad woman took the Queen by the head and her daughter took her legs, and then they threw her out the window in the river that ran past. Then put the ugly daughter in the bed, and covered her up to her head. When the king came home and would talk with his wife, the old man said: "It can be no question. I have to let her have peace today, she is sleeping." The king did not think anything about it and came again the next morning. But for every word his wife said, jumped a toad out of her mouth while otherwise used to drop gold pieces. When he asked how it could be, the old man said that it was enough of. It came from the strong sved.Om night so scullion a duck come swimming through the washer end. It said: "What makes suppose my king at this late hour? Is he awake or he rests safely in the night's slumber?" And when he did not respond, said: "What makes all my guests in the large, beautiful castle?" The boy answered then: "They are probably in bed asleep fast and well." It asked again: "And what does my little boy?" And he answered, "He sleeps warm and soft in his white silk bed." Then it changed into the queen and took the child, and gave it to drink and tinkered it and was so again for a duck and swam away. It came two nights, and the last night said to the kitchen boy, "Go and tell the king that he must take his sword and swing it three times over my head." The boy rushed in to the king, who came out and did as the other had said, and as he swung the sword a third time, stood his queen healthy and fresh for ham.Kongen was now very happy, but he hid the Queen in a room for Sunday when the child should be baptized. When it was christened he asked stepmother: "What should be done by the one who takes a second out of bed and throws it into the water." - "He should be put in a barrel full of nails inside, and rolled down a mountain and into the water," said the old man. But the king said: "You have spoken your own judgment," and let the old and the daughter put in a barrel that was rolled down the mountain and rolled into the river.
The three spinners	131	501	Danish	There was once a lazy girl who would not spin, and it was no use, how much her mother could not persuade her. But one day she lost patience and gave the girl a on the ear, so she proceeded to tudskråle. Queen drove just over, and when she could hear that there was someone who was crying inside the house, she went in there and asked the mother why she was beating her daughter, so you could hear her cries out in the street. The mother was ashamed of having to tell where her daughter's laziness, and therefore said: "I can not get her to stop spinning, and I am so poor that I can not provide all the linen, she needs . " - "I love so much that someone spins," said the Queen then, "I know nothing funnier than watching the reels spinning. Let her come home to me, I have flax enough, and she can spin so much she wants. " The mother was very pleased and took the girl with the Queen. When they came to the castle, the Queen her three rooms, from ceiling to floor was full of the finest linen. "Can you spin all the flax up," she said, "then you marry my oldest son. I do not like that you're poor. Your diligence dowry enough." The girl was terrified, for if she had spun for three hundred years from morning to night, she was not finished. When the queen was gone, she began to weep, and sat so for three days. When the queen came back and saw that she absolutely had not started the work, she was surprised, but the girl excused herself by saying that she had longed so for her mother that she had not been able to order something. It seemed the queen probably that could be meaningful. "But tomorrow you turn," she said as she gik.Pigen did not know what to do, but was distressed and looked out the window. When she saw that there were three women walking. The first was flatfooted, the other's lower lip was so thick that it hung down over the chin, and the third had a very large thumb. They stopped below the window and asked the girl what was wrong. She complained of his misfortune to them, and they offered her their help and said, "If you will invite us to the wedding, and not be ashamed of us, but to say that we are your cousins, then we in a hurry spin it listen up. " - "Yes I promise you," the girl said, "only come in and start." Then these same women came in and sat in the first room and began to spin. One pulled thread and the entry wheel, the other the wetted, the third winding and the beat it against the table with the fingers, and each time she did it, was there a bold yarn down and it could not be spun finer. When the queen came, the girl hid the three spinners and showed her the yarn was spun, and she could not find praise enough for the girl. Before very many days were all three rooms empty. So said the three women goodbye. "But do not forget what you have promised us," they said, and then went de.Da the girl showed the queen all the yarn, she began to make preparations for the wedding, and the bridegroom was happy because he was such a nice wife. "I have three cousins," said the girl, "which has been very good to me. Can not I invite them to the wedding." - "Well, why not," replied the queen and her son. At the party beginning came the three women into some whimsical costumes, and the bride said, "Welcome, dear cousins." - "How you can be a relative of the strange womenfolk?" said the groom. Then he went to one and asked her why she was flatfooted. "It was I of stepping spinning wheel," she replied. He then asked the other how she had gotten the thick lower lip. "From licking," she answered. "How did you get such a broad thumb" Then he asked the third. "By turning the thread," she answered. "My lovely bride should never touch a spinning wheel," said the prince absolutely horrified and so she escaped to spin.
The three languages	312	671	Danish	Lived in Switzerland once an old count, who had an only son who was so stupid that he could not even learn something. "Can not get nothing into thy head," said the father angrily, "it does not matter what we do to you. Now I will send you to a famous teacher, and see if he can help you. " The youth was sent to a strange city for a very good teacher and was a full year. So he came home again, and his father asked, "What have you learned, my son?" - "I have learned to understand the dogs' language," the boy replied. "Goodness!" Cried the father, "is it all! It is best to get to another teacher." The youth was taken and returned a year later. "What have you learned?" the father asked. "I have learned what the birds," replied the boy. "Fell into a rage," cried the father, "now you have again wasted the precious time, and you're ashamed not a bit of it. I will send you to a third teacher, and if that does not help, I will no longer known by you." The youth remained a whole year, and when he came home, the father asked: "What have you learned?" - "Now I can understand what the frogs croak," the boy replied. Father jumped furiously up, called his people, saying: "He who says, is no longer my son. I drive him. Take him out into the forest and kill him." But when the people were about to kill him, they had pity on him and allowed him to run away, and they cut the tongue and the eyes of a deer and brought the old det.Ynglingen walked and walked and eventually came to a castle, where he asked for a night's lodging. "If you want to stay in the old tower, you may," said the lord of the castle, "but I warn you, that is full of wild dogs that barks and howls, and at certain hours a man has handed out and eats it immediately. the whole district was in sorrow and dismay, but nobody can find a way. " The youth was not afraid. "Let me just come up to them," he said, "and give me something with which I can throw them. Me doing the really no." When he stood firm in his intent, he got some food for the wild animals, and led him up the tower. When he got up there, barking dogs do not, but wagged friendly and ate what he gave them. The next morning he came to everyone's astonishment healthy and out of the tower and said to the lord of the castle, "The dogs have told me why they bring so much harm over the country. They are bewitched and guardian of a great treasure down the tower. Before it is raised, they do not fall down, and they also told me how you go about it. " All who heard it, rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him as a son if he could really help them. He went back into the tower and came out with a huge chest full of gold. They heard now no more dogs barking and the country was freed from the plage.Nogen time after getting head that he would travel to Rome. On the way he passed a swamp where the frogs were sitting croaking, and when he heard what they said, he was very thoughtful and sad. When he finally came to Rome, the Pope just died and the cardinals were in great doubt as to who should be his successor. They were eventually agreed that they would wait to choose the new pope, God gave them a sign. At that moment, they had decided that the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two snow-white doves flew and sat one on each shoulder. The priests thought it was a sign from God and asked him if he would be pope. He did not really know what to say to it, but the pigeons whispered to him that he should say so, and he did indeed eventually. He was so anointed and consecrated, and now it had happened that he had heard the frogs in the swamp croaking about. He then had to stand up and trade fair, and had no andelse about what he had to say, but the white pigeons sitting on his shoulders, came to his aid and whispered each word to him.
The lazy Henrik	1566	1430	Danish	Henrik was a really lazy guy, and although he had nothing else to do but drive his goat out to pasture, he nevertheless groaned when he came home in the evening. "It's a tough job," he sighed, "this year in and year out just to late autumn to feed a goat. If you then even be able to lie down and sleep, but no one must have eyes and ears with it to take care that it does not break the young trees, or escapes into any garden. How can we be so able to enjoy life! " He wondered and wondered how he was going to escape, and finally he found the council. "Now I know what I do," he cried, "I marry fat Trina. She also has a goat, she can look after both of them, and that way I do." Henry stood up, set his weary legs in motion, and went right across the street, where Trine's parents lived, and asked for their diligent daughter. The parents did not hesitate long. "Like Attracts Like," they said. Now the thick Trine married to Henrik and she drives both the goats out to the field, so he had nothing else to do than to care for her own comfort. Sometimes he walked with her out there, "Then taste-fire so much the better," said han.Men the thick Trina was no less lazy, and one day she said to Henry, "Why should we make us life so difficult. The goats disturb us every morning in our sweetest sleep with their bleating. It's much better that we give them to your neighbor and get a beehive instead. we will put in the sun behind the house and let it take care of itself. bees do not standing on the pegs. They fly out and come home and make honey without making us the slightest trouble. " - "You are a wise woman," said Henry, "let us immediately do it. Honey tastes better than goat's milk and can stay much longer." The neighbor willingly gave a beehive for the two goats. The bees flew tirelessly in and out from morning to evening and the most beautiful honey, so that in autumn Harry was a large jar fuld.Derpå placed the jug on a board, which was posted on the wall of their bedchamber, and because they were afraid that it might be stolen, or that the mice might lick it, put Trine a thick stick beside him in bed, so she could chase the intruders away without having to travel sig.Henrik did not like to stand up before dinner. "It is wasting his strength," he said. One morning when he was in broad daylight even lay in bed he said to his wife: "The women are fond of sweets, and I know that you go tasting the honey. It's better that we look to exchange it for a goose before you have eaten it all. " - "Let us wait with it until we have a child who can fit it," said Trina, "I certainly do not want to exert myself with it." - "Do you really think our son bother to guard the hen house?" he said. "Nowadays, follows the children only their own wise head and does not care about what parents are saying. They behaves just like the lazy servant who had to look for a cow and instead of chasing after three thrush." - "If he does not obey, he'll have me to deal with," said Trina, "I just takes a stick and beats away at him - such" - in his eagerness she seized the stick, which lay next to her, but had the misfortune to hit the jar that stood over the bed. The pitcher struck in many pieces and the fine honey flowed down the wall. "There lies the goose," said Harry, "Now we do not need to wonder who will care for it. But it is lucky that the pitcher did not fall on my head. We have indeed reason to thank provided." He saw a little bit of honey, which sat on a swath picked it up and said happily: "It should taste good on top of the scare. And then we had better rest a little. It does not matter whether it is a little later than usual, the day is always long enough. "" Yes, you will troth always in time, "said Trina," do you know the story of a bird that was invited to the wedding and set out on the road, but arrived at the christening . Outside the house fell bargain down from the fence and said, 'Speed ​​does no good. "
The lazy spinner	1214	1405	Danish	There was once a man and a woman who lived in a village. The wife was so lazy that she did not bother to order something, and when the man gave her something to spin, she did not, and she made the final once, haspede she did not wind, but let it all remain entangled in a heap . If the man scolded her, she would always have the last word, and said: "How could I manage when I have no reel?. First go into the forest and get me one." - "Is that what's wrong," the man said, "now I'll get some wood for you." The woman was now afraid that he would make a clasp to her, so she had to take the yarn off, and began to spin. She thought for a moment, and suddenly she got a good idea and ran behind the man out in the woods. When he had climbed up a tree, she stood downstairs and shouted: "He who cuts haspetræ in the woods, door, and he who winds, shall perish." The man listened, laid the ax from him and could not understand what she meant. "It's probably just been my imagination," he thought so. "There is really nothing to be afraid of." He again took the ax and wanted to chop, but when he heard again: "He who cuts haspetræ in the woods, door, and he who winds, shall perish." He was quite eerie to fashion and sat for some time quietly. But when he could not find anything, he took courage again and would strike again, but as a voice for the third time and this time very loudly and clearly: "He who cuts haspetræ in the forest dies, and whoever winds, shall perish. " Now he lost heroism and climbed in a hurry down the tree and went home. The woman ran as fast as she could, a side road and get home first. "Well, have you found any good wood," she said, when he came home. "No, it probably can not be somebody with the clasp," he said, and told her what had happened to him in the woods. From now on, he demanded no more, she should spinde.Men some time after he began to fret about the disorder in the house. "It is a shame that the spun yarn should lie there all entangled," he said to his wife. "Now listen," she replied, "style you up at the ceiling, so I stand below, and then we throw the spindle back and forth, then we will be a clove of it." - "Yes, it's good," the man said. When they had finished, he said: "The yarn is in skeins, now it must be boiled." The wife was quite choppy, but said, "Yes I'll do it tomorrow morning." But she just wondered how she should play him a new plaster, and the next morning she got up, made the fire and put the kettle on, but instead of yarn, she put a lump of tow, and let it boil. Then she went to the man and said, "I have to go out, so you have to stand up and look a little after the yarn boiling. But close your eyes up properly, because if the cock crows, and you're not careful yarn it becomes tow. " The man stood up quickly and went into the kitchen, but when he looked into the pot, he found to his dismay nothing but a lump of tow. Then the poor man as quiet as a mouse, and thought that it was his fault, it had gone wrong. From now on he never spoke more to his wife to spin. But you yourself must admit that she was a bad one.
The laziest	1437	1950	Danish	There was once a king who had three sons. He held equally by all three of them and, therefore, did not know who should inherit the kingdom after him. As he lay on his deathbed he called them and said, "Now I'll tell you what I've decided. The one of you who is the laziest will be king after my death." - "Then it becomes me," said the eldest, "I am so lazy that when I would go to bed and falling a drop down in my eye, I do not bother even close it to fall asleep." - "No, it is me," said the other, "for jeger so lazy that when I sit by the fire to warm me, will I not pull the legs back, although my heels to burn." - "It is now still me," said the third, "because I'm so lazy that I do not even bother to cut the rope that, when I was strung up on the gallows, although one handed me a knife." - "You are the laziest," said the King, "the kingdom is yours."
The poor miller boy and cat	1005	402	Danish	In a mill lived an old miller who had neither wife nor children. He had three apprentices in his service, and when they had been with him several years, he said to them: "I am old, and want to sit in the chimney-corner. Go out into the world, and that brings me the best horse I will give the mill, but he must in turn take care of me until I die. " The third of the boys were still in the learning and the others thought he was a real fool, and begrudged him the mill, and he cared the way, not on it. They Then all three went out together, and when they came to the village, they said to stupid Hans, "You can stay here. You will never in your life day no horse." But Hans went anyway with, and at night they came to a cave where they lay down to sleep. The two smart ones waited until Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, went away leaving him where he was and thought they had done a much wiser way. But it did them anyway not terribly good. As the sun rose, and Hans woke up, he was lying alone in the dark cave. He looked around and shouted: "Where am I though." Then he got up, climbed out of the cave, went into the woods and thought, "Now I am quite alone and deserted. How will I be able to find a horse." When he went on in these sad thoughts, he met a small tabby cat who kindly said, "Where are you going, Hans." - "You may easily anyway not help me," the boy said. "I know what's wrong," said the cat, "you will have a beautiful horse. Come with me and serve me for seven years, so I'll give you one that you've never seen before." - "It was a wonderful cat," thought Hans, "but I have enough light to see if it's true what it says." He took him with her into her enchanted castle, where all the waiters were cats. They sprang nimbly up and down the stairs and were happy and in good spirits. When they ate the evening, three of them, the one played bass, the second violin, the third blew the trumpet, so the cheeks bulging. After they had eaten, the table was cleared away, and the cat said, "Come and dance with me, Hans." - "No, I do not dance with a pussy cat, I have never yet done." - "Let him then go to bed," said the waiter. The lighted him to his bed-room, and took his shoes off, one his stockings, and then blew out the candle. In the morning they returned and helped him to get dressed. One gave him socks on, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes, one washed him and wiped his face with his tail. "It's very pleasant," said Hans. He may also order something. Every day he cut kindling. He got an ax, a wedge and saw were of silver and the mallet of copper. Well, he chopped the wood and got its good food and drink in the house, but never saw anyone but the tabby-cat and her servants. One day he said to him: "Go out on the meadow and mow the grass and make sure it gets dry." Then he got a scythe of silver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him deliver them back again. His did his work, and when he was finished he brought the scythe, whetstone and the hay home and asked if he might not get his salary. "You have to do a thing yet," said the cat, "Here are builders of silver ax, angle iron and everything you need, all in silver. Build me as a small house." His built the house and said that now he had done what he had, but he had not yet received any horse. The seven years had gone by with him as if they had been a half. The cat asked him if he would see her horses. Said Hans. So she shut the house up, and there stood twelve horses, and they were so beautiful and shining, that his heart rejoiced at the sight of him. He gave him to eat and drink, and said, "Go home, but you do not get the horse. The I bring you three days." She showed him the way to the mill, and he went away. He had not got new clothes, but had to go into the old, tattered coat he had on when he came, and he was the completely grown out of the seven years. The two other apprentices had already come home and they each had a horse, but one was blind and the other lame. "Where's your horse?" did they ask. "It comes in three days," he replied, but then they began to laugh. "Where will you get a horse from?" they said, "it appears a nice one." Hans went into the living room, but Miller would not have, he had to sit down to the table, for he was so ragged and tattered that one had to be ashamed, should there be any. He did so a little food, and as the evening went to bed, the two others did not give him space. Eventually he had to creep into gåsestien and lie on the bare straw. When he awoke, the three days gone. There was so moving a cart with six magnificent horses and a servant came afterwards with a seventh to the poor miller boy. Out of the car rose a lovely princess, and it was none other than the motley cat that Hans had served for seven years. She asked the miller where the miller's boy was. "He lies in gåsestien," he replied, "he is so ragged that we do not have him here." Princess said they would pick him up, and he came to hold his rags together to cover himself as best he could. The servants unpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed him, and when he finished, he was as beautiful as any king. Maiden desired to see the two turbines is reversed horses, and one was dead and another lamb. So she ordered the servant to bring the seventh horse, and Miller said that such a horse as he had never seen. "This is the third miller's boy," she said. "So he must have the mill," said Miller, but the princess said to him that he might keep the horse and also the mill. Then she sat up in the cart with the faithful Hans, and they drove off. They drove to the little house which he had made with silver tool. It was a huge castle where everything was of silver and gold. So she married him, and they were so rich, so rich that they had enough for their whole lives. So no need to say that it is stupid, can not be anything.
The skilful hunter	1052	304	Danish	There was once a young fellow who had learned their craft. He said one day to his father that he would go into the world and seek his fortune. "It's very sensible," said the father, and gave him some money for his journey. He went away to search for work. But their craft did not go right for him, so he lost the desire for it and would rather be the hunter. One day as he went along the way, he met a huntsman dressed in green, who asked where he was going. The young man said he was smith, but he had a liking for it, and would rather be the hunter. He would very much like to go immediately apprenticed to the hunter. It did this in on, and the young fellow him for some years and taught him the art of. Then he would try his luck on his own. To pay for his services, he was nothing but a gay man, but it had the property that it always hit. The young hunter went away and came to a large forest. All day he went without being able to get out of it, and in the evening he sat up in a tall tree, so wild animals could not get hold of him. Towards midnight he thought he saw a light glimmered in the distance. He put close attention to where it was and to be sure not to go wrong, he threw his hat in the direction of the light, then he climbed down from the tree, went to the hat, put it on again, and then went straight out of the nose. The further he went, the greater was the light, and finally he saw that it was an enormous fire. Three fights sat around and turned an ox on a spit. "It is best, I taste the meat soon tender," said one, tore a piece off, and was about to put it in your mouth when the huntsman shot it out of his hand. "Now the river winds it is indeed from me," he said and took another piece, but also the huntsman shot away. On this the giant gave the one who was sitting beside him, enørefigen. "Why river you know me," he shouted. "I have not taken it," replied the other, "it is well for any hunter who shot it out of hand on you." The giant took another piece, but not what could hunter let him keep. "It must be a good hunter, so shoot the food out of my hand," he said, "him, we could probably use." He shouted so loud, "Come forward, hunter, and eat of the bread, we do not do anything. But if we have to use force to get hold of you, it is all over with you." The young man walked up to them and said that he was a hunter. He could hit everything he aimed at. The contestants said that if he would go with them, he would get well. They told him that outside the forest was a deep water. On the other hand there was a tower, and there was a beautiful princess, as they very much wanted to get their hands on. "I'll be fine," said the hunter. "It is no slight matter," said one of the contestants, "for there is a small dog, which immediately begins to bark when someone approaches, and then wake up the whole court. Therefore, we can not come in. Do you think you can kill the dog? " - "It is an easy trick," said the hunter. He sailed out on the water, and when he would moor at the other bank dog came rushing, but he was in a hurry his gun and killed it. The contestants were very happy and thought that they already had the princess, but the huntsman wished first to see how it all went, and said they should stay outside until he called them. He went into the castle. There was dead silence, all slept. In the first room there hung on the wall a silver saber, which was a golden star and the king's name. On the table lay a sealed letter which he opened, and it was written that whosoever had the sword could kill everything. He took the saber about life went on, and came into the room where the princess was. She was so lovely that he stood still and looked at her, and barely daring to breathe. "I dare not give this innocent girl in the wild giants," he thought, "they have evil in their minds." He looked around and saw a pair of slippers that stood under the bed. On the right stood her father's name and a star, and on the left her own name with a star. There was also a large silk scarf, and on the right side stood with gold letters her father's name, on the left side of her own. The hunter cut the piece of the King's name was, and stuck it right slipper in your pocket. The princess was still asleep. Her gown was sewn firmly on her. He cut now also a piece of it and put it in his pocket, but did it so gently that he never touched her. Then he went his way, and let her sleep in peace. When he came to the gate, stood the fighters there and waited for him to come up with the princess. He shouted to them that they were to come in. He had got hold of the princess, but he could not get the door open, they had to crawl through the hole here. One of them got there, the hunter twisted his hair in his hand, pulled the head in, and cut it off with the saber and then drew the rest afterwards. He called to the other two, and it went in the same way. He was very happy at having liberated the princess from her enemies, cut the tongues out of the mouths of the contestants and put them in his pocket. "Now I go home to my father," he thought, "so he can see what I have already accomplished. But then I get out into the world again. The happiness that God will give me I win enough." When the king in the castle awoke, he saw the three died fighting. He immediately went in to his daughter, awoke her, and asked who had killed the giants. "I do not know, little father," she replied, "I have slept." When she would take her slippers on, lacked the right. There was also cut a piece of both of her silk scarf and her chemise. The king summoned the court called together and asked who had freed his daughter. Then came one of his officers who was one-eyed and very ugly, and said that he had done it. The old king promised him so that he should marry for real. But the princess said: "Rather than marry him, I will go out into the wide world, as far as my legs can carry me." King said that she, rather than her royal apparel, to take a peasant girl dress and go away. She could go to a potter and start trading in earthen vessels. She did as he said, went to a potter, got some jars and promised him that she would pay him the evening when she had sold them. King said she was putting herself in a corner, and he got so grab some vehicles that would run through the middle of it all, so they went to pieces. When the princess had placed her stall in the street, came the carts, and broke all the jars into tiny fragments .. She began to cry. "How will I ever pay the potter," she said. However, it was the king's mind in this way to force her to marry the captain. She went to the potter and asked if she again had to borrow some pots, but he said no. She was not until she had paid the other. When she went crying to her father and said she would go out into the wide world. "I will build a house out in the woods and you can stay as long as you live," said the king, "you have to cook for everyone, but you can not take money for it." When the house was finished, was beaten up a sign that read: "Today for nothing, tomorrow for money." She lived for a long time in there, and the rumor that there was a virgin and made food for nothing, needed knowledge. It also came hunter's ear, and he thought: "It was nothing for me. I also am a poor guy." Then he took his gun and knapsack, which he had saved everything he had taken the castle, went into the forest, and found the little house that read: "Today for nothing, tomorrow for money." He had put on the sword with which he had killed giants, and thus entered the house and asked for something to eat. He was welcomed by the sight of the lovely girl and she came up to him and asked where he came from and where he was going. "I must go around and look around the world," he replied. She then asked how he had got hold of the sword with her father's name. "Are you a princess?" he asked. She nodded. "With this sword, I cut off the heads of three giants," he said, taking tongues slipper, and the little bits of scarf and her shift forward. She was very happy and said he had saved her. Then they went up to the old King went with him into her room, and told that it was the hunter who had killed the giants. When the king saw the tongues and the other cases, he doubted not that it was true, and the princess's great delight, he said that she was to marry the hunter. This was now dressed as if he was a fine gentleman, and the King ordered a feast. At the table sat the officer left, the hunter on the right side of the princess, and the officer thought it was a foreign gentleman who had come to visit. When they had eaten and drunk, the king said to the officer that he would give him an enigma. "There was a man who said he had killed the three giants and he were asked where tongues was, he looked to the giants' mouth, and then there were none. How could it be?" - "They have hardly had any," said the officer. "All animals have a tongue," said the king, "but what can one do about such an answer?" - "He must be torn in pieces," said the officer. "You have condemned yourself," King said. The captain was put in prison and torn into four pieces, and the hunter held the wedding of the princess. He picked as his father and mother, and they lived happy and happy with their son. When the old king died, he inherited the kingdom.
The bird Grif	1575	610	Danish	There once was a King, but where he reigned and what he was called, I do not. He had no son, but an only daughter who was always ill, and no doctor could cure her, but there was even been predicted that she could get well when she ate an apple. The king ordered it to be proclaimed that the person who could bring him the apple, should have his daughter to wife and become king over the country. Outside the city there lived a peasant who had three sons. "Go into the garden and take a basketful of those beautiful red apples," he said to the eldest, named Ole, "perhaps they can make the princess well, and then you get her for his wife and become king." The son did indeed and went on his way. When he had gone a little way he met an old man who asked what he had bought. "Frogs' legs," said Ole. "Well, then we say it," the man said and walked on. At long Ole came to the palace and said he brought apples which would cure the princess healthy. The king was very happy, but when Ole took the lid off the basket, he saw to his dismay that it was filled with frog legs, which lay and crawled around. When the king saw this, he was very angry, and let him out of the house. When he came home and told me what had happened, sent the old second son, named Mads, of place, but he fared the same. He also met the little man who asked what he had in the basket, and he replied: "Pig bristles." - "Well, then we say it," the man said. When Mads came to the palace and said he had apples that would cure the princess, thought the servants first, it was not true, and would not let him in, but when Mads was by reassuring them about it, they let themselves be persuaded to let him come in to the king. But when he uncovered the basket, was full of pig bristles, and the king was terribly angry and let him whip out of gården.Han got home and told what had happened to him, and the third son, whom they called stupid Hans, asked his father if he could be allowed to go to the palace. "Yes, you are just the right fellow," said the old man, "when not even the wise can help, what would so you could do." But the guy kept pestering. "Oh, go away, however, you stupid boy," said his father, petulantly, "wait until you are no wiser." Then he turned around, but Hans pulled his coat. "Let me be allowed, Dad," he asked. "Well, yes, yes, so for me," answered the father, "you come troth enough back home." His and jumped for rapture. "See how he creates himself, the fool," said the old man, "he gets dumber every passing day." His did not interfere in his joy. Since it was late at night, and he could not come to the palace that day, he decided to wait until the next morning. He closed barely an eye all night, and when he finally kinds of things, he dreamed of lovely girls and castles, and gold and silver. Early the next morning he went on his way, and a little later the old man walking behind, pulled him by the shirt and asked what he had bought. He replied that it was apples princess should eat to be healthy. "Well, then we say it," said the gamle.Men when Hans came to the castle, there was no question that they would let him in, because there had already been two who said they had apples and one had frog legs and the other pig bristles. His was by asserting that he had the most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom. The servants thought he did such a lie, and when he came in to the king and took the lid off the basket was also found that it was full of the most delicious apples. The king ordered them immediately bring to his daughter and then waited in anxious anticipation of what effect they had. Soon afterwards daughter herself healthy and fresh to him and he was beside himself with joy. But now he did not want to give his daughter in marriage. He had to make a boat which would go quicker on dry land than in the water. Hans agreed to it and went home and told how he had fared. The father sent Uele into the forest to make a boat, and he worked diligently, and whistled while. At noon, when the sun was highest, came the little man and asked what he was doing. "A wooden barrels," said Ole. "Well, then we say it," said the old man. In the evening, when Ole thought he was done and would sit up in the boat, it was no different than a conventional wooden barrels. Next day went Mads out in the woods, but missed him like Ole. On the third day Hans went there. He worked diligently and sang and whistled as it echoed through the trees. At noon came the little man again and asked what he was doing. "I make a boat that can go just as well on land as on water," said Hans. "Well, then we say it," said the old man, and as the sun sank, was Hans finished his boat and rowed to the palace, and it went like the wind. The king had seen him in the distance, but still would not want to give him his daughter to wife and demanded that he first had to guard hundred hares from morning to night, and if there was one of them away, he got her all. His went next morning to the forest with all his flock and took great care that none of them ran away. Soon after came a servant from the palace and asked if he was in a hurry would give her a hare, for strangers came, and it would fry. His saw what that meant, and said that the king could wait until the next day to give his guests hare rose. But the girl continued to penetrate him, and finally he said that if the princess herself would come, she had to get one. The girl went home and told it, and when she was gone, the little man and asked him what he was. "I care that none of the hares running their way," he replied, "so I do not get the princess and will not be king." - "Well," the old man said, "there you have a whistle. If one of the hares run away, you simply have to blow into it, then it comes right back." Then came the princess, and Hans gave her one of the hares, but when she got a hundred paces away, he blew the whistle, and immediately jumped the hare from her and ran back to the flock. In the evening blew whistled once, and when he saw that they were all there, he drove them back to the castle. The king was astonished when he saw that there was not missing a single one, but still would not give him his daughter, he must now bring him a feather from the griffin. Hans immediately set out on the road and went straight out the nose. In the evening he came to a castle and asked if he could stay the night, for then there were no inns. He was kindly received and lord of the castle asked where he would go. "To the Griffin," said Hans. "Will you," he said, "it is said that at all. Do not you want to ask him where the key to my iron casket money has gone." - "Yes, I will," said Hans. Early the next morning he went ahead and in the evening he came to another castle, where he was the night. When the people who got to know where he was going, he told me that he had a daughter who was very ill, and asked him to ask the Griffin what he had to do to get her well again. His promised that, and went on. Shortly after he came to a lake where there was no ferry, but a great man who had to carry everybody across. The man asked whither the journey went. "To the Griffin," said Hans. "Then you do me a favor," said the man, "ask the why I have to go here and carry people across the water." - "That I will," said Hans, and then the man took him on his back and carried him over. At last came his to the bird Grifs house. There were no other home than Mrs Griffin, and she asked him what he wanted. His said then that he had to have one of her husband's tongue and told her also the lord of the castle, whose key was gone, and the man with the sick daughter and about the great, great man who had to carry everybody over the lake. "Yes, my friend," said Mrs Griffin, "my husband eats all the Christian people he can get hold of, but you can crawl under the bed and wait until he is asleep, you can pull a feather out of him, and you want to know, I'll even ask him. "His did. But like Griffin came into the room he said, "I smell a Christian." - "Yes, it has also been one, but he's gone again," said Mrs Griffin, and thus gave himself satisfied. Middle of the night when the Griffin was snoring loudly, Hans reached out and plucked a feather from it. I immediately woke up instantly, and shouted, "I smell a Christian, somebody who shook me in the wing." - "You've been dreaming," said the woman, "I have told you that here has been a man today. He told me for the rest of things. He came from a castle where the key to the money-chest was gone." - "The fools," said Griffin, "the key lies in the woodshed during the chopping block." - "He has also been in another castle, where there was a sick girl who could not even get well again. What should they do to her?" - "It is easy enough, said Griffin," under the cellar-steps a toad has made its nest of her hair. When she gets the hairs again, she is healthy. "Then he told me finally that he had come across a river, where there is always a man walked and carried people back and forth. How can he get rid of it?" - "It is an easy matter," replied the bird. "I wish he middle of the river puts it, he's on his back into the water, then he is even free." Next morning the Griffin got up and went out. Hans came forth from his hiding place. The beautiful feathers he had, and he also had quite heard what the Griffin had said. Mrs. Griffin repeated it for him to be sure he remembered it, and then he went back on the road. First he came to the man in the water, who asked what the bird had said. His would not tell him before coming over to the other bank. So bar man him over, and Hans told him what he should do. He was delighted and offered to thank wearing His once back and forth across the river, but he said no thanks. He had had enough of the one time. Then he came to the castle where the daughter was ill. She was so weak that she could not support the legs, and Hans took her therefore on the arm and carried her down to the basement stairs. There he took toad nest forward, put it in her hand, and immediately she was well again. Her parents were beside themselves with joy and gave him as much gold as he wanted. Hans went on, and when he came to the next slot, he went straight into the burning house and moved the chopping block, and found the key. He also was very happy and gave Hans as a reward much of the gold that was in the chest, and besides a quantity of sheep and cows and geder.Da Hans came to the king with all these good things he asked him where he had gotten everything from it. Hans said that Griffin had given him everything he wanted. The king wanted to also try his luck and went on his way. When he came to the river, the man took him on his back, but he was just the first thing that came after Hans had been there, and in the middle of the water pushed the him down and ran away. King drowned, and Hans married the King's daughter and became king of the whole kingdom.
The old forest	1164	442	Danish	There was once a poor servant who drove with his mistress through a large forest. When they were in the midst of it, robbers back and murdered whom they could get hold of. The only one who got away with life, the girl. In her anxiety, she jumped out of the car and was hiding behind a tree. When the robbers had gone away with their booty, she came out and cried and cried. "What am I poor girl do," she said, "I can not figure out the forest and live here hardly a living soul. I die enough of hunger." She went around and tried to find the way, but it was impossible. In the evening she sat under a tree, praying to God, and decided that here she would be seated, without moving, what happened. When she had sat there for a bit, came a white dove flying with a little golden key in its beak. It put the key in the girl's hand and said: "In the big tree over there is a small lock. Go and close it up with this key, then you will find enough food and not having to starve." The girl went to the tree, opened it, and found a small bowl of milk and wheat bread. When she was satisfied, she said: "At this time flying the chickens up and sits on their sticks. I'm so tired, I just lay in my bed." The dove come flying with another gold key and said, "Open that tree yonder up, there is a small bed." The girl found a beautiful white bed, and she prayed God to protect her during the night, lay in bed and fell asleep. In the morning the dove came for the third time, again brought a key and said, "Open that tree there, there are clothes." When she did, she found garments beset with gold and precious stones, as glorious as if they were a princess. How did it for some time. The dove came every day and made sure everything she needed. Otherwise she was quite alone, but she was quiet and godt.En day when the dove came and said: "Will you do me a favor?" - "Yes, I will," replied the girl. "I will lead you to a little house," it said, "there you go. By the chimney sits an old woman. She says hello, but you really must not say anything about what she does. To the right of she is a door, and when you go through it, you come to a room where there is a variety of rings on the table. there are many with magnificent, brilliant stones, but them you need to forget. there must also be a quite shoddy, matte one, which you take and bring with as quickly as you can. " The girl went to the house and entered. The old woman who stared when she saw her. "Good morning, my child," she said. The girl did not answer, but went to the door. "Where are you going?" shouted the old and grabbed her dress, "this is my house. No one may enter without I want it." The girl did not answer, breaking free and walked right into the room. On the table lay a multitude of rings, which gleamed and sparkled. She turned them over each other and searched and searched but could not find it, she would have. While she stood there, she saw that the old would sneak away with a bird cage in his hand. She hurried to take the cage, and when she looked into it, she saw that the bird had the plain ring in its beak. She took it, ran home happy, and thought that the white dove would come and get it, but it did not come. She stood and leaned against a tree to wait for it, but at one time it was as if the tree bent and was letting its branches down. Suddenly branches twined around her like two arms, and when she turned around, the tree was a handsome man, who embraced and kissed her. "You have saved me," he said, "the old woman was a witch who had turned me into a tree. Only a few hours each day, I was a white dove, and as long as she had the ring I could not be human again. " All trees next to now was also released from the spell and turned into horses and waiters. The young man was a prince, and they drove home to his kingdom. The wedding was celebrated, and they lived long and happily together.
The old Sultan	455	101	Danish	There was once a peasant who had a faithful dog called Sultan. But now it had become old and had lost all his teeth, so the man said one day to his wife: "Tomorrow I will shoot old Sultan. However, it is of no earthly use more." Wife took pity on it and said: "He has served us so long that I probably think we could leave the dining nådsensbrød in his old age." - "What nonsense," the man replied, "You're too soft heart. If he has served us believe, it also has in turn given its good food." The poor dog was tætved in the sun and had heard it all. It was very sad, because it understood that it was the last day of its life, and in the evening sneaked out to his good friend, the wolf, and complained of his misfortune to it. "Cheer up, buddy," said the wolf, "I'll help you. Tomorrow morning, your master is going with his wife to the ground and take their small child, and they usually leave it lying over by the hedge. You must simply lie next to, like you would keep watch. then I will come out of the woods and off the child, and you shall go after me to take it from me. When I got a little distance into the woods , I put it down, and then you can bring it back to the parents. They will of course be you forever grateful, and you can be sure to get good rest of your life. "the dog thought it was an excellent plan, and the next morning they carried out just as it was arranged. Father screamed their lungs, as it ran away with the child, and when Sultan brought it back, he patted it and said, touched: "There shall not one hair on your head, and to be cared for you as long you live." Then he said to his wife: "Go straight home and cook some porridge to Sultan and put my pillow out of its basket, so that it may lie upon." From now had the old Sultan as good as it could wish for. Soon afterwards the wolf visited him and welcomed so well had succeeded. "But listen, buddy," he said, "now you will probably do me the favor to close your eyes, if I again take to take one of your master's fat sheep. It is not so easy to cope with these scarce times. " - "Do not count on," said the dog, "I will be true to my master, how it goes." The wolf did not think he felt so strictly, and came limping at night to pick up sheep. But the faithful Sultan had told his master what the wolf had in mind, so the farmer stood on guard in the barn and threshed it properly through. It had to run away, but shouted at the dog, "Wait just, your filth. What you get paid." The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog. Out in the woods so that they might settle the affair. Old Sultan could not get by him but a cat with only three legs, and the two limped off together, while the cat of pain stuck her tail straight up. Wolf and his friend were already on the spot, and when they saw their opponents come, they thought that the cat's spiky tail was a saber. They could not see that it only had three legs, but thought it was picking up rocks. They were very scared and wild boar crept into some bushes and the wolf jumped up a tree. The dog and the cat were very astonished not to find, and stood for some time and waited. Suddenly the cat eye on the pig's ear that stuck out from between the leaves, and when it thought it was a mouse, jumped up and bit very emphatically therein. The pig squealed and screamed: "The one is up in the tree," and ran off so strong, its legs could carry it. The dog and cat looked up, they saw the wolf, who was ashamed of having shown himself so timid, and handed the dog hand for peace and conciliation.
The white bride and the black	1284	403	Danish	There was once a woman who with her daughter and stepdaughter went into the field to pick up the feed. They met when our Lord in the form of a poor man, and he asked: "Which is the way into the village?" - "Find it yourself?" said the mother, and the daughter added, "If you are afraid to go errors, ye look to get one to go with." - "Come, I'll go," said his stepdaughter. Then God was angry with the mother and the daughter that he cursed them and ordered that they should be as black as night and as ugly as sin. The poor stepdaughter he followed to the village, blessed her and said: "You must get three wishes fulfilled." - "I wish I was beautiful and bright as the sun," she said, and immediately she was so beautiful that one can not imagine it. "Secondly, I want me a purse that is never empty." That the Lord gave her also, but said: "Do not forget the best." - "So I want my eternal salvation," said the girl, and God also promised to fulfill this request, and then parted de.Da stepmother and her daughter came home and saw that they were black and ugly, but the daughter was white and beautiful they were even more evil, and they thought of nothing else than to hurt her. Location daughter had a brother called Reinholdt, which she loved. And she told him what had happened to her. One day he said to her: "I want to paint a picture of you, so I can always have you in mind for my love is so great that I can not do without seeing you." She asked him not to show the image to anyone and he painted his sister and hung it in his living room. He was a driver with the king and lived in the castle. Every day he looked at the picture and thanked God for his dear sister. The Queen, however, was dead, and she had been so beautiful that no one could match her and the king was very distressed. The attendants noticed that the coachman stood daily before this beautiful picture, and told it to the king. This let the picture be brought to him, and when he saw that it was like his lost wife, but was even more beautiful, he was deadly in love with her. He called on the driver to get to know who it was and decided not to take any other than her his queen. He gave Reinholdt magnificent clothes and sent him away with horse and cart to fetch the bride. His sister was very happy when he came, but place her sister was jealous and said to her mother: "What good is all your tricks. Such a happiness you can not get me." - "Do not worry," said the old man, "I'll help you." By sorcery did she coachman almost blind and the bride almost døv.Derpå they got into the carriage, first the bride in splendid apparel, then the mother and her daughter, and Reinholdt sat up on the box. Along the way, the driver said: "Little sister, tires you, take care of your golden clothes that not dust and rain you stains before you the king enters." "What does my brother?" The bride asked. "He says that you must take off your golden dress and give it to your sister." She did it and got an old, gray dress instead. They drove onwards, and little by brother again cried, "Little sister, tires you, take care of your golden clothes that not dust and rain you stains before you the king enters." "What does my brother?" The bride asked. "He says that you must take off your golden hood and give it to your sister," said the old man. She did it and ran with her own head. Little by shouted the coachman: "Little sister, tires you, take care of your golden clothes that not dust and rain you stains before you the king enters." "What does my brother?" The bride asked. "He says you must look out the window," said the old man. They drove just across a bridge over a deep river, and when the bride leaned out of the car, pushed her so she fell into the water. When she sank, appeared a snow-white and up and swam down the river. The brother had observed nothing of it all and drove on until they came to the castle. Then he took the sister of the king and thought it was the right when he saw the golden garments glittering and he could see how she looked. When the king saw how ugly she was, he was angry, and ordered the coachman thrown into a pit which was full of worms and snakes. But the old witch understood by his sorcery to blind the king so that he eventually found his daughter was quite nice, and even married hende.En evening when the black bride was sitting on the King's lap, came a white duck swimming up ikøkkenet through the drain and said to the scullion, "boy, light a fire that my feathers, I heat can." He did it, and then came the duck and sat down by the fire, polishing his feathers with its beak and said: "What makes Reinholdt, my brother dear?" The boy answered, "lizards biting him, hoses slider him." She asked, "What does the witch, the black bitch?" The boy answered, "She is happy and warm, in the king's arm." Then said another: "O woe is me, woe is me arms, God have mercy!" and swam away igen.De next night she came again and asked about quite the same. Then the scullion to the king and told it all. He would see it, and next evening went into the kitchen, and when the duck he grabbed his sword and cut its throat. Immediately stood the loveliest girl who quite like the picture. The king was very pleased and fetched costly apparel to her, the water drives her. She told him how she had been deceived and plunged into the water, and her first prayer was that her brother had to get out of the snake pit. King granted immediately her wish and then went to the old witch and asked her what had to be done by the one who had been guilty of such a crime as that was practiced against the girl. The old thought not at all on its own malice but said: "He deserves to be put naked into a barrel with nails. In front of the barrel tighten a horse, and it should be thrown out into the wide world." The wicked witch and her daughter was now sentenced to this punishment and the king married the beautiful girl and made her brother a rich and distinguished man.
The white snake	161	673	Danish	For many, many years ago there lived a king who was famous worldwide for his wisdom. He knew everything that happened and you would almost think that he was bidding on the air wings of the most secret things. But he had a strange habit. Each dinner when they were taken off the table, and everyone had gone out, a trusty servant had to bring him one more dish. It was closed, and the waiter did not know any more than any other man that were therein, the king did not eat of it until he was completely alone. This had gone on for some time, but one day the waiter seized with such curiosity that he slipped into another room with the dish. When he had carefully locked door, he took the cover and so that there was a white hose. He immediately got such a desire to taste it and cut a little bit and put it in your mouth. No sooner had he eaten it before he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside the window. He went and listened, and then noticed that it was the sparrows who spoke with each other and told everything they had experienced in fields and forests. Anyone who ate the snake got ability to understand animals sprog.Samme day was one of the queen's precious ring, and suspicion fell on the faithful servant who had access to all rooms. The king called him and said that if he was not before the next day be able to say who was the thief, he would be looked upon as guilty and executed. It did not help that he asserted he was innocent. He went worried back and forth in the yard and was wondering how he was going to be saved. Ude some ducks peacefully around and plastered herself with her beak and talked together. The waiter stood and listened to them. They talked about the wonderful food they had in the morning, and one of them said sadly, "I have to hurry swallowed empress ring that had fallen out of the window, it is so heavy in my stomach." The waiter grabbed it immediately in the neck, carried it into the kitchen and said to the cook: "Here's a nice fat duck, that you should slaughter." The chef looked at it and said, "Yes, the have really had eaten well, it can probably deserve to be fried." He cut the throat of it, and when the intestines were taken out, he found the queen's ring in the stomach. The waiter could now easily prove his innocence, and the king, who would make his wrongs, allowed him to ask what he wanted, and promised to make him the place in the court if he wanted det.Tjeneren cared refused everything, but asked for a horse and some money for traveling, he wanted to look around in the world. The king gave him gladly, and he immediately set out on the road. One day he came across a pond, where he saw three fishes caught in the reeds and lay gasping for breath. They say enough that the fish are dumb, but he understood immediately that they complained that they were to die. He took pity on them, dismounted and helped them to get loose. They were very grateful and put their heads out of the water and shouted: "We'll repay you for saving." He rode on, and after a while he thought he heard a voice in the sand. He listened, and heard an ant queen, who complain, "Just the stupid people could be us from life with their clumsy animals. There comes the big horse and trampling all my ants to death." The waiter turned on to a side path and the ant queen shouted after him: "We'll repay you for saving." The road led through a forest, and there he passed two ravens who were preparing to throw their young out of the nest. "Pak you," they shouted, "we can not find food for you. You are big enough to feed yourself." Those poor kids lying on the ground, flapping their wings and screamed: "We can not even fly, we die of hunger." The good servant rose when the horse ran his dagger in it and left it for raven kids could get something to eat. Then they came hopping, and ate their fill and shouted after him: "We'll repay you for saving." Now he had to use his legs, and finally he came to a city. There was heavy congestion on the streets, and a man rode up on a horse and declared that the princess wanted to marry, but he who would woo her, had to first pass a difficult test, and he passed it, he had his life forfeited. Many had already tried then, but they had all perished. When the youth saw the king's daughter, he was so dazzled by her beauty that he never thought of the danger, but volunteered as frier.Han was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into the water. King told him to bring the ring back and added: "But if you come up again without it you will crash out and find your death in the waves." All lamented the beautiful youth who was standing alone on the shore. While he stood there and thought about what he should do, he saw three fishes come swimming. It was those whose lives he had saved. The middle held a mussel in its mouth and put it up on the beach at his feet, and when he picked it up and opened it, lay the gold ring therein. Glad he brought it to him and thought that he would get his salary. But when the proud princess was told that he was not her equal, she demanded that he should be made on another sample. She even went into the garden and strewed ten sacks millet seed on the grass. "These must be picked up before the sun rises in the morning," she said, "and there may not be missing a single one." The youth sat down in the garden and thought about what he did had to do, but he could not find a way and sat sorrowfully awaiting that he should be led to the place the next day. But when the sun's first rays fell into the garden, he saw all the ten sacks were filled to the brim, and missing not a single grain. Ant queen had been there with its thousands and thousands of ants and they had collected all the grain up. When the princess came into the garden, and was contrary to expectations that the young man had done what she had said. But she could not yet bend his proud heart and said: "I will anyway not marry him until he has brought me an apple from the tree of life." The young man had no idea where the tree of life grew, but he immediately set out on the road. When he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came into a great forest, and sat down to sleep under a tree. Suddenly he heard a noise above his head, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time three ravens flew, sat at his feet and said: "We are the three young ravens whom you saved from dying of hunger. When we got to know that you were seeking the Golden Apple, we flew over the sea end of the world, where the tree of life stands, and brought you the apple. " The youth went now pleased on the way home and brought the beautiful princess apple, and now she could not find on several excursions. They shared the Apple of Life, and when she had eaten it, she came to hold infinite love him, and they lived happily together for many, many years.
The bright sun brings everything for a day	1091	960	Danish	There was once a tailor's apprentice who went out into the world. But he could not find work, and eventually he was so poor that he did not own a penny. One day he met a jew on the road, and when he thought he might have a lot of money, got his evil tendencies power over him, and he went right away at the Jew. "Give me your money or I'll kill you," he said. "Let me my life," asked the Jew, "I own no more than eight shillings." - "Shown you have the money," cried the tailor, "come with them." So he thrashed away at the Jew and beat him almost to death. "That the bright sun probably bring for a day," said the Jew, and then he died. The tailor felt in his pockets to grab the money, but there was no more than the eight dime. So he threw the Jew behind a bush and went on. At last he came to a town and got to work. Master had a beautiful daughter, her he fell in love and they got married and lived happily sammen.De had two children, and when that was gone for many years, died father-in- law and svigermoderen, and the young people lived so alone. One morning when the man sitting on the table near the window, brought his wife him a cup of coffee. He poured it into the cup and wanted to drink it. The sun's rays fell just then and glare flickered back and forth on the wall. "Yes, you'd probably like to bring it for a day," said the tailor and looked up there, "but you can not." - "What is this, little man," asked the wife. "I dare not tell you," he replied. "Well, if you love me, you tell me," she said, kissed him and said that she would not divulge it to anyone. He finally gave in to her tormenting arteries and told that many years ago he had been wandering and not owned a single penny. Then he had taken a jew and killed him, but the Jew had just before he died said: "The bright sun'll bring it for a day." The sun would also like to have done and had jumped and danced on the wall and made pretzel wreath, but had not been able to. He asked her again finally not tell anyone, as it was the end of him, and she promised it certainly. When he sat down to work, went the wife to her godmother and told her the whole story on the condition that she did not say it to a human. But within three days had passed, did the entire city, and the tailor was brought to court and executed. Thus brought the bright sun it anyway for a day.
The wise peasant girl	894	875	Danish	There was once a poor peasant who had no land, and only had a small house. "We will ask the king for a piece of heath land," he said to his only daughter. When the king heard how poor they were, he gave them a piece of land. It dug up, and intended as little corn and grain of it. When they had dug nearly found in the earth a mortar made of pure gold. "It's best we give the king, because he has been so gracious to give us this land," the man said, but her daughter did not like it. "Would not consent," she said, "we have not any encounter, and then we just also get it." But he did not like what she said, took the mortar to the king and said that he had found it on the moor, and he wanted to give it to him. The king asked if they had not found more, and when the father said no, he demanded that they also bring him the pestle. The farmer said that it had not found that, but it was like talking to deaf ears, he was thrown in jail and having to sit there until he produced the pestle. The servants had daily to carry him bread and water - it's the food you get in prison, and they heard that the man still shouted: "Had I listened to my daughter advice, if only I'd done it." They went up to the king and said that the man would neither eat nor drink, but continually yelled: "If only I had followed my daughter's advice." King commanded that they should lead the prisoner to him and asked why he still cried like that. "She said that I should not bring the mortar, so I should also probably get the pestle," he replied. "If you have such a clever daughter, let her come here," King said. She now had to go to the palace, and the king said to her that he would try if she really was so wise. He would give her a riddle, and if she could guess that, he would marry her. Bond girl replied that she would guess it, and the king then said: "You must come to me not clothed, not naked, not riding, not walking, not on the road nor off the road. If you can, I will marry me with you. " She dressed now completely, so she was not clothed, wrapped a large fishing net completely on, so she was not naked, borrowed a donkey and tied the net to its tail, so that it dragged her away, so hun.Der went some years. Once, when the king went out on parade, when it happened that some peasants who had been selling wood stopped with their carts outside the palace. For some of them there were cattle and some horses. A peasant who had three horses, one of them gave birth to a foal, and it ran away and lay down between two oxen which were harnessed to a cart. The peasants came together, and began to argue and scream. The peasant with the oxen wanted to keep the foal, saying that his animals had given birth to it, but the other said no, his horse had had it and it was his. King quarrel came to know and he ordered that the foal should stay where it had been, and it was thus given to the farmer who absolutely had no right to it. The second was crying his way. He had heard that the Queen was so gentle and kind, because she herself had sprung from poor people, and he went up and asked her if she would help him to get his foal back again. "If you will promise not to say that it is I who have helped you, I will do it," she said. "Tomorrow morning, when the King parades the guard, place thyself in the road and take a big fishing net and pretend you are fishing and sheep net full of fish and shake them out." She told him also what he should answer when the King spoke to him, and he stood so the next day up and fished on dry land. King passed by, and when he saw him, he sent his messenger to ask what the whimsical man ordered. "I fish," replied the farmer. The messenger asked how he could fish when there was no water. "I might as well fish on dry land as an ox to have a foal," replied the farmer. The messenger brought this reply to the king, he called on the farmer and said he would immediately tell who had taught him, for he had not even made up. But the farmer would not and went on to claim that it was his own idea. He was now thrown at a stråknippe and they beat and tortured him until he confessed that the queen had taught him. When the king came home he told his wife, "Why deceive me? I will not have you for a wife. Go back home to your peasant hut." He gave her, however, allowed as a farewell gift to take with her, she loved most. "Yes, I will do what you command," she said, kissing him goodbye. Then she ordered a powerful sleeping draft to drink farewell to him, and the King took a long draft, but she took only a little. He soon fell into a deep sleep, and when she saw it, she called one of the servants, and wrapped the King in a white sheet and commanded the waiter wear him down in the cart. She then drove home with him, put him in his bed and he slept a whole day in a row. When he woke up he stood up, looked around without being able to understand where he was and called his own servants, but no one came. Eventually his wife came to him and said: "You have even commanded me to take what I liked best, with me: You are my dearest in the world. And that's why I took you." The king had tears in his eyes: "We will always be together," he said, and they returned to the castle. The wedding was celebrated, and if they have not died, they are still alive.
Clever Else	322	1450	Danish	There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Else. When she was grown up, her father said: "We have to get her married." - "Yes," replied his wife, "when there was only one who wanted her." At last one came from a distance, named Hans, and when he proposed, he asked Else should be very careful as well head. "She is smarter than all of us put together," said the father, and the mother added, "She can see the wind coming down the street and hear the flies cough." - "Yes, if she is not very clever, I will not have her," said Hans. They sat down to the table, and when they had eaten, the mother said, "Go down to the basement and get some beer, Else." Clever Else took the mug and rattled along the way with the lid, for the time not to drop her long. When she was down there, she took a chair and sat in front of the dish, that she should not need to stoop. She began then to turn on the tap, and while the beer run into the mug she sat and looked great on down there. She was just above her head spot a Murhammer that the masons of a mistake had forgotten. "When Hans and I now even have a child to be grows big, then falls murhammeren down on its head and kill it," said Clever Else and burst into tears. The other sat up there and waited for the beer, and Else did not come, sent his mother eventually cook down to see where she went. The girl went into the basement, and when she saw Else sit weeping in front of the dish, she asked what however was in the way. "I'm so unhappy," said Else, "Hans, and now I even have a child, and it here to draw beer, fall murhammeren down on its head and kill it." - "Our Else is clever," said the girl and began also to cry. Since neither the girl or Else came back, the man sent the servant down to see where they went. He found both of them crying and asked what however was in the way. "I'm so unhappy," said Else, "Hans, and now I even have a child, and it here to draw beer, fall murhammeren down on its head and kill it." - "Our Else is clever," said the youth, and began to cry loudly. Upstairs in the living room, they sat and waited and waited, and finally the man said to his wife: "You go down and see how they get by." Mistress went down and found them all crying and asked what was wrong. Else told her now, how sad it would go her small child. "Where you is clever," said the mother, and began also to cry. The man sat up there and became more and more thirsty, and finally decided himself to go down there. When he came downstairs and was told that they wept because the child that Else might even'd get would maybe be down to tap beer when murhammeren fell down, he said: "Where you is clever, Else , "and began also to cry. Suitor was long awaited, but finally he thought: "They're well down there waiting for me. It's probably best I go down and see what they are ordering." When he got there, they sat all five crying, one higher than the other. "What is however going on," cried he. "Oh, Hans," said Ellen, "once we have a child and we send it down here to draw beer, fall murhammeren down and kill it. Is not that terrible?" - "You're so clever, Else," said Hans, "and therefore I will also marry you." Then he took her hand and they walked up and held the wedding at the samme.Da they had been married for some time, Hans said one day: "I will go out and look to get some work, so I can earn some money. you go out into the field and give you about to cut the corn, so that we can get something to bread. " - "I'll, Hans," said Else. When Hans was gone she cooked herself porridge and took it off the ground. "Shall I eat or mow first," she thought as she got there, "Well, I think I'll eat." She ate so all the porridge and was stokmæt. "Should I now sleep or mow first," she thought, "I think I'll sleep." Then she lay down in the corn and went to sleep. Hans had come home long ago, and Else did not come, he thought: "It is an extremely wise wife I have. She is so industrious that she does not even come home to eat." And when it was evening, he went out to see what she had ordered, and found her snoring end, without having mowed the slightest bit of grain. In a hurry, he ran home and fetched a bird netting with bells and wrapped it around her without her slumber. Then he went home and closed the door and began to work. At long last woke Else, it was pitch dark, and as she groped around him to get up, the bells jingled at every movement she made. She was frightened and knew neither in or out. "Is it me, or is it not me," she thought, but she was not wiser. She did not know what to do, but finally she decided to run home and look to get the matter done. When she came home, the door was closed and she knocked at the window, and shouted: "Are Else there, Hans?" - "Yeah well she's it," he replied. "Oh, it's not me," she thought frightened and ran from one house to another, but no one would shut up when they heard the bells ringing. Then she ran out of the village, and no one knows where she has gone.
Clever Gretel	731	1741	Danish	There was once a cook named Gretel. She wore shoes with red heels, and when she went with them on, she turned herself right away and thought, "I'm a pretty girl." When she got home, she drank out of sheer joy a sip of wine and then she also want to eat and tasted so long for food until she was satisfied. "The cook must know how it tastes," said hun.En once told hubby to her: "Tonight we get strangers. Can you roast two really delicious chicken." - "It should jegnok," said Grete, slaughtered them, scalded and plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them on fire to roast them. They began to turn brown and tender, but the stranger was not arrived yet. "If he does not come soon, I have to take them off the fire," said Gretel, "but it is sin if it lasts very long before they are eaten. They are allersaftigst now." - "I will run myself, and fetch him," said the master. As soon as he was gone, Grethel chickens aside and thought, "You get hot and thirsty to stand so long by the fire. God knows when they come home. I must down to the cellar and something to drink." Then she ran down there and filled a mug. "Cheers, Gretel," she said and took a swig. "This is not how to stop once you have started," she said, taking a drag on. She went up again, put the chickens over the fire, smeared butter on and turned them around. They smelled delicious, and Gretel thought: "It's best to taste them, that it should not go wrong," stroking your finger over them and licked it. "Where the hens however are lovely, she thought," it is a shame that they can not be eaten immediately. "She ran to the window to see if her husband did not come with his guest, but there was no one to see . "one wing burning well," she thought as she approached the chickens again, "it is much better that I eat it." she cut it off, and it tasted her so well that she thought: "it is best, I also take the other. Otherwise, one can see that something is missing. "When she had eaten it, she went to the window to look for her husband, but she could not eye him." Maybe they did not, "she thought," the may well be taken in another place. Courage, Grete. Take a good sip wine and eat it all. You are, after all, started and then you get peace. Why should we waste God's gifts. "She then ran down to the basement and took an enormous drink and ate up the one chicken. And when her husband still did not come, she looked at the other and said:" Where one is, Do the other also. The two belong together, and what's right for the one that fits for the other. When I get a little more to drink, it can be shown not hurt me. "And when she had taken a swig of wine, slipped the other hen also ned.Mens she sat there and ate very well, came householder walking and shouted "Hurry up, Gretel, the guest is coming soon." - "I'll make it up," answered Grethel. Meantime the master looked, the table was covered nicely, and then went out into the corridor and sharpened the big knife which he would carve the chickens with. However, the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the door. Grete ran to him, and when she saw who it was, she put her finger to her lips and said, "Hurry up a little to get going . If my husband gets hold of you, are unhappy. He has just invited you to cut both ears of you. Can you hear, he sharpens the knife. "He could probably hear and ran down the stairs, everything he could. Grete was not lost behind a truck, ran crying to her master, and cried:" It is a network guest ye who have been invited. "-" What do you mean, Gretel. "-" think Just, I was coming in with the chickens, also snatched him both of them and ran away. "-" It's a nice trick, " said the man, annoyed because he had missed the lovely chickens, "just he at least had let me keep one, then I should have had something to eat." he shouted now to the guest that he should wait, but he pretended he did not hear. Then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand and shouted: "just one, just one." he thought that he would have one hen, however, thought that he had with one of his ears, and ran as he had the fire under their feet, to escape unscathed home with both of them.
The Clever Hans	302	1696	Danish	"Where are you going, Hans?" says his mother. "To Grethel, mother," replied Hans. "Behave well, Hans." - "That I will. Goodbye mother." - "Good-bye, Hans." Hans went to Grete. "Good day, Gretel," said Hans. "Good day, Hans. You got anything good?" - "Not a bit, gives you nothing?" Gretel presents Hans with a needle. "Goodbye, Gretel," said Hans. "Good-bye, Hans." Hans takes the needle in a load of hay and follows the cart home. "Good evening, mother." - "Good evening, Hans, where have you been?" - "At Gretel." - "What did you give her?" - "Nothing. She gave me something." - "What did she give you?" - "A needle." - "Where did you get that?" - "I have it stuck in a load of hay." - "It was stupid of you, Hans, you should have stuck it up his sleeve." - "I'll do better next time." "Where are you going, Hans?" - "To Gretel, Mother." - "Behave well in hand." - "That I will. Bye, Mom." - "Good-bye Hans." Hans went to Grete. "Good day, Gretel." - "Hello, Hans. You got anything good?" - "Not a bit. Gives you something?" Gretel presents Hans with a knife. "Color], Grete." - "Good-bye, Hans." Hans takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. "Good evening, mother." - "Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?" - "At Gretel." - "What did you give her?" - "Nothing, she has given me anything." - "What has she given you?" - "A knife." - "Where did you, Hans." - "I have it stuck in your sleeve." - "That was stupid, Hans, you should have put it in your pocket." - "I'll do better next time." "Where Hans?" - "To Gretel, Mother." - "Behave well, Hans." - "That I will. Bye, Mom." - "Good-bye, Hans." Hans went to Grete. "Good day, Gretel." - "Hello, Hans. You got anything good?" - "Not a bit. Gives you something?" Gretel gives Hans a young goat. "Goodbye, Gretel." - "Good-bye, Hans." His tie the legs together at the goat and put it in his pocket. When he comes home, the choke. "Good evening, mother." - "Good evening, Hans, where have you been?" - "I have been with Grete." - "What did you give her?" - "Nothing. She has given me anything." - "What has she given you?" - "A goat." - "Where'd you get that, Hans?" - "I put it in my pocket." - "It was stupid of you, Hans, you should have tied it to a rope." - "I'll do better next time." "Where are you going, Hans?" - "To Gretel, Mother." - "Behave well, Hans." - "That I will. Bye, Mom." - "Good-bye, Hans." Hans went to Grete. "Good day, Gretel." - "Good day, Hans, you have something good?" - "Not a bit. Gives you nothing?" Gretel gives Hans a piece of bacon. "Goodbye, Gretel." - "Good-bye, Hans." His tie bacon in a rope and pull of it. The dogs come and eat it. He comes home with the rope in his hand and nothing else. "Good evening, mother." - "Good evening, Hans, where have you been?" - "At Gretel." - "What did you give her?" - "Nothing, she has given me anything." - "What has she given you?" - "A piece of bacon." - "Where do you have it?" - "I tied it to a rope and dragged it home, but the dogs ate it." - "That was stupid, Hans, you should have taken it on the head." - "I'll do better next time." - "Where are you going, Hans?" - "To Gretel, Mother." - "Behave well, Hans." - "That I will. Bye, Mom." - "Good-bye, Hans." Hans went to Grete. "Good day, Gretel." - "Good day, Hans, you have something good?" - "Not a bit, gives you nothing?" Gretel presents Hans with a calf. "Goodbye, Gretel." - "Good-bye, Hans." Hans put the calf on his head, and the scraper him in the face with his feet. "Good evening, mother." - "Good evening, Hans, where have you been?" - "At Gretel." - "What did you give her?" - "Nothing, she has given me anything." - "What has she given you?" - "A calf." - "Where did you get that?" - "I have it on my head, and scratched my face." - "That was stupid, Hans. You should have pulled the home and tied it by the hedge." - "I'll do better next time." "Where are you going, Hans?" - "To Gretel, Mother." - "Behave well, Hans." - "That I will. Bye, Mom." His goes to Grete. "Good day, Gretel." - "Hello, Hans. You got anything good?" - "No, not a bit. Gives you nothing?" Gretel says to Hans: "For myself." His ties Grete in a rope, leads her to the rack and binds her fast. Then he goes home to his mother. "Good evening, mother." - "Good evening, Hans." Where have you been? "-" At Gretel. "-" What did you give her? "-" Nothing. I've got herself home. "-" Where did you find her? "-" I have tied her to the hedge and some grass for her. "-" That was stupid, Hans. You should have cast friendly eyes on her. "-" I'll do better next time. "Hans went into the stable, cut out the eyes of all the cows and sheep and throwing them face Gretel. Gretel gets angry tears away and runs away, and is not his bride of.
The little peasant	582	1535	Danish	There was once a village where there lived but really rich peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant. Both he and his wife would so much like to have a cow, but they had none, and they had not the money to buy someone. One day he said to his wife: "I've had an excellent idea. We ask my godfather, the carpenter, to make us a calf of brown wood so that it looks like it was alive. It will certainly get large cow. " The wife liked the idea and the carpenter made the cow so that it stood with bowed head, as if it ate, and ground it with natural farve.Da cows the next morning were driven out of peasant called the cow herd and said, "Here I a calf, but it is so small that it could be carried. " - "It's good," said the shepherd took the calf and carried it out on the field and put it into the grass. The calf was standing there with bowed head, as if it ate, and the shepherd thought: "What the already can eat. It can actually also soon go." When the flock in the evening had driven home, he said to the calf, "When you put such a lot in life, you can actually also go home, I do not want to drag you." The little peasant stood at the door and waited for her calf, and when the shepherd was walking, he asked where it was. "It stands troth out there eating," replied the shepherd, "and it is not finished yet, so it would not agree." - "I must really want my animals again," said the farmer, and they walked on to the field. However, it had been stolen. "It is well run away," said Shepherd. "Thank you, my friend," replied the farmer and accused him of mayor, who sentenced him to punishment for his carelessness should give farmers a ko.Endelig had the small peasant and his wife, the cow, they had long wished themselves. But they had no food for it, and was therefore forced to kill it. The salted meat and the peasant went into the city to sell the skin and buy a new calf. On the way he passed a mill, and there sat a raven with broken wings, and when he was sorry for it, he wrapped it into the skin. The wind howled and the rain poured down, and he could not bear to go further, but went into the mill and begged for shelter. Moller's wife was home alone and gave him a bundle of hay to lie on and a piece of bread and cheese. The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman thought, "He sleeps troth, as tired as he is." Then came the priest, and his wife took very kindly towards him. "My husband is not home," she said, "so we will have something good to eat." The farmer heard it and was annoyed because he had not had anything but bread and cheese. The wife sat However, the best food on the table, both rose and salad and cakes and vin.Da they had sat down and was about to eat, knock on the door. "God, that's my man," said the woman, and in a hurry she hid the roast on the stove, the wine under the pillow, the salad on the bed, the cake under the bed and the priest in the closet. Then she went down and opened the door to her husband and said: "Thank God you're here again. It is such a storm, as if the world were to go under." When the miller saw the peasant, he asked: "What is he there." - "Oh, the poor guy," the woman replied, "He came here in the bad weather and asked if he could be here. I allowed him to lie there and gave him a piece of bread and cheese." - "I do not mind," the man said, "Let me now get something to eat." - "I have nothing but bread and cheese," she replied. "Yes, I do not care when I just get something," the man said. "Come here, you," he shouted to the farmer, "so you can get something." The peasant did not say twice, but got up and ate. Miller saw the skin with the raven and asked what it was. "It's a fortune-teller," said the farmer. "Can he foretell anything to me?" he asked. "Yes, why not," replied the farmer, "but he only says four things, the fifth he keeps to himself." - "Can I hear it again," said Miller curious. The farmer gave the raven a pressure on the head so as to give a proper quack. "What does it say?" asked Miller. "First, he says that there is some wine hidden under the pillow." - "That was like hell," said the miller, and went there and found the wine. "What more?" The farmer gave the raven a back pressure. "Now, he says that there is some roast meat on the stove," said the farmer. "That was like hell," shouted the man and found the roast meat. "Thirdly, it says that there is a salad in bed." - "The devil either," cried the miller, and went and found the salad. Yet The peasant on the raven. "Fourthly, he says that there are some cakes under the bed." - "It was like hell," said the miller, and went and took kagen.De sat down to table, and ate and drank, and the miller's wife crept trembling with fear to bed and took all the keys with her. Miller also wanted the fifth thing to know, but the peasant said, "Let us first enjoy the four things, for the fifth is something bad." When they had finished, they talked about what the miller was to give for the fifth prophesy, and finally they agreed on three hundred dollars. Peasant once raven on his head, and he croaked loudly. "What did he say?" asked Miller. "It says that the devil sitting there in the cupboard," said the peasant. "He has gone," said the miller, and opened the door wide open, and the woman had come up with the key to the closet. The farmer went and opened the door, and now ran the priest with all his might. "It is quite true, I saw the black rascal with my own eyes," said Miller. Next morning the farmer went home again with his three hundred dollars in lommen.Hjemme in small peasant gradually increased, he built a beautiful, small house, and the peasants said: "He must have been where the golden snow fall, and you shovels. " The small peasant was brought before the mayor to tell how he had all these riches. "I sold my cow's skin in the town, for three hundred dollars," said the peasant. When the others heard this, they too wished their cake, ran home, slaughtered their cows and pulled the skin off them to sell it in the city. "My girl should be allowed to come first," said the mayor. When she came to the grocery store, he gave her no more than three dollars for the skin, and when the others came, they were not even that much. "What can I do with all these skins?" said han.Bønderne annoyed now because that little had misled them, and when they would avenge him, and accused him of treachery before the Mayor. The innocent little peasant was unanimously sentenced to death and had to be put in a perforated barrel and rolled into the water. The small peasant was brought down and she sent a priest who had read the soul of the fair. All the others went their way. When the farmer saw the priest, he recognized that it was him, as he had been with the miller's wife. "I set you free, as I sat in the closet," he said, "help you now me out of the barrel." At that moment a shepherd over his flock. The small peasant knew him well and knew he very much wanted to be Mayor. He began now to shout with all his might: "No, I will not, I will not." Shepherd hearing that, came over and asked what it was, he would not do. "They want to make me Mayor, if I will put myself in the barrel," replied the farmer, "but I will not." - "Is not that something," said the shepherd, "if I could be Mayor, I would immediately do it." - "Yes, if you do, you will also Mayor," said the farmer. The shepherd was willing, and got in, and the peasant shut the top and then took the herd and drive it home. The priest also went home and said that now he had read the soul of the fair. Then they came back and began to roll the barrel towards the water. The shepherd was there and shouted: "I want to be Mayor." They believed that it was the peasant and said, "Do we intend, but first you see you a bit about down there." And they rolled the barrel into vandet.Derpå peasants went home, and when they came into the village, they met the small farmer who quite delighted came trotting with his sheep. "Where do you come from, however, you have been in the water?" asked the astonished. "Yes, truly," replied the peasant, "I sank deep, deep down, and when I finally reached the bottom, I kicked the lid of the barrel, and crept out. There were lovely meadows with many white sheep, and then took I them with. " - "Are there more yet?" asked the farmers. "Many more than I do," replied the peasant. The farmers agreed now that they each would pick up a herd, the sheriff would first. They went together to the water. The sky was blue with little white clouds which is called lamb's wool, and when the peasants saw them reflected in the water, they cried out: "You can already see the sheep down there." Mayor pressed forward and said: "Now I jump down first and see how that is and if it's worth it, I'll call you." - "Plump," it said, as he jumped out, but the peasants thought he said, "Come," and in a hurry they jumped afterwards. Now the village was dead, and the small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.
The little shepherd boy	1447	922	Danish	There was once a little shepherd boy, who was renowned far and wide because of the wise answers he gave to every question. The rumor also reached the king, but he did not believe it and sent for the boy. "If you can answer me three questions," he said, "I will take you as my son, and you shall dwell with me in the palace." - "What do I know?" asked the little guy. "Can you firstly tell me how many drops there are in the ocean?" the king asked. "Let all the rivers on earth clog so that there flows a single drop into the sea that I have spoken it, I will tell you how many there are," replied the boy. "Can you say me how many stars are in the sky?" the king asked. The boy asked for a large sheet of white paper, and made so many little dots then that you almost could not see them and even less count them. It was quite sore eyes from staring thereon. "There are as many stars in the sky as there are dots here on paper," the boy said, "here you go ', count them." But it was, no one could. "Now comes the third question," said the king, "how long is eternity?" - "Over in Farther Pomerania lies a diamond mountain," replied the shepherd boy, "it's a mil high, one mil wide and a mil deep. Every hundred years there will be a bird and sharpens its beak on the mountain, and when it has worn it completely up, is the first second of eternity past. "" You responded as a sage, "king said," stay with me in my castle, I will be a father to you. "
The Little red ridinghood	246	333	Danish	There was once a sweet little girl that everyone loved, but no one loved her as her grandmother, who did not know how well she would do it for her. Once she gave her a little red fløjlshue that suited her so well that she always went with it, and therefore she was called Little Red Riding Hood. One day her mother said to her, "Come Little Red Riding Hood, here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine, you can bring them to your grandmother. She is sick and weak, and they will do her well. Do any go immediately, before it gets too hot, but now go nicely the straight path and be careful you do not fall and turn the bottle broke. and remember to say hello immediately, now comes into the room, and stand not only and see you. "" I'll remember it all, "said Little Red Riding Hood and gave his mother a hand on it. The grandmother lived out in the woods, a half hour from the village. As Red Riding Hood entered the woods, she met the wolf, but she was not afraid, for she had no idea how bad it is. "Hello, Little Red Riding Hood," it said. "Hello," she replied. "Where are you going so early?" - "I'm going to Grandma." - "What do you have under your apron?" - "It's cakes and wine. We baked yesterday, and now poor old best also to bring anything." - "Where does your grandmother live, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "Oh, this is a good quarter hour from here. Her house stands under the three large oak trees, you know." - "That is a tasty mouthful *" thought the wolf by himself, "she will probably taste better than the old. Now I will carry me really kind ad, so I get them both." It followed now Red Riding Hood a little while on the road, and soon after said to her: "Look at the lovely flowers, Red Riding Hood, you see you do not like it. You hear shown not even know how sweetly the birds are singing. You are walking along as much as if you were going to school, and there is so beautiful in the woods. "Red Riding Hood looked around. The sunbeams shone between the leaves down to the many beautiful flowers and she thought: "Grandma would surely be happy a bouquet of flowers. It is so early, so I can reach to pick some." She went off into the woods and began to pluck, but whenever she had picked one, she thought that there was even more beautiful one farther away, and the way she came deeper and deeper into the forest. But the wolf ran straight to the grandmother's house and knocked on: "Who is it?" She asked. "It's me, Little Red Riding Hood, with cakes and wine for you," replied the wolf. "Just press the latch," cried the grandmother, "I am so poor that I can not stand up." The wolf pressed the latch, and the door swung open, and without saying a word went straight over to the bed and swallowed the old grandmother. So took the her clothes, lay down in bed and pulled the curtain for.Rødhætte had picked as many flowers as she could carry, and came at last to the house. She could not understand why the door was open, and when she came into the room, she was so strange to fashion, and she could not imagine she held otherwise so much to be with his grandmother. "Hello," she said, but there was no answer. She went over to the bed and pulled the curtain aside, and Grandmother was lying there with her cap pulled down over his forehead and looking very strange. "What big ears you have, Grandma," said Little Red Riding Hood. "It's so that I can better hear what you say." - "And what big eyes you have, Grandma." - "It is for the better to see you." - "But what big hands you have, Grandma." - "All the better to grab you." - "But, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have." - "It is for the better to eat you," said the wolf, and at the same moment jumped out of bed and swallowed the poor little Rødhætte.Da wolf had finished this tasty bite, put it down again in bed and snored so house shook. Huntsman was just passing and thought, "This is ludicrous, as the old woman snore. It's best I go in and see if there is something wrong." He went into the room and found the wolf lying in bed. "Now I have you at last, you old sinner," he said, "I have such a long time after you." He was about to shoot it when he remembered that the wolf might have eaten the grandmother, and that she might have been living yet. So he took a knife and began to cut open his belly. When he had made a few cuts he saw the red cap shining, and shortly after the girl jumped out and shouted: "No, I was scared. There was so dark in the wolf's belly." The grandmother came out, but she was very short of breath and could hardly breathe. Red Cap fetched in a hurry some large stones and put them into the belly of the wolf, and when it woke up and wanted to run away, fell down and died with the samme.De were all three very happy. The hunter pulled the skin of the wolf and took it home with her grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine and came back to recuperate, and Little Red Riding Hood promised herself that she would never again run into the forest when her mother had forbidden her det.Man also says that since Red Riding Hood a second time would bring her grandmother some cakes, she met another wolf that would lure her into the woods. But Little Red Cap took care not heed and went straight up and told her grandmother that she had met a wolf. "It looked so bad out," she said, "so I'm certain he would have eaten me if it had not been on the road where there are so many people over." - "Let's close the door so it can not come in here," said the grandmother. Shortly afterwards the wolf knocked on the door and said, "Shut up, Grandma, it's Little Red Riding Hood comes with cakes for you." They did not answer, and the wolf crept sometimes around the house, but finally jumped on the roof to wait there for Red Riding Hood went home in the evening, and then sneak after her and devour her in the darkness. But the grandmother saw what it had in mind. Outside the house there was a large stone trough, and she said to the girl: "I have cooked sausages yesterday, Little Red Riding Hood. Take the water I cooked them in, and pour it into the trough." Red Riding Hood did it, and the smell of the sausages strapped up to the wolf. The sniffed and looked down, stretching his neck so the lost balance and slid down the roof, just in the big trough and drowned. But Red Riding Hood went home happy and there was none that made her something.
Lean Lisa	1604	1430	Danish	was of a very different kind of thinking from lazy Harry and fat Trina, who never let toddlers. She toiled from morning to evening and loaded as much work on her husband, Long that he had the drøjere than a donkey three sacks. But it made little difference. They had nothing and they got nothing. One evening when she was in bed and was so tired that she could not move a limb, she could still not sleep for all she was thinking about. Suddenly she gave her husband a nudge in the side. "You know, Jamie," she said, "I've been thinking that if I found a thaler, and there was one that gave me one, then I'd borrow one and you should also give me one. So I had four dollars and then I could buy a cow. " - "I do certainly not where I need to get the dollars from," the man replied, "but if you still can grab the money and buy a cow, I think it's great." He was little and thought about it and then said: "It is also nice when the cow has a calf, and I am pleased indeed to have nice some fresh milk." - "You really have no milk," said Lise. "It must let the calf suck, so it can be big and fat and we can get much money for it." - "Yes of course," replied the man, "but it can not do something, we get a little bit of it." - "What sense do you have on cows," said the woman, "and either damages or not, I will not have it, and if you sit on its hind legs, you will not get a drop of milk. Because your long guy is so gluttonous, so there no end to it, do not delude yourself that you are allowed to eat everything I with difficulty scrapes together. " - "If you be quiet, it's probably best that you get a muzzle on," the man shouted. "What!" Cried the wife and up, "Such a long, lazy kid." She would take hold of him, but Jens got up, squeezed with one hand the lean Lise's thin arms and pressed her head into the pillow. So she could scold so much, she would, he insisted, until she fell asleep from fatigue. But the next morning started arguing again, or whether she went out to look for the florin that she would see I do not know.
The beautiful Katrine and købstadstampen	1244	2019	Danish	"Hello, summarizes Bond Beast." - "Hello, Per borough stamp." - "Can I have your beautiful daughter?" - "Yeah well, if Mother Dairy, brother Large Snout, sister head of the cabbage and the beautiful Katrina will go into it, so it can probably be done." "Is mutter Milking out in the barn?" "No, she is inside and milking the cow. " "Hello, Mother Dairy." - "Hello, Per borough stamp." - "Can I have your beautiful daughter?" - "Yes, if summarizes Bond Beast, brother Large Snout, sister head of the cabbage and the beautiful Katrina will go into it, so it can probably be done." "Where is brother Large Snout gone?" "Out in the yard and chop wood. " "Hello, brother Large Snout." - "Hello, Per borough stamp." - "Can I have your sister to wife?" - "Yes, if summarizes Bond Beast, Mother Dairy, sister head of the cabbage and the beautiful Katrina will go into it, so it can probably be done." "Where is Sister head of the cabbage now?" "She is shown and hoes cabbage itu . " "Hello, sister head of the cabbage." - "Hello, Per borough stamp." - "Can I have your sister to wife?" - "Yes, if summarizes Bond Beast, Mother Dairy, brother Large Snout and the beautiful Katrina will go into it, so it can probably be done." "Where is the beautiful Katrine so long?" "She's been up and counts his money. " "Hello, beautiful Katherine." - "Hello, Per borough stamp." - "Will you be my girlfriend?" - "Yes, if summarizes Bond Beast, Mother Dairy, brother Large Snout and sister head of the cabbage will go into it, so it can probably be done." "What do you have in dowry, beautiful Katherine." - "Fourteen pennies in cash, thirty ear debt, half a pound of dried apples, a handful of nuts, a handful rødderog such cases in overflod.Synes you do not, the dowry is good?" "What kind of crafts you can, borough stamp? Are you a tailor?" - "Higher up." - "shoemaker?" - "Higher up." - "You're not a farmer?" - "Higher up." - "Snedker then?" - "Higher up." - "Blacksmith?" - "Higher up." - "Mills?" - "Higher up." - "Are you brush?" - "Yes, I am. Is not it a lovely craft?"
The stolen toøre	1467	769	Danish	There was once a man who sat at table with his wife and children and a good friend who had come to visit. As the clock struck twelve, the door opened and a small pale child came into the snowy white robes. It looked neither to the right or left, did not say a word and walked right past them into the next room. Then came the turn and went quietly UÅ the door. The two following days went just the same, and the stranger asked the father to whom the beautiful child was, as every day went through the living room. "I have not seen anything," he replied, "and I can not imagine who it would be." When it came back the next day showed the man it to the others, but none of them could see it. He followed now by it into the living room and watched as it sat and dug with his fingers in the crack, but when it saw the stranger disappeared. He told him what he had seen and described the child carefully, and the mother exclaimed: "It must be my own child, who died four weeks ago." They broke now up the floor and found a toøre that the child had once received from his mother to give it to a poor man. She had thought: "It can buy me a biscuit for," and had hidden the floor slot. She had not had peace of the grave, but came back each day to search for money. The parents gave toøren to a poor man, and since that time showed the child never more.
The sweet porridge	975	565	Danish	There was once a pious but poor little girl who lived all alone with his mother. They had no more to eat, and the child went into the forest, and there she met an old woman. She already knew what was wrong and gave the girl a small saucepan. When she said to it, "Cook, little pot," doing good, sweet porridge, and when she said, "Stop, little pot," it ceased to cook. The girl took the pot home to her mother, and their distress and grief was now over. As often as they wanted, and ate sweet porridge. One day, when the girl had gone out, the mother said, "Cook, little pot." It then began to boil, and she ate her fill and wanted it to stop again, but she could not remember what she had to say. The cooked so on, porridge rose over the rim and cooked and cooked, so the kitchen and the whole house was full, and eventually went porridge into the house next door and down the street, as if the whole world had to eat his fill, and was not a man who knew advice. As only one single house, where it had not penetrated, came the girl home and said, "Stop, little pot." It stopped and gave up cooking, but wished to return to the town had to eat his way through.
The gallant tailor (Seven at one blow)	191	1640	Danish	One summer morning sat a little tailor at his table by the window. He was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. While he sat there, a peasant woman came down the street and shouted: "Who will buy honey, who will buy honey!" tailor wanted to taste it, stuck his head out the window and shouted: "Come hither my good wife, so you can get rid of some of your honey." The wife went up the many stairs with her heavy baskets and had to close up all the jars. The tailor stuck his nose in them all, and then said: "It seems after all to be good. Give me four left. It does really does not know exactly, although it will be a quarter pound." The woman had thought that she would make a good customer, gave him angrily what he demanded. "It will refresh me," said the tailor, took the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself a decent piece and smeared honey on. "Is it best that I first finish with my sewing," he thought, put the bread beside scar itself and sewed on, but he was so happy that he still took bigger and bigger stitches. The smell of the sweet honey needed however to the wall, which was full of flies, and they came flying and perched on the bread. "Who invited you?" said the tailor, and drove them away. The flies did not understand Danish, but came back a moment later. When the tailor lost patience, took a piece of clothing and slammed after them. No less than seven flies lay dead on the table. "What a fellow I am," he said admiringly, "the whole town shall know." He made in a hurry a belt and sewed it in large capitals "Seven at one blow." - "The whole world should know about it," he said, and his heart rejoiced at his waist of glæde.Skrædderen tense belt around his waist and started heading out into the wide world, because he thought his workshop seemed too small for such a brave guy. Before he set off, he investigated whether there was anything he could take, but he found nothing but an old cheese, and which he put in his pocket. Outside the house he saw that there was a bird that had been caught in the thicket, and he put into his pocket with the cheese. He strode now good, and when he was a quick little guy, he was not tired. The road went over a high mountain, and on the top there sat a powerful giant and looked around. The tailor went bravely up to him and said: "Good day, mate. You sit looking at the world. I just horizontally to see me. Would you like to go with?" The giant looked at the tailor. "Such a boor," he said. "So do you," said the tailor, buttoned his coat up and pointed at the belt. "You see what I'm for." - "Seven at one blow," read the giant, and as he thought it was human, he was not so little respect for the little guy. However, he would first put him to the test and therefore took a stone in his hand and squeezed it so hard that water came down. "Can you do me for?" he asked. "Is that all," said the tailor, "it's just play work." He put his hand in his pocket, took the cheese out and squeezed it so the juice ran out between his fingers. "It was probably a little bit better," he said. The giant did not know what he would think, took a stone and threw it so high that you almost could not see it and then asked: "Can you do me for?" - "Yes, it may well be very good," said the tailor, "but now I throw a stone so high in the air, it does not come down again." He took the bird out of his pocket and threw it in the air. Happy about his freedom swung it away and did not return. "Yes, throw it to you," said the giant, "but let's see if you can bear anything." - "Can you help me to carry this tree out of the forest?" - "With pleasure," replied the little man, "you take the trunk on his shoulder, so I carry the branches, it is the heaviest." The giant did it and tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who could not turn around, had to carry the whole tree and the tailor into the bargain. He was well pleased and whistled and sang as if it were the pure child's play to wear such a tree. When they had gone some way to giant could not stand it anymore and said, "Now I let the tree fall." The tailor jumped down, grabbed the branches with both hands as if he were carrying it, said contemptuously: "Can such a great guy does not even carry the little wood." They went on, and when they came to a cherry tree pulled giant the top branches down and gave the tailor them to observe, that he might eat the berries. The tailor had obviously not the strength to keep the branches down, and when the giant let go, they flew in the air and the tailor with. When he joyfully had slipped back down to earth, giant said: "That was ludicrous that you are not even so strong that you can keep it thin tree down." - "It is absolutely not the reason," said the tailor, "what do you think it has to mean someone who has slain seven at one blow? I jumped over the tree because hunters are shooting through the bushes down there. See if you can do me for. " The giant tried it but was stuck in the branches, and the tailor so that once taken over here. "When you have such a gallant fellow, suppose you come with me to our den, and stay the night," said the giant, and the tailor came so with him. Inside the cave sat some other giants around the fire and gnawed a roasted sheep. The tailor looked around and thought, "There is more elbow room than in my workshop." The giant showed him a bed, he could sleep in. He thanked, but felt it was too great, and when the giant had gone to bed, he sat down in a corner. At midnight, when the giant thought the tailor a sound sleep, he got up and beat the bed with a big iron bar and thought that he had broken every bone in the little guy's body. Early in the morning the giants went into the woods and had completely forgotten the tailor, but at once saw him very merry go promenading. They were afraid that he was going to beat them all to death and ran away as quickly as they kunne.Skrædderen went on straight forwards. When he had gone a great way he entered into a farm that belonged to the king's palace, and when he was tired, he lay down to sleep in the grass. While he was there, came a lot of people pass by and stopped and read what was written on his belt. "It must be a very powerful man," they said, "but what he will be here in time of peace." Then they went and told it to the king, and said he finally had to get the man to be there, because he might be of great use in the war. King sent one of his men down to the tailor to ask if he would go to war service with him. So the messenger stood down there, to stretch the limbs and opened his eyes and came forward with his petition. "This is precisely why I have come here," said the tailor, "I am prepared to enter into the service of the king. "He was received with many honors and the king gave him even his bolig.Soldaterne so the little tailor, and wished him a thousand miles away." It may be a crazy story for us, "they thought," if he gets into a fight with one of us and turns to fall seven at once. "and they went all together to the king and demanded that he be dismissed." We can not serve with a man who kills seven at a blow, "said the. the king did not want to lose all his faithful servants because of one man, and was so sick of him that he wished he had never seen him before his eyes. But he did not dare to dismiss because he was afraid that he would kill him and all the people to death. he eventually found, however, on the advice. he sent word to the tailor that he, because of his great gallantry would give him an honorable task. in a forest in his kingdom had two fights whereabouts, and they robbed and burned throughout the region, and no one dared go in against them. If he could kill them, the king would give him his daughter in marriage and half the kingdom as dowry. Hundred horsemen should go with to help him. "It's something that does not offer every day," thought the tailor, and said, "I'll take care of the two giants, and I have absolutely no need for the hundred riders. It will be an easy matter for someone who have slain seven at one stroke to get the better of the two. But they can of course like to ride with. "the little tailor set off at the head of a hundred riders. When they came to the forest, he said to them: "Stay here, I'll always come alone." Then he ran into the woods. Shortly after he saw fighters who slept under a tree and snored so that the branches shook. The tailor filled in a hurry his pockets with stones and climbed træet.Han did then slide out on a limb, so he came to sit just above the giants, and began throwing stones down on one. There went a long time without his noticing it, but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said, "What are you hitting me?" - "You're dreaming," said the other, "I have not touched you." They lay down again to sleep, and the tailor let fall a stone on the other. "What does that mean," he cried, "why do you strike me?" - "I will not hurt you," growled the first. They argued a little bit, but they were so tired that they soon stopped and closed his eyes again. Tailor took the heavier stone and threw it as hard as he could, down on one fight. "No, now it will be too bad," he shouted, beside himself and pushed the other against the tree so it shook. The other paid in the same coin, and they come in such a rage that the rooting up trees and beat each other until they dropped dead. The tailor jumped now in a hurry down the tree. "It's good that they took the tree I was sitting in," he thought, "I would probably have gotten me a proper turn." He took his sword and gave them each a deep wound in the chest and went back to the horsemen and said: "Now the work done. It was really a tough game, they tore up trees to defend themselves, but it helped altsammen not . however, they could not stand against the one who kills seven at one stroke. " - "Are you not wounded?" asked the horsemen. "Not a hair, they curled up in my head," replied the tailor. The horsemen would not believe it, and rode into the forest, and there they found the giants wallowing in their blood, while the trees lay scattered around the dem.Skrædderen now demanded his salary, but the king repented of his promise and began to ponder on how he could gain the hero. "You must perform another heroic deed before I give you my daughter," he said. "Out in the woods there is a unicorn, which makes a lot of damage, you must secure him." - "The I am even less afraid than the athletes," said the tailor, "seven in one fell swoop is an easy trick." He took a rope and an ax with him, went into the woods, and told the men who had accompanied him to wait outside. He had not been gone long before the unicorn came running toward him and would readily eat him. "Take it easy," he said, "so easy it does not work." Then he stood quite still, the animal had come close to him, so he jumped deft behind a tree. The unicorn ran with all his might against the tree and stuck his horn so deep into the trunk, that it could not get it out again. "Now I have you," said the tailor, put the rope around the neck of it, cut the horn out of the tree and brought the animal to kongen.Kongen would still not give him his wages, but demanded that he first had to catch a wild boar, which made great damage in the woods. The hunters had to help him. "It would give me an easy matter," said the tailor. He let huntsmen into the wood, and it was the better pleased, for the wild boar had before given them as warm as the reception that they had lost the desire to come again. When the animal saw the tailor he ran at him, and the froth stood it out of his mouth. The nimble hero rushed into a chapel that was right, and jumped out of the window on the other side. The pig had run after him, and he was now in a hurry back and slammed the door and caught it so. Tailor called the huntsmen that they own eyes might see the prisoner. And he came to the king, who had to keep his promise, whether it tasted him or not. If he had known that it was nothing but a little tailor who was standing before him, it was probably done him even more to heart. The wedding was celebrated with great splendor and little joy, and the tailor was konge.Nogen time later heard the young queen a night that the king was talking in his sleep. "Make the coat stand, boy, or I'll warm your ears," he said. She could now imagine how the brave brand originated from, and the next morning she went to her father and asked him to free her of a man who was nothing but a tailor. The king comforted her and said, "The next night, leave the door to my bedroom door open, then one of the waiters stand on guard outside, and when your husband is asleep we bind him and bring him on board a ship, and so we let it flow for wind and dare. the Queen liked the idea, but the young king's faithful servant had heard what they agreed, and told his master it all. "I'll put a stick," said the little tailor . in the evening he went to bed as usual, and when his wife thought he was asleep, she got up and opened the door and crept back to bed. But the tailor had only pretended he was asleep, and shouted now high: "Do the coat stand, boy, otherwise you need to get your ears warm. I have slain seven at one blow, killed two giants, caught a unicorn and a wild boar, and so would I be afraid of the one who stands outside the door! "And when they heard it, he was beside himself with fear and ran as the hell was following him, and none of the others dared to go to the tailor. Thus the little tailor to be king as long as he lived.
Faithful John	51	516	Danish	There was once an old king who was very ill. When he thought he was dying, he said: "Let the Faithful John to come to me." Faithful John was his favorite servant, and was so called because he had been faithful to him as long as he lived. So he went in to the king, who said to him: "My faith John, I feel that I am going to die soon. I'm just worried about my son, he is still so young that he can not dispose itself. Would you promise me to take care of him and be a father to him, so I can close my eyes in peace. " Faithful John said, "I will never leave him, and I will be faithful to him, even if it costs me my life." - "Then I can die calm," said the old king. "When I am dead, you must show him the entire castle and all the treasures stored there, but you can not show him the back room of the long time it where the image of the princess of the golden roof hangs. If he get that picture, he will be deadly in love with her and fall into despair. and he will come in great danger for her sake, so you have to promise me to take care of. " Since the Faithful John had given him her hand on it, put the old king head back on the pillow and døde.Da he was buried waiter told the young king what he had promised his father on his deathbed. "And I will keep my promise and be faithful to you, even if it costs me my life," he said. When the mourning was over, said the belief of John: "Now is the time that you get your inheritance to see. Come, I'll show you the castle." Then he took him about everywhere and showed him the splendid halls with precious treasures; only one room where the dangerous figure stood, he did not open look. The picture was hung so that it had the right for yourself when you opened the door. There could not think of anything more beautiful, it was so beautifully painted that it looked like it was alive. The young king noticed that the faithful John jumped a door over and asked: "Why does not you the door?" - "There's something in there that will hurt you," John answered. But the king said: "I have seen the entire castle, and I also want to know what's in there." Then he went and would open the door by force. Faithful John held him back and said, "I promised your father before he died that you would not see what was in the room. It will turn into misfortune for both of us." - "No, no," said the king, "but if I do not get in there, I will not have peace day or night. I do not go away until you have closed up." Since then the belief of John that there was something to do about it, and a heavy heart, he took the key out. When he had opened the door, he himself first in and intend to stand in front of the image and hide it, but the king stood on tiptoe and looked over his shoulder. And when he saw the beautiful maiden, he fell unconscious to the floor. Faithful John lifted him up and carried him into his bed while he sorrowfully thought, "Now the accident happened. Lord God, what will become of us." Then he gave the king of wine to drink, so he came to himself again. "Who would imagine that glorious picture?" was the first thing he said. "That is the princess of the Golden Roof," answered Faithful John. "If every leaf on the trees were tongues, they could not say how great my love is," said the young king. "I will put my life to win her. And you, my faithful John, you must help me." The faithful servant pondered long and hard about how to behave, because he thought it would be difficult even to get access to the princess. Finally he thought he had figured it out and said to the king: "Everything that surrounds her is of gold, tables, chairs, dishes and cups. In your treasures are five tons of gold. Hence, leave one goldsmith processing a multitude tub and birds and strange animals. she will probably think about, and then we take away with things and try our luck. " King sent word to all the jewelers in the country, and they had to work day and night to get things done. Then it all loaded on a ship, and the King and the faithful Johannes disguised himself as merchants, so you could not even know them. So they sailed over the sea, until they reached the town where the princess of the golden roof boede.Den Faithful John said that the king stay behind on the ship, and wait for him. "Perhaps I shall bring the princess with me," he said, "make sure that everything is in order, let gold set out and the whole ship jewelry." He took some gold cases in the country and went straight to the castle. When he came into the yard, there was a beautiful girl at the well and drew water for two gold pan. When she was finished and turned to carry the flashing water away, she saw that there was a stranger, and asked who he was. "I am a merchant," he said, and showed her some of his gold cases. "Oh, what beautiful things," she exclaimed, and put the buckets down and looked at one after the other. "It was to the princess look," she said, "she is so fond of gold. She bought it enough everything." She took him by the hand to lead him to the princess, she was lady's maid. The princess was very happy and said: "Where it is beautiful. I would buy it all." - "I am the only servant of a rich merchant," said Faithful John, "what I have here is nothing compared to what my Lord has down on his ship. It is the most wonderful thing that ever made of gold. " Princess would then have it all brought up there, but he said: "It will be many days, because there is so much that you will not even have room for it in all your rooms." She then became so curious that she said: "Take me down to the ship so I can get all your master's treasures to see." Faithful John followed the happy princess down, and the king thought his heart would break when he saw her alive, a hundred times prettier than the picture. He led her around now while the Faithful John was up on deck at the officer and ordered him to encounter the country. "Put all the stops," he said, "we'll fly like a bird in the air." However, the king showed the princess all gold clothes, every cup and dish, and all the birds and strange animals. It lasted several hours, and she enjoyed themselves so much that she absolutely did not notice that they sailed. When she had seen it all, she thanked the merchant and wanted to go home, but when she came on deck, she saw that they were sailing at sea under full sail. She was horrified and shouted: "I have been deceived. I would rather die than be in the power of a merchant." The king grabbed her hand and said: "I am no merchant, but a king, and my family is not inferior to yours. It is only because of my great love that I've kidnapped you. Just by seeing your picture, I fell in a swoon. "When the princess heard that, she was reassured, and immediately came to think so well of him that she promised to marry ham.De sailed on the sea, and one day when the belief of John sat in the bow and music, saw three ravens come flying. he stopped playing and singing to hear what they were talking about, because he understood the language of the birds. "Look there," screamed one "there he is carrying home the princess of the golden roof." - "Yes," replied the other, "but he did not see her yet." - "he has her, however, with him on the ship," said the third. "What helps it, "cried the first." When he goes ashore, there comes a red chestnut leaping toward him. It swings himself up, and then blow it off with him through the air, and he will never see his bride again. "-" Is there no escape? "Asked the other." Well, if someone else in a hurry take the gay, which is inserted into the halter, and shoots the horse, the king rescued. But it is not so. And if there is someone who knows and tell him, is the one who has said it, turned to stone from the sole of the foot to the knee. "-" I know more, "said the other," even if the horse is killed , is the king not allowed to keep his bride. When they get home to his castle, there is a wedding shirt that looks like it was made of gold and silver, but it is sulfur and pitch, and if he puts it on, it will burn him to the marrow. "-" is there no escape? "asked the third." Oh, yes, "replied the other," if someone else takes gloves and throwing his shirt into the fire, is the king rescued. But what's the use! It says it to him, will be turned to stone from the knee to the heart. "-" I know more, "said the third," although the shirt is burned, container king not his bride. After the wedding, the young queen in the middle of the dance fade away and fall down dead. And if there is one that lifts her up and draw three drops of blood from her right breast and spit them out again, she will die. And the one who knows it and says it will be turned to stone from head to foot. "When the ravens had told this, they flew on. Faithful John had understood it all, and from now on he was quiet and sad. If he not told his young king what he had heard, he made him unhappy, and he said that he had even die. But he said to himself, "I will save my master, even if I have to perish thereby." When they stepped ashore, went as ravens had said immediately got a nice, red steed leaping. "it will carry me to my castle," said the king and would soar up on it, but faithful John beat him to it , jumped fast on his horse, took the gun and shot the animal down. "Where it is shameful," said the other servants who were jealous of John, "think to kill the beautiful animal, as the king had to ride home on." But the king said: "No one should do anything to him. He is my belief John, and one can not know what it might be good for. "They went into the castle, and there were wedding shirt in a floor and looked as if it were gold and silver. The king would take it, but faithful John shot him aside, took the gloves and threw it into the fire. the other servants murmured, saying, "Now he is even burning the king's wedding shirt." but the king said: "you can not know what it is good for . Let him go in peace, he is my most faithful John. "Now the wedding was celebrated, and the dance began. The bride danced too, but at the same time, she was livid and fell as if dead. Then all the belief of John fast forward, lifted her up and carried her into a room. there he lay down on his knees, sucked three drops of blood from her right breast and spit them out. Immediately she breathed and came to herself again. the king, who had seen it all and could not comprehend what it would mean were angry and shouted: "Throw him immediately into prison." the next morning was the belief of John brought to court and sentenced to be hanged. When he had been led to the gallows and the rope were put around his neck, he said: "Anyone who will die, have the right to speak first. I have a right to it? "-" You must be allowed, "the king replied." I have been unfairly convicted, I have always been faithful, "said Faithful John then. And he told them what the ravens had said, and that he had done it all for the salvation of his master. "before him down before my faith Johannes down," cried the king. But when the faithful John spoke the last words, he fell down lifeless and had been turned into stone. the king and the queen was deeply distressed. "so do I have paid so much fidelity," king said. he ordered the stone figure to be up and carry into her bedroom and put on her bed. Every time he looked at it he wept and said, "If I could but make you alive again, my faithful John." Some time after the queen gave birth to two sons, and they grew up and were her delight. One day, when the Queen was at church and the king was playing with his children, so he again stone figure and said: "If I could but make you alive again, my faithful John." When b egyndte stone to speak and said: "To sacrifice what is dearest to you in the world, I can come to life." - "There is not a thing I will not do for your sake," said the king. "To own hands will chop off the heads of your children and ironing their warm blood all over me," said Stone, "so you give me my life back." The king was terrified, but thought that the Faithful John had died for him, drew his sword and cut off the heads of his own children. And when he had smeared the stone with the blood, was the belief of John alive for him. "I will reward your love," he said to the king, took the children's heads, put them on the body and stroked blood over them. At the same moment they were alive again and played on as if nothing had happened. King was beside himself with joy, and when he saw the Queen coming he hid Faithful John and the children in a large closet. "Did you pray in church?" he asked dahunkomind. "Yes," she replied, "but I have constantly thought of the Faithful John, who has become so unhappy." He said, "Dear wife, we can give him his life back, but we must sacrifice both our sons." The queen turned pale, and her heart was filled with grief, but she said: "We owe it to him for his great fidelity." He was glad that she thought as he picked up the children and the belief John, saying, "God be praised, he is saved and our sons also," and he told her now, how it had happened. And now they lived happy together ever after.
The weird fiddler	71	151	Danish	There was a time a musician, who went quite alone through a forest. He went into his own thoughts, but eventually he began to get bored and thought, "The time falls me still a little long now. I'll see if I can get hold of a comrade." Then he took his violin and began to play, so it echoed through the trees. Then came a wolf trotting through the thicket. "The I have no longing for," said the musician, as he saw it, but the wolf said, "how beautifully you play nice, fiddler, the art I would certainly like to learn." - "It's easy enough," said the musician, "but then you must do everything I say." - "I will obey you as an apprentice his master," replied the wolf. The musician then said that it had to follow him, and when they had gone some distance, they came to an old oak that was hollow and completely cracked. "If you want to learn how to play, you need to put your feet in this crack," said the musician. The wolf did it, but the musician quickly picked up a stone and squeezed the wood so tightly together that the wolf could not get loose. "Wait there till I come back," he said, and walked vej.Nogen time after he thought again: "It bores me to go here alone. I will look to get hold of a comrade," and he began to playing his violin. A moment later he saw a fox came creeping through the trees. "Oh, it's a fox," he thought, "that I have no longing for." The fox came up to him and said: "How you play pretty. I wish I could learn it." - "It's easy enough," said the musician, "You just do everything I say." - "I will obey you as apprentice his master," said the fox. "Come on," said the musician, and when they had gone a little, they came to a path with high bushes on both sides. "Now give me your left paw, if you want to learn something," said the musician. The fox did it, and he tied the now fixed to a branch on one side of the road. "Now give me the right," he said, and tied it on the other side. And when he had tied it really tight, did let go, the branches up and hung fox dangling. "Wait there till I come back," he said and went videre.Nogen time after he thought again: "It is still a bit boring to walk here alone. I will look to get hold of a comrade." He again took his violin and began to play, and a moment later a hare leaping. "It was certainly not the one I meant," he thought. "Where, however, you play nice," said the hare, "only I could learn it." - "That would indeed easy enough," said the musician, "You just do everything I tell you." - "I will obey you as an apprentice his master," said the hare. They went on until they came to an open space overgrown with poplars. The musician tied a piece of string to the neck of the hare and tied the other end fixed to a tree. "Now run twenty times round the tree," said the musician. Haren did it, but was so entangled in the cord, that it could not get loose again, and when it pulled in, it cut the throat. "Wait there till I come back," said the musician, and went videre.Imidlertid had wolf work for so long that it had been able to draw paws out of the crack, and it crashed now blazing away after the musician, to pounce on him and flay him. When the fox saw it began to scream with all his strength: "Come and help me, brother wolf, the musician has tricked me." The wolf pulled down the trees, bit the cord in and freed the fox, who went with both off to take revenge on the musician. They also passed the hare and liberated it, and went all three in search of their fjende.Spillemanden had once again his fiddle, and now he had better luck. The music had penetrated to a poor woodcutter, and whether he would or not, he had to stop work and come walking with the ax under his arm. "There will be the right one," said the musician, "it is a human and not wild animals, I have called on." He played so beautifully and delightfully that the poor man was completely captivated, and his chest swelled with joy. While he stood there and listened came the wolf, the fox and the hare rushing, and he could probably see that they had evil intentions. When he lifted his flashing ax and placed himself before the musician, as if to say: "He who would harm him, get me to deal with." The animals were frightened and ran into the woods again. But the musician played yet long for the man to thank, before he went on.
The young giant	856	650A	Danish	There was once a peasant who had a son who was not bigger than a thumb, and he grew over several years, not so much as a hair's breadth. One day, when the father was going out to plow, the little one said: "May I make, Dad." - "Do you understand?" said the father. "Do you prefer at home. You can not make any avail, and you could also easily be gone for me." But when he began to cry, and for the sake of peace his father put him in his pocket, and went out. On the field, he took him up again, and put him in a newly plowed furrow. While he sat there, a great giant came over the hill. "Can you see the big bugaboo," said the father and would do little afraid to get him to be good, "he will come and take you." When the giant had gone a few steps on his long legs before he was in the trench, carefully took the little guy between two fingers, looked at him and went with him without saying a word. The father stood by and was so afraid that he could not get a sound out. He thought he forever had lost her baby and would never see it for its øjne.Kæmpen however, took the boy home with him, suckled him, he grew and grew big and strong as a giant. After two years, would the old test his strength and took him out in the woods: "Pull the rice up," he said, and the boy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree up by the roots. "It will be better still," said the giant, took him home with him and gave him die in two years. So he had become so strong that he could tear an old tree out. But the giant thought yet, it was enough and gave him die once in two years. Then they went into the forest again, and he said to the boy: "Take a decent rice," and with a blast tore the boy the thickest oak up and it went for him like a breeze. "Enough is enough," said the giant, "now you're trained." Then he went with him to the field where he had fetched him. The father walked behind the plow, and the young giant went up to him and said: "Hello, Dad. There you can see what kind of man his son has become." The farmer was alarmed. "You're not my son," he said, "I do not know any of you, go your way." - "Truly I am your son. Let me help you. I can plow as well as you and better." - "No, you're not my son, and you can not plow. Go away." But he was afraid of the big man, he walked away from the plow and sat at a distance. The boy pressed now just with one hand on it, but so strong was the pressure to plow sank down to the ground. It could pawn not keep quiet and shouted: "If you want to plow, do not press so hard. It's no good." The boy unharnessed the horses, and even pulled the plow. "Just go home, father," he said, "and let mom cook a dish of food. Then I will, however, be done with the field." The farmer went home and asked his wife cook and boy plowed quite alone field which was two acres large, tensed himself for the harrow and harrowing with two at once. When he finished he went into the forest, tore two oaks up, put them over his shoulder and hung a horse and a harrow and one behind and carried it home to his parents' house as easy as it was a bundle of straw. When he entered the yard, his mother did not recognize him, and asked, "Who is that horrible tall man?" - "This is our son," replied the farmer. "No way," she said, "well this is quite a small guy. Go away," she shouted to him, "we do not want any of you to order." He said nothing, put the horses into the stable, gave them some oats and hay, and then went into the living room. "If the food is almost done, Mom," he asked and sat down on the bench. She said yes and came with two large barrels, which would have enabled eight days for her and her husband. The boy ate it all alone and asked if she had more. "It's all here," she replied. "It's only a taste, I must have more." She dared not make a fuss, put a pan of food on the fire, and when it was ready, she put it to him. "Finally, I get a few crumbs," he said, ate it all and was not satisfied. "I see very well that you can not get me what I can eat," he said, "can you give me an iron rod which is so strong that I can not break it over my knee, so I draw out into the world." The farmer was glad, put the horses, and fetched from the smith got a stick that was so heavy that the horses could possibly drag. But the boy sat on the knee, and crack, he broke it as easy as a stick, and threw it away. Father then harnessed four horses to the wagon and fetched a stick as big as they could tow it. But the son snapped this also and said, "I can not use, Dad, you have to get me a better one." Father harnessed eight horses, and brought one pole as big as they could tow. But then the giant took it in hand immediately went to the top piece of. "You probably can not get me a stick that I can use," he said, "but now I will not be here anymore." He went away and posed as smith. Some time after he came to a village where there lived a blacksmith who was a real gniepind and grudged any man a little, but wanted everything for himself. On went into the smithy and asked if he needed a companion. Smith looked at him and thought, "He seems to be a strong fellow who will strike out well, and earn his for a living." He said yes and asked what he would have to pay. "I would not want any," he replied, "only every fortnight when the other journeymen are paid, I will be allowed to give you two strokes. You may find yourself in." The miser was heartily and thought he could save much money. Next morning, the strange journeyman was the first blow, but when the master brought the glowing bar, and struck his hard on it, it went broke and the anvil sank so deep into the earth that you could not even get it up again. When the miser angry and said: "You can not I use, you are nasty. What will you have for the one blow?" - "I just want to be allowed to give you a tiny slap," said the giant, "otherwise I ask not." Then he gave him a kick that he flew over four loads of hay, took the thickest iron bar he could find in the forge in as a cane and walked away. When he had walked for some time, he came to a farm, and asked the bailiff if he did not need a foreman. "Yes, I can make use of one," said the manager, "and you see the out to be a nice guy. How much you will have a year?" He replied that he did not care about any salary. He would only annually give him three strokes, and he had to find himself in. It was well pleased with the tenant, because he was also a gniepind. The next morning they had to go into the forest, and the other servants were up long ago, but he was still in bed. "Now you see coming up," one of them shouted, "we must go into the forest and you must." - "Just go there," he replied harsh, "I shall be back again before any of you." Then the others went and told the manager that the head man lay in bed, and would not hesitate in the woods. The manager said they would call him back and say that he should buckle. However, said: "Just go there, I shall be first." He was in bed two hours, so he finally came out of the feathers. So he fetched two bucket of peas from the ceiling, cooked porridge and ate it at your leisure, and when it was all done, harnessed the horses and ran into the woods. Right woods he had through a gully. He let the first carriage and the horses run through and then went back, tore trees up and made a overcutting, so it was impossible for any horse to come forward. When he came out of the forest came the other running with their loaded carts. "Run I just," he said, "I will, however, before the home than I." He drove a short distance into the woods, tore two of the largest trees up, put them in the cart and turned back. When he came to the barricade, the others and could not move forward. "You see," he said, "if you had stayed with me, you would have got home just as quickly, and had even been able to sleep an hour longer. He would now run, but the horses could not appear. he excited them when off, laid them on the cart, took the pole in his hand and pulled it all as light as a feather. "There, you see, I come home first," he said to the others, as he had got over and they had to stay where they were. when he came into the yard, he took the tree in his hand and said to the manager: "is not that a fine bundle of wood." - "it is nevertheless a good fellow," said the bailiff to his wife, "although he does sleep long, he is still home before the others." the giant now served one year of the manager, and when it was gone, and the other servants were getting their money, he said that now he would also like to having his salary. But the manager was shaking at the thought of the beatings, he should have and pleaded if he might escape, he himself would be fo rkarl and the youth should be bailiff. "That I will not go into," said the giant, "I am foreman, and I will continue to be, but I will have fulfilled the conditions." The manager offered to give him everything he wanted, but he said no to it all. The manager now knew not what he should do and asked for a fortnight's time, so he could think. The head man confessed to him, and the manager called on all its signatories and said they should think carefully and give him some advice. They wondered a long time and finally they said that no man was safe for the head man, he killed people as if they were flies. The manager should command him to go down the well and clean it, and when he was down there, they had to throw a millstone down on his head, so he never went more to light. The manager liked the idea, and the head man was willing to go down the well. As he stood at the bottom, they threw the biggest millstone down and thought his head was crushed. "Take the chickens away," they heard him shout so, "they run and throw sand in my eyes, so I can not see." The manager seemed then, as if he kissed the chickens away, and when the head man had finished his work, he came up with a millstone around his neck. "Is not it a nice collar?" he said. He now demanded his salary, but the manager asked for fourteen days of Reflection. Then he called back its signatories together and they advised him to send the youth into the haunted mill to grind grain. Yet never no man had living there. The manager decided to follow the council, called on head man and ordered him to take eight bushels of corn to the mill and grind it at night, they should use it. The giant went up to the attic, put two goals in the right pocket and two in the left, four he took over back tværsæk, and thus laden he went to the enchanted mill. The miller said to him that day, he could grind there very well, but at night the mill was haunted, and all that had gone in there, had been lying dead in the morning. "I will go unscathed from it," said the giant, "do I just go home and sleep in your green ears." Then he went into the mill, and poured out the corn. About eleven o'clock he went into the living room and sat on the bench. When he had been sitting there for some time the door opened, and a large table came strolling in. Wine and rose and many good things came in and stood on it, and all was owing alone, there was no one who held it. The chairs pushed themselves up the table, but there were no people, until he saw a finger used knife and fork and putting food on a plate, but it was the only thing he could see. When he was hungry, he sat at the table and took care of the dishes. When he was satiated and the others had emptied the barrels, he heard quite clearly that the lights were blown out and there was pitch dark, he suddenly felt a blow full in the face. "If there is such a thing again, so I turn back," he said. And when he got another slap in the face, he beat around him. How did it all night. He gave back what he got, and pitched extremely loose, and at dawn heard it all up. When the miller got up he would in and see him and was very surprised to find him alive. "I've eaten my fill," he said, "and then I got boxes on the ears, but I have also given back." Miller was very happy for the mill was now released from the spell, and wanted to give him a reward. "I have enough money," said the head man took the flour on his back and went home and said to the manager that he had now done its job and would require his salary. When the bailiff heard that he was scared and frightened and walked aimlessly up and down while the sweat stood on his forehead. To get fresh air he closed the window, and before he had time to look around, gave the head man him a kick that he flew through the window into the air, far away / so no one ever saw him. "If he does not come back, you must take the second blow to you," said the servant to the bailiff's wife. "No, I can not stand it," she cried, and closed the second window up, sweat running down her forehead. Then he gave her a kick, so she flew up, and when she was much easier than the man, she flew much higher. "Come to me," the man shouted. "I can not," she replied, "you came to me." There they floated around in the air without being able to get to each other. Whether they fly there yet, I do not know, but the young giant took up his iron bar and walked on.
The blue light	1101	562	Danish	There once was a soldier who had served the King faithfully for many years. When the war was over, he had so many wounds that he could not fight more, and the king said to him: "Now you can go home, I do not need you. You have no money, it is only the who can do his job. " The soldier did not know how he would cope. Sadly he departed and went throughout the day, for the evening he entered a forest. As darkness fell, he saw a light shine, went after it and came to a house wherein lived a witch. "Can I stay the night and get something to eat and drink," said he, "I am dying of hunger." - "Do you think I give to a run soldier something," she said, grinning, "but for once I'll help you if you will do what I say." - "What do you want?" asked the soldier. "You must tomorrow dig my garden for me." The soldier consented, and next day all his strength, but could not finish it by the evening. "You probably can not," said the witch, "you can stay here another night, and then you return tomorrow chop me a load of wood for kindling." Soldier spent the whole day and in the evening the witch proposed that he should stay one night more. "You need to do a very trifling piece of work. Behind the house there is an old dry well. You need to download a light that I've fallen, it burns blue, and never turns off." Next day the old him to the well and hissede him down in a basket. He found the blue light and motioned to her that she should raise him up again. She pulled him up to the rim and stretched down her hand and would have the blue light. But he saw what she had in mind. "You do not get it until I stand with both feet on the ground," he said. When she became furious, let him fall into the well, and went vej.Den poor soldier fell on the damp ground without injury. The blue light was still burning, but what could it avail. He saw that death was his way. He sat very sorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found a pipe, which was half full of tobacco. "This shall be my last pleasure," thought he turned it on the light and began to smoke. When the smoke had filled the cave, suddenly a little black man to him and asked, "What do you order, sir?" - "What should I command you," replied the soldier, quite astonished. "I do everything you ask," said the little man. "Well, help me then first out of the well." The man took him by the hand and led him through an underground passage, and the blue light he took with. Along the way he showed him all the treasures that the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he came up on the ground, he said to the man: "Now go and bind the old witch and bring her to justice." Soon she came screaming rushing past on a wild cat, as fast as the wind, and a moment later the man came back. "It is all done," he said, "the witch is already hanging on the gallows. What commands has my lord?" - "At this moment," replied the soldier, "you can go home, but came as soon as I call." - "You only need to turn your pipe at the blue light," said the little man, "I'll come immediately." Then disappeared han.Soldaten now returned to the city he had come from. He bought the beautiful clothes, went into the best inn, and ordered the landlord furnish him a room as grandly as possible. When he had gotten what he wanted, he called the little man and said: "I have served the king faithfully, but he sent me away and left me to hunger and want. Now I will avenge me." - "What should I do?" asked the man. "Tonight, when the princess lying in bed and asleep, you must bring her here, she should be my servant." - "It is easy for me," said the little man, "but for you it can be a very dangerous thing, and if someone knows it, it's going you wrong." At twelve o'clock the door sprang open, and the little man came in with the princess. "Oh, it's you," cried the soldier, "then take hold. Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber." When she had done it, he called to her, stretched out his feet and said, "Pull off my boots." Then he threw them in her face and she had to take them up and polish them. She did everything he commanded, with half-closed eyes, without opposition. At the first cock-crow bar the little man her back home in her bed at slottet.Da princess awoke the next morning, she went to her father and told him that she had had a very strange dream. "I was at lightning speed carried through the streets," she said, "and brought to a soldier that I had to serve in. I had to do the dirty work, sweeping and polishing boots. It was only a dream, and I'm just as tired as if I really had done it. " - "It may have been true," King said, "but I will give you some advice. Fill your pocket with peas, and make a small hole in it. If you re being led away, they fall out, and then we can pursue track. " The little man stood But unseen by the door and heard what the King said. When he by night carried the sleeping princess through the city, dropped although some peas out of her pocket, but the shrewd little guy had already scattered peas in every street, so it was not looking on track for something. The princess had to again serve the soldier to hanegal.Kongen sent the next morning his men out to search for the peas, but it was no use. In every street poor children were picking up peas. "It must have rained peas, last night," they said. "We must think of something else," King said, "keep your shoes on when you go to bed, and save one of them before you go home from the soldier, and I'll find it." The little man heard it all, and night when the soldier demanded that he should get the princess again, he counseled it. Towards this list he knew no means, and if the shoe were found in the soldier went wrong. "Do as I say," said the soldier, and the princess had again this night serve as a girl. Before she went away again, she hid However, one shoe during sengen.Næste morning the King had searched for his daughter shoes throughout the city, and it was found at the soldier. He was for the little man had gone outside the town, but was soon caught and thrown in jail. Its greatest treasure, the blue light, he had forgotten to take, and he had only a single gold piece in his pocket. While he is now in its heavy chains stood at the prison window, he saw one of his comrades passing. He knocked on the window and shouted to him: "Do me the favor to get the little bundle that I have left lying in the inn. You must get a ducat for it." Companion ran the place, and they came back with the bundle. As soon as the soldier was alone, he lit his pipe, and the little man came immediately. "Do not be afraid," he said, "Let them do with you what they want, but remember the blue light." Next day the soldier was tried, and although he had not done anything wrong, he was sentenced to death. As he was led away, he asked the king if he could get his last wish fulfilled. "What is it?" the king asked. "Can I smoke a pipe on the road?" - "Back three, if you will," replied the king, "but do not imagine that I'll give you life." The soldier now took out his pipe, lit it at the blue light, and since there had risen a few rings in the air, stood the little man with a baton in his hand. "What does my lord?" he asked. "Turn the false judge and his officers to the ground," said the soldier, "and spare not the King who has treated me so ill." In a flash of the little man back and forth, and whom he so much as touched by his cudgel fell to the ground and lay there, he never to stir again. The king was terrified, and to be allowed to live at all, he gave the soldier the princess and half the kingdom.
The little donkey	1368	430	Danish	There was once a king and a queen who had everything they could possibly want, but no children. The Queen lamented over this day and night, saying, "I am like a barren field." Finally, God gave her her wish, but the child she gave birth, did not look like a human, but as a small donkey. When she saw it, she began to cry and said that they were to throw it into the water so the fish could eat it. One such child was worse than nothing. "No," said the king, "God has given us and he will be my son and heir and sit on my throne." The donkey grew up and became larger, and its ears were long and pointed and bristled in the air. It was almost always happy and jumped around and played, and especially enjoyed music. Once it went to a famous minstrel and said, "Teach me to play just as well on the lute as you." - "It will be no, sir," said the musician, "your hands are too big. I am afraid that the strings would not last." But there was nothing for excursions. The donkey was determined to play the lute and was so diligent and persistent, to do it as well as læreren.En day when the young men were out to take a walk, he passed by a source, and when he reflected in it so his donkey. He was so distressed that he went out into the wide world and only took with him one faithful companion. Once they came to a country where there was a king who had a beautiful daughter. "Here we will be," said the donkey, knocked and shouted, "Here comes a guest, close up." But when no one answered, he sat down and played so good on his lute, the sentries did big eyes and ran over and said to the king: "There sits a young donkey outside the door and play the lute as well as any man." - "Let musician come to me," King said. But when the donkey came in, every one began to laugh at him. He should now follow out with the waiters to get something to eat, but said offended: "I'm no ordinary donkey, I am very privileged." - "Would you rather like the soldiers?" the king asked. "No," replied he, "I will sit next to the king." He laughed and said good-naturedly: "Yes, yes, come and sit down here." A little later he asked: "How do you like my daughter, little donkey?" The donkey turned and looked at her, nodded and said: "She is the most beautiful I've ever seen." - "So you must also be allowed to sit next to her," King said. It was the donkey well pleased with, and ate and drank and behaved so nicely and formed, as you could just wish sig.Da he had been there for some time, he thought: "What good does all. It's probably best I takes home again. " He hang sadly, and went to the king and asked for his resignation. The king, who had come to hold much of him, asked: "What ails you? You see the so sour as a vinegar brewing. Stay with me, then you should get what you demand. Want gold?" - "No thanks," said the donkey and shook his head sadly. "Would you then have jewelry and precious stones?" - "No thanks." - "If only I knew what would make you," said the king, "you have my pretty daughter to wife?" - "Yes, I would like," said the donkey and was immediately at ease, for it was just what he had wanted. The wedding was celebrated with great splendor. When the bride and groom in the evening had come into their sleeping chamber, the king commanded one of his servants to sneak in there to see if he would behave well. The bridegroom thought they were quite alone, locked the door and threw off his æselhud and stood as the most beautiful prince, one could imagine. "Now you see who I am," he said, "and I am not inferior to you." The bride was delighted, kissed and embraced him. In the morning he threw back animal skin on again, and no one could have guessed what was hidden behind it. Then came the old king into them. "Already on the legs, little donkey," he said. Then he turned to his daughter. "You're not so glad that your husband is not a real person," he said. "I care so very much of him," she replied, "I will never in my life to marry anyone else." The king was surprised, but the waiter who had concealed himself came and told him everything. "It's not true," he said. "Watch yourself the next night," the waiter said, "and I will give you a piece of advice. Take animal skins and throw it on the fire, so he may well prove in its proper frame." - "It is good advice," said the king, and at night as they slept, he slipped in there and saw in the moonlight the beautiful young man. The skin was next to the ground. He took it with him, lit a bonfire in the yard, threw it then and was out until it was burned to ashes. But when he wanted to see how it would go when it was discovered the morning, he slipped back in there. At dawn awoke the king's son and would take the donkey skin, but could not find it. He was alarmed, and said sadly: "Now I must go away from here." But doorstep stood the king. "Where are you going, my son," he said, "Stay here with me. I'll give you half my kingdom, and after my death you get it all." - "May it always have to look so bright for me," said the prince, "I'm staying with you." The old gave him half his kingdom, and when he died a year later, he got it all, and when his own father died, he got another, and lived happily until his death.
The singing bone	265	780	Danish	There was once a country where there lived a wild boar which did great harm. It destroyed farmers' fields, killed the cattle, and ripped up people. King promised a large reward to anyone who would free the land from this plague; but the beast was so big and strong that no one dared venture into the forest where it lived. Eventually the King gave notice that he would give his daughter to the one who could capture or kill vildsvinet.I his country there lived two brothers who were the sons of a poor man. They volunteered with the king and would dare attempt. The elder, who was crafty and shrewd, out of pride, the younger, who was innocent and simple, from a kind heart. For that they could be sure of finding the beast king commanded that they should go into the forest from opposite sides. The elder went in on the west side and the younger on the east. When the younger had gone a while, came a little man approached him with a big spear in his hand, gave it to him and said, "It must have, because you have such a good heart. Just go away at the boar, it will not hurt you. " He thanked the little man many times, took the spear and went on, without being the least bit afraid. Shortly after, the animal rushed toward him, but he held the spear forward and in blind rage run wild pig straight towards it, so it penetrated the heart and killed it. He took the animal on the shoulder and went home after to bring the king det.Ved edge of the forest there was a house where people were making merry with wine and dancing. There was the elder brother had gone in to strengthen itself by a cup of wine, and thought that the boar would not run away from him. When he saw his brother get out of the woods with his prey, filled his heart with envy. "Come in and rest and get a drink of wine," he shouted to him.The other, not entertained the slightest suspicion, went in and told how he had fared. His brother got him to stay there till the evening. When they on the way home had to be a bridge, let the elder his brother go on ahead, and suddenly he gave him a blow, so that he fell down dead. He buried him beneath the bridge, took the pig and brought it to the king, and celebrated her wedding with the Princess. When his brother did not come back, he said: "The pig has enough torn stomach up at him," and no one believed it samme.Men nothing is hidden from God, and this evil deed eventually came to light. Many years later as a shepherd was driving his herd across the bridge that stuck a yellowish legs out of the ground, and took it because he thought it might be a good mouthpiece for a flute. But when he would begin to blow in it, gave it to his great surprise to sing by herself, "Shepherd, shepherd, listen to my sang.Menneske I was you engang.Min brother me dræbtepå this bridge to win the princess's faith. " "It was a wonderful horn, which can sing," said the shepherd, "I will bring it to the king." When he came to the king, again began to sing the same song. King understood immediately what it meant, and then ground under the bridge was taken away, came the victim's skeleton appeared. The older brother was forced to go to confession and was then put in a sack and drowned. But the dead brother's skeleton was laid to rest in a beautiful tomb in the cemetery.
The naughty child	1111	779	Danish	There was once a naughty little child who would not do what his mother said. Reason God had not happy about it, and let her become ill. No doctor could help it, and shortly after died it. As the coffin was lowered into the grave and the earth was thrown to, then suddenly its small arm sticking up. It did not help that it was laid down and the earth covered over again, his arm still came out. The mother then had to even go out to the grave and give it a slap on the arm as she had done when the child lived. Then the arm pulled down under the ground and the baby had peace in his grave.
Devil's three golden hairs	273	461	Danish	There was once a poor woman who gave birth to a son. He had a caul on, and it was predicted that when he was fourteen years old, he had to marry the king's daughter. Shortly after the King came into the village, without anyone knowing it was him, and when he asked if there was anything new to tell, people said: "There's just given birth to a boy with a caul. He will always have luck, yes there is even predicted to him that when he is fourteen years, he must marry the king's daughter. " The king was annoyed prophecy and went to the parents and said, "You are so poor. Give me the baby, I'll take good care of it." They first said no, but when the stranger offered them much money, they gave in and thought: "It will of course be going him well. He is a happy child." King put it in a box, and when he came to a deep water, he threw into it and thought, "Now I have freed my daughter from her unlooked suitor." Box, however, did not sink, but floated like a ship, and there was not a drop of water. It floated to the came to a mill which was two mil from the capital, which was hanging in millwork. A miller boy spotted it and pulled it up. He thought that there was a great treasure, but when he opened it, he found the little boy. He brought him to the miller and his wife, and since they had no children they were very happy and said: "God has given him to us." The boy stayed with them and grew up and was nice and god.Mange years after King had once in a storm into the mill, and he asked the people if the tall youth was their son. "No, it's really no," the woman replied, "Fourteen years ago he came drifting down the water in a box, and the maelstrom of the mill wheel got him here." It immediately went up to the king that it was happy child, as he had wanted to drown, and he said: "My good people, the boy can not bring the Queen a letter from me will give him two gold pieces for it." - "as the King commands," answered they, and they told the boy that he should make himself capable. The king then wrote a letter to the Queen, which said: "The boy who brings this letter, let him be killed and buried. It must be done before I come home." The boy went on the road with the letter, but got lost and came in the evening to a large forest. In the distance he saw a light shine, and when he had gone for some time, he came to a small house. He went in there and took no further than an old woman sitting by the fire. She was frightened when she saw him and said, "What are you doing here?" - "I live over on the mill," replied the boy, "and I have to get to the queen with a letter, but I'm lost in the woods. Do not I stay here tonight?" - "Poor boy," said the woman, "you have come to a cave of robbers. When the robbers come home, beats you to death." - "I am not afraid," the boy said, "and besides, I was so tired that I can not stand." Then he lay down on a bench and immediately fell asleep. Shortly after the robbers came home and asked angrily, what kind of a guy. "It's a poor child who is lost," said the old woman, "and I could not bear to let him go on. He is on his way to the Queen with a letter." The robbers took the letter and read it, and the hard-hearted men took pity on the poor boy. The captain tore the letter to pieces and wrote another, which stated that the boy immediately to hold the wedding with the princess. They let him sleep peacefully until morning, and when he awoke they gave him the letter and showed him the right path. When the queen had read the letter, she did as there was, and happiness of the child and the King's daughter's wedding was celebrated with great pragt.Nogen time after the king came home and saw that the prophecy had come true. "How did it happen?" he asked angrily. "I had given a completely different command in my letter." The Queen handed him the letter, and he saw that it had been exchanged for another. He asked the boy why he had brought another letter than the one he had given him. "I do not know anything about," he replied, "It must have happened while I was out in the woods and slept." - "So easy you should not get to my daughter," said the king furious, "the one who wants her to wife must fetch three of the devil's golden hair. If you bring them to me, you should be allowed to keep her." The king hoped to be rid of him, but happy child replied: "I'll get you. I'm not afraid of the devil." He then took leave and went sted.Vejen led past a big city, and the sentry at the gate asked him what his trade was, and what he could. "I do everything," replied happiness child. "Then you can do us a great service," said the sentry, "tell us why the source along the square has become dry, and there is not even water flows out of it, while before pouring the wine." - "Wait till I come back, so shall know it," he replied. He went on and came to another town, there also the gatekeeper asked him what he could. "I do everything," replied happiness child. "Can not you tell us why a tree which once bore golden apples does not even have green leaves," said the sentry. "Wait till I get back," he replied, "and I'll tell you." He went on and came to a deep water. The ferryman asked what he could. "I do everything," replied happiness child. "Can not you tell me why I must always be going backwards and forwards, and am never set and replace me," the man asked. "Wait till I get back," he replied, "and I'll tell you." On the other found the entrance to hell. It was black and sooty. The devil was not at home, but his grandmother was sitting in a large armchair. "What will you?" she asked him, but she did not look so bad out. "I would like to have three of the devil's hair," he replied, "otherwise I can not be allowed to keep my wife." - "It's good deal to ask," she said, "if the devil comes home and finds you, you are on a neck. But I feel sorry for you and should see if I can help you." She changed him into an ant and said he was hiding in the folds of her dress. "Yes, it is all very well," he said, "but then there are three things I would love to know. First, why a source from which once flowed with wine has become dry, and no longer even water of the second, why a tree which once bore golden apples does not even put forth leaves, and thirdly, why ferryman must always be going backwards and forwards without somebody comes and replaces him . " - "Those are difficult questions," she said, "but sit now just ask and be careful what he says when I pull out the hairs." In the evening, the Devil came home, but hardly had he stuck his head inside the door before he noticed that the air was not clean. "I smell human flesh," he said, sniffing. He searched everywhere but found nothing. "Now I've just been swept and put in order," scolded grandmother, "and so messing up everything. You smell always human flesh. Sit down and eat your supper." When he had eaten and drunk, he was tired, and laid his head in his grandmother's lap, for that she should groin him. It was not long before he was asleep and snoring and breathing heavily. Then the old a golden hair out and laid it beside him. "Oh," cried the devil, "what are you doing?" - "I had bad dreams," answered the grandmother, "so I seized hold of your hair." - "What did you dream?" he asked. "I dreamed that a source which wine once flowed, now dried up, and not even water would flow out of it. How can it be?" - "It's just because there sits a toad under a stone in the well," replied the devil, "when they killed it, the wine as before." Oldemoderen to comb him again until he fell asleep and snored until the windows shook. Then she pulled the second hair out. "Oh," cried the devil, "What is this that you do?" - "Do not be angry," she said, "I did it in a dream." - "What have you dreamed?" he asked. "I dreamed that there was an apple tree which once bore golden apples now does not even put forth leaves," she replied, "whom do you think it will go?" - "Yes, they did but know," answered the devil. "A mouse is gnawing at the root. When they killed they would have golden apples again, but if it gnaws much longer the tree will wither completely. Leave me in peace. If you disturb me again, get you a slap. " Great-spoke good for him to comb him until he fell asleep again. Then she pulled the third hair out. Devil furiously up and would batter her, but she reassured him, saying, "I can not help it that I have bad dreams." - "What have you dreamed?" he asked, for he was still a little curious. "I dreamed of a ferryman who complained because he had to keep rowing back and forth without any untied him," she replied, "how can that be?" - "The blockhead," replied the devil, "he just give one of those coming, tiller in hand, so he is free, and the other must ferry in his place." As the grandmother had plucked out the three golden hairs, and to know what she wanted, she let the old serpent sleep in peace just to the bright morgen.Da devil had gone out the next day, the old woman took the ant for human again. "There you have the three hair," she said, "and I suppose you heard what the devil said." - "Yes, I do," he replied, "and I'll remember it." - "So have what you want," she said, "and now you can go your place again." He thanked her very much for her help and went happy and fortunately. When he came to the ferryman asked this, he could answer him the question. "Put me first of said happiness the child," so I'll tell you when you can go free. "When they had reached the other bank, he told him what the devil had said, and went on until he came to the city with the barren apple tree. the sentry would also hear his answer, and he said so, the devil said, "Kill the mice gnawing at the root, it will again bear golden apples." watchman thanked him and gave him two donkeys laden with gold. And he went to the city where the well was dry. he told the watchman what the devil had said. "there's a toad under a stone in the well," he said, "when it and kill it, flowing again wine. "the watchman thanked and also gave him two asses laden with guld.Endelig came happiness the child home to his wife, who was very happy when she saw him and heard how well he had fared. He is now the king of the three golden hair, and when this so all the gold, he was quite well pleased o g said: "Well, you have fulfilled all conditions and may keep my daughter. But tell me how you got your hands on that gold. "-" I came across a river where it was like sand on the shore, "replied happiness child," and so I took it. "-" Can I get some of it? "asked the king greedy." as much as you will, "he replied," there is a ferry man rowing you across. So you can fill your bags. "The king hurried away, all he could, and when he came down to the river he beckoned to the ferryman, that he should come and put him in. The man came and let him go down in the boat, but when they came to the other shore he gave him the tiller in his hand and jumped ashore. the punishment for his sins king had now ferry back and forth, and if there has been no and have solved him, sitting he there yet.
Doctor Omniscient	930	1641	Danish	There was once a poor peasant named Krebs. He drove with two oxen a load of wood into town and sold it to a dokter. The doctor was sitting at the table as he counted the money, and when the peasant saw how nice he ate and drank, he felt like also to be a doctor. He stood there for some time and finally asked if he could learn to be a doctor. "That would indeed easy enough," replied the doctor. "What shall I do?" asked the farmer. "First you need to buy yourself an ABC, which is a farm rooster, secondly you need to sell your car and your oxen, so you get money to buy clothes and whatever else is part of the healing art, thirdly you need a sign letting paint: "Here lives doctor Knowing," and put it above your door. " The farmer did it all. When he had been a doctor for some time, was stolen some money from a distinguished gentleman. He got to hear that in the village there lived a man named Doctor Omniscient, and therefore had to know where the money was. He seemed so buckle, drove to the farmer and asked if he was a doctor Knowing. Yes, it was he. So he had to go and recover the stolen money back. The farmer also wanted his wife Grete, and they grew so all three into the wagon and drove off. When they came to the castle, the table was spread, and he should first eat. "Grete should also eat with ,." he said, and sat down with her. When the first servant came with the good food, gave the farmer his wife a nudge and said, "It is the first." He believed that it was the first one that came with the food, but the waiter thought he believed it was the first thief, and he really had stolen, he was afraid, and said to his companions: "The doctor knows everything. it goes wrong. He said I was the first. " The other waiters would not go in, but he had to be it. When he came with the dish, nudged the peasant to his wife and said: "It is the other." He was just as scared and came out in a hurry. The third was not a bit better. The farmer said: "It is the third, Gretel." Then a fourth servant with a covered bowl and the lord said to the doctor that he ought to give a try to his art and say what was in the dish. However, it was crayfish. The farmer looked at the dish and did not know his wits. "Oh, I poor crayfish," he said. When the master heard this, he cried: "See, he knows it. So he also knows where the money is." The servants, however, was terrible anxiety and motioned to the doctor that he should come out to them. When he arrived, they confessed that they had taken the money. They would like to give them to him, and many more if he would promise not to betray them as they were on a neck. They led him to where they had hidden the money, and thus he was quite satisfied. He went back in, sat down and said: "Now I look for in my book where the money is." The fifth servant climbed into the stove to hear if the doctor knew more. The farmer was turning over in his ABC book and looked for the cock. When he could not immediately find it, he said: "You are, however, in here, so you'll get out." The waiter in the stove thought that it was he sprang out and cried, "The man knows everything." Doctor Omniscient now showed the lord where the money was, but did not say who had stolen them. He received great rewards, both for him and the servants, and became a famous man.
death's godson	419	332	Danish	There was once a poor man who had twelve children and had to work day and night to feed them. When the thirteenth came into the world, he knew not how he should do, and in his despair he went out on the road to ask the first person he met to be the godfather. The first person he met was the good God. He already knew and said, "I pity you, poor man. I will be godfather for your child and make sure that it goes well in life." - "Who are you?" asked the man. "I am the good God," replied the stranger. "Yes, and I do not want you to sponsor," said the man, "you give some wealth and lets others die of hunger." The man did not understand how certain God distributes poverty and wealth and therefore went on. Soon after he met the devil said to him, "If you will let me be godfather to your child, I will bestow the gold and honor and all the glory of the world." - "Who are you?" asked the man. "I am the devil," replied the stranger. "Yes, and I do not want you to sponsor," said the man, "you seduce people to evil and deceiving them." He went on and shortly after he met death. "Who are you?" he asked. "I am Death, who makes everyone equal," replied the stranger. "Yes, you must be godfather to my child," said the man, "you do not discriminate between rich and poor." - "I will make your child rich and famous," said Death, "it is always good to have my friend." Next Sunday, when the baptism occurred, came death also, and stood godfather to barnet.Da the boy had come to shed years of age, entered godfather one day into the room and bade him follow. They went into the woods and showed him a small plant and said: "Now you get your godfather gift. I will make you a famous doctor. Every time you are called to a sick, I will appear unto you. I stand at the sick person's head, you simply have to give him one of these herbs, he will be healthy. But I stand at the foot you should say that no power on earth can save him. But beware of using this herb against my will it could get you dearly to stand. "Before there was not long before the young man had become the most famous physician in the whole world. "He only needs to look at a sick, then he knows immediately whether he will live or die," said the people. From afar came the travelers to take him to their sick, and he soon became very rich. Once the king was ill and sent for the doctor, that he would say if he could live. But when he approached the bed, Death was standing at the foot. For him there was no healing. "I wonder if I could fool the death again," thought the doctor, "he would probably be angry, but because I am his godson, he wears hopefully with me." Then he turned the sick, so death came to stand at the head, and took one of his herbs and gave it to the king. But death came to the doctor with a dark face and rebuked him. "This time I forgive you," he said, "but if it happens again, it is all over with you." Shortly afterward the king only daughter very ill. He was crying his eyes out of his head, and made known to the person who could heal her, will make her real and inherit the kingdom after him. When the doctor came to the sick, he saw that death was at her feet. But he was so dazzled by the princess's beauty that he forgot everything else. He did not see that death rebuked him with his bony hands, but turned her over so his head was located at the foot of the bed. Then he gave her an herb and immediately got her cheeks color, and her lips opened igen.Men death went straight to his godson and said angrily: "Now it's your turn." Then he took hold of him with his icy hands and forced him to follow into an underground cave. There were thousands and thousands of lights and burned. Some were great, others were already burned halfway and others were quite small. Every moment extinguished some and others were lit, so it looked as if the flames jumped back and forth. "It is man's light of Life," said Death, "the big ones are children, the half belonging to people in their best years, and the little ones to old people. But often also children and young people only a little light." - "Show me my life," said the physician, thinking that it still would be very large. Death pointed to a little stump that was just about to go out. "It is your light," he said. "Dear godfather," cried the horrified physician, "light a new one. Let me live with my lovely princess and become king over the whole kingdom." - "I can not," answered Death, "one must go out before the second turn on." - "Then set the old onto a new, so it burns far," asked the doctor. Death pretended that he would fulfill his desire, and brought a great light. But when he had put it on top of the small stump, he fell on purpose, so it was extinguished. At the same moment sank doctor and died.
The spider and the Tortoise	8971	60	Danish	One day plucked the spider Anansi some very large and tasty vegetables from his garden. He baked them with great care and they ended up smells wonderful when they came out of the oven. He could not wait to sit down and eat dem.I same moment there was a knock on his door. It was Turtle, who had traveled all day and were very tired and hungry. "Hello, Anansi," said Turtle "I've been out walking for so long, and I smelt the most delicious vegetables I have ever sniffed. Will not you share your meal with mig.Anansi could not deny it was the custom in his country to share your meal with visitors at midday. But he was not very happy, for Anansi was a little bit too grådeig and would have all the wonderful vegetables all to himself. So Anansi thought for a while and got on a plane. "Please come in, Turtle. I would be honored to have you as my guest this evening. Sit down, find a chair and help yourself. "Turtle came inside and sat down, but just as he reached for the vegetables, cried Anansi," Turtle, do not you know better than to come to the table with dirty hands? "Tortoise looked at his hands and saw that they were filthy. He had climbed all day and had not had a chance to wash themselves. Turtle got up and went down to the river to wash his feet. He walked slowly like all turtles all the way back to the house and when he came back was Anansi already begun to eat. "I did not want these tasty vegetables should be cold, so I had to begin," said Anansi. " but do come and join me now, Turtle. "Turtle sat down again and reached for the vegetables, but again Anansi yelled at him." Turtle heard you tell me before? It's not polite to come to the table with dirty hands! "He looked around and saw that his hands were dirty again, he had to crawl on them to get back to the house. So once again he went down to the river to wash. And when he went back, he was very careful to walk on the grass so his hands would stay clean. But when he finally had sat down Anansi had finished eating all the tasty vegetables and not a single bite was tilbage.Skildpadde so short at Anansi and said, "Thank you for sharing your meal with me. If you once come by where I live do not hesitate to let me reciprocate earn stone. " Then he got up slowly and walked out the door and continued on his vej.Dagene went by and Anansi thought more and more on the meal Turtle had offered. He became more and more interresseret in a free meal, and could finally no longer stand it. He went out the next day to find Turtle's hus.Han found turtle sunbathing on a riverbank just around spisetid.Skildpadde looked up and said "Hello, Anansi, have you come to share dinner with me?" "Oh yes, yes! "said Anansi, who was becoming more and hungrier by the minute. Turtle went underwater to his house to set the table for dinner. Soon he came back to the bank and said," Your place is waiting for you and the food is finished, do come and join me, Anansi. "and then he dived underwater and began to slowly eat his måltid.Anansi jumped into the water, but could not get to the bottom of the river. he tried to swim down, but he was so easily he continued to flow back to overfladen.Han tried to dive and he went back crawl. he tried a jump with tributaries, but nothing helped him to get down to flodbunden.I meanwhile ate turtle slowly through his måltid.Anansi was not to give up a free meal and swam to shore while he wondered what he should do. Finally, he got an idea. He collected rocks and stuffed them in his jakkelommer.Da he jumped into the river he sank directly to the bottom and was able to take a seat at bordet.Bordet was a wonderful feast filled with delicious food. Anansi could hardly fathom how much tasty food that was in front of him and could not wait to starte.Men just as he reached for the first bite, kept the turtle stopped eating and said, "In my country we do not have our jackets on at table. "Anansi noticed that Turtle had to take his own jacket before having sat down. Anansi started taking his own jacket off and as soon as it was of his shoulders he went directly to the surface. He stuck his head into the water and saw Turtle down there slowly nydde the wonderful feast.
Almond tree	445	720	Danish	For many hundreds of years ago lived there was a rich man who had a beautiful and pious wife. They lived happily together and had just the grief that no children were. The wife prayed day and night to God, but they did have none. Behind the house there was a courtyard in which there stood a juniper, and in winter the wife was standing out there and peeled an apple, she came to cut her finger, so that fell a few drops of blood on the white snow. She sighed and said, "only I could have a child who was as white as snow and as red as blood." At that moment, she was so strange light mood, and it was, as she felt that her desire to go in opfyldelse.Da one month was over, the snow melted, the month after the grass began to chirp up, in the next stack all the little flower head out of the ground. Since there had been four months jumped out buds, branches intertwined between each other and the birds sang so merrily in the woods. Next month she stood under the juniper tree, which smelled so sweet that her heart was filled with joy and she knelt and prayed. When the six months had passed, and the fruit of the almond tree was big and juicy, she went still and silent around, in the seventh month she ate greedy of berries and was sick and distressed. When the eighth month came, she cried and said to her husband: "When I die, please bury me under the almond tree." She was now happier again, and when she in the ninth month gave birth to a son who was as white as snow and as red as blood, broke her heart of glæde.Manden buried her under the almond tree and grieved for her. Since there had been a time he stopped to mourn, and took a second wife. She bore him a baby daughter. When the woman looked at her, she felt, how she loved her, but the little boy was her an eyesore. She beat him and pushed him, and let him never be at peace. And still she thought of how she had to get her daughter throughout formuen.Engang, since the wife had gone up to the attic, the little daughter and said, "Give me an apple, mother." The mother immediately took up an apple by a large chest that had a very heavy lid with a great jernlås. "Does my brother have one too?" asked the little girl. The wife was annoyed, but said, however, that he might get one when he came home from school. When she saw him coming, an evil thought, and she tore the apple of her daughter and said: "You must not have before your brother have got." Then she threw the apple into the chest again, and when the boy came, she said kindly: "You must have an apple, my friend." But just as she was so sorry for him that he was quite scared. "Take as even one," she said, closing the lid up. And when the boy bent down in the coffin, she let the lid slam, then his head rolled down to the red apples. When she had done it for a shiver through her, and she thought, "I wish I could give someone else to blame for it." So she took the head out of the coffin tied it firmly to the body with a white scarf, gave him an apple in her hand and sat him on a chair in front døren.Lidt came Malene out to his mother, who was in the kitchen stirring a pot of boiling water. "Mom," she said, "my little brother sitting outside the door and is completely white in the face. I asked him the apple, he has in his hand, but he answered me not." - "Ask him again," said the mother, "and if he will not answer you, just give him one on the ear." Malene went in to his brother, but when he did not answer this time, she gave him a box on the ear, then the head came off. She was very frightened and ran crying out for her mother. "I turned the head of my brother," hulkde she could not keep up crying again. But the mother shushed her. "Be quiet," she said, "let's just make sure that not a soul knows it. We can not do it. I will boil him in choucroute." Then she chopped the boy in very small pieces and put him into the pot. But Malene's tears fell there, so it needed no salt.Da father came home, he sat at the table and asked, "Where is my son?" The mother put a dish of sauerkraut on the table, and Marjory was crying incessantly. "Where is my son?" the father asked again, and the mother replied: "Roosters gone into the country to his grandfather and stay there for some time." - "It's weird, he not only said goodbye to me," the father said. "He asked me if he could stay there six weeks time," said the woman, "and I gave him permission. Out there he is always welcome." - "I think not, 'said the man, shaking his head," it's not nice of him that he did not say goodbye to me first. " Then he began to eat and said: "However, keep crying, Malene. He comes well again. How the food however tastes me," he said to his wife: "Give me some more. You might as well give me everything immediately. I have a feeling that it is my everything. " He ate and ate and threw all the bones under the table. But when they got up, took Malene his beautiful silk scarf, gathered all the pins in it and hid them under the juniper tree. And when she had done, she was quite lighthearted and stopped crying. Suddenly juniper tree to move the branches waved back and forth, and there lay a mist about them. In the middle of the fog was as there burned a fire, and out of it flew a beautiful bird who sang so nicely, and soared high into the air. Then the fog lifted and the almond tree remained as it always had been, but the scarf with her legs was gone. Marjory felt so happy as if her brother were still alive and went cheerful into the house. The bird flew However, the place and sat down on a goldsmith's house and sang: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with her sharp knife, and was my father who ate of me glæde.Min little sister Marjory good, she gathered in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil rest under the tree rod.Kvivit, tweet what I is a beautiful bird. " Goldsmith was sitting in his workshop and made a gold chain, when he heard the bird sing, and he never seemed, he had heard anything so lovely. Hn got up to go out, but when he went over the gutter, he lost one slipper. He left it and went middle of the street, on his stomach, he had his leather apron, in one hand a gold chain and in the other pliers. The sun was shining brightly, and he stood in the eyes, to really see the bird. "How beautifully you sing, little bird," he said, "sing the song again." - "No," it said, "Twice I sing not for nothing, but give me that gold chain, I'll do it." - "Please," said the goldsmith, and handed the chain. The bird took it in the right claw and began to sing: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with her sharp knife, and was my father who ate of me glæde.Min sister Marjory and good, she collected in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil rest under the tree rod.Kvivit, tweet what I is a beautiful bird. " Then the bird flew to a shoemaker's house and sat on the roof and sang: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with her sharp knife, and was my father who ate of me glæde.Min little sister Marjory good, she gathered in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil rest under the tree rod.Kvivit, tweet what I is a beautiful bird. " The shoemaker heard it and came out in shirt sleeves, but holding his hand to his eyes when the sun blinded him. "Where you sing pretty little bird," he said, and called his wife, for her to come out and hear it. She called to her daughter, and all the children and the journeyman and the girl came out into the street to see the bird. It was all red and green, but the neck it had a golden ring, and its eyes shone like stars. "Sing that song again," asked the shoemaker. "No," replied he, "twice I sing not for nothing." The man then sent his wife to fetch a pair of red shoes and shelf stands. It took them in his left claw and began to sing: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with her sharp knife, and was my father who ate of me glæde.Min sister Marjory and good, she collected in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil rest under the tree rod.Kvivit, tweet what I is a beautiful bird. " When he had finished, he flew on with the chain on the right and the shoes left claw, and when it came to a mill, put it on the roof. Mill wings went: Flap, flap, inside the mill sat twenty journeymen and carved on a stone: Chop, chop. The bird sat in a lime tree and began to sing: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with his sharp knife," they heard one stop working, "It was my father who ate of me; . " then there were two that stopped, "My little sister, pious and good," she heard four up "her in a handkerchief" now it was only eight, who cut, "as my legs, and put them" now only seven "to under the almond tree." and now only one. "Tweet, tweet, what I am is a beautiful bird." At length the last and said: "How beautifully you sing, little bird, sing it again." - "No," replied the bird, "twice I sing not for nothing. Give me the millstone, and I will do it." - "Yes," said the man, "if it were my own, should you troth like to get it." But all the others were agreed that it should have the stone. The bird flew down to them and got millstone around the neck like a collar and singing again: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with her sharp knife, and was my father who ate of me glæde.Min small sister, pious and good, she gathered in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil rest under the tree rod.Kvivit, tweet what I is a beautiful bird. " When he had finished, he flew away with the millstone around his neck and chain in the right and the shoes in the left claw. Far away it flew, and when it sat down, it was to his father hus.Inde in the living room sat the father, mother and Marjory at the table, and the man said: "I do not know how it can be, but I'm so happy and light hearted today. " - "I'm not," said his wife, "I am so anxious, as if a storm were coming." But Malene sat and cried and cried. The bird came flying and perched on the roof, and the father said, "Where the sun is shining brightly today. I'm into fashion, as if I were to see an old friend again." - "And I am so afraid, teeth chattering in my mouth," said the woman. "The blood burns like fire in my veins," and she pulled restlessly up and down in her bodice. But Malene sat in a corner of the plate to the eyes and wept, so it was quite wet with her tears. Then the bird perched on the almond tree and sang: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with his sharp knife," When kept the wife hands seductive and squinted to, but it whistled for her ears as the strongest storm, eyes burned in her head, and it was as if lightning flashed around her. "it was my father who ate of me." "Do you hear, there is a bird that sings so good," the man shouted. "See how the sun shines, and you can smell a fragrance of thyme." "My little sister, pious and good" When hidden Malene head in her lap and wept as if her heart would break. "I will go and see the bird," said the man, but his wife grabbed his arm and said: "Do not do it. I have a feeling as if the whole house was ablaze." He did not, however, about what she said, but went out and looked at the bird. "She gathered in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil rest under the tree rod.Kvivit, tweet what I have a beautiful bird . " With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it just fell on the neck of the man and fitted him exactly. He went in and showed his wife and said, "What a lovely chain, the pretty little bird has given me." But the wife was so scared that she fell to the floor, and her cap came off. The bird began to sing: "My mother robbed me my life, and cut me with his sharp knife," "I wish I were a thousand fathoms under ground," she wailed. "It was my father who ate of me. " Now she was as pale as a corpse. "My little sister, pious and good," "God knows if the bird will give me something," said Malene and went out to it. "She gathered in a klædeda my legs, and put demtil under the almond tree. " In it threw the shoes down to her. "Tweet, tweet, what I am is a beautiful bird." Marjory all at once so happy, put on the red shoes and began to dance and jump. "It is a beautiful bird," she thought, "I'm so happy, so happy, and me a pair of red shoes." - "I think the world is coming," moaned the woman and stood up, "I have to out and have some fresh air." But hardly had she come outside the door before the bird threw the millstone right in her face, so she fell as dead as a herring. Father and Malene, who had heard the hullabaloo, came rushing out. In the same beat, a clear flame off, and the steam and smoke formed a dense fog. As it spread, stood the little brother is alive and happy and happy they took hands and went into the house.
One-Eye, Two-eyes and Little Three-eyes	1234	511	Danish	There was once a woman who had three daughters. The oldest was called One-eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of the forehead, the other had two eyes like other people and was called Two-eyes, and the third had the youngest, middle of the forehead and called therefore Little Three-eyes. But neither the mother nor the sisters liked Two-eyes, because she looked like other people. "You're a frugal one, you with your two eyes," they said, and beat and pushed her. She had nothing else to eat, but what they left, her old clothes and pierced, and they made her all the mischief they kunne.En day should Two-eyes out on the field and guard a goat. She was very hungry, because she had almost nothing got to eat, and when she came out on the field, she sat down and cried so strong that tears streamed down her cheeks. Suddenly she caught sight of an old woman who stood beside her. "What are you crying for, little Two-eyes," she asked kindly. "I'm so unhappy," sobbed Two-eyes, "because I have two eyes like other people, neither my mother or my sisters like me, and buffer and beats me and let me go in old rags. And I never get something decent to eat, I am so hungry, so hungry. " - "Dare now your eyes, little Two-eyes," said the old woman, "I'll make sure that you are not going to starve. You just need to say to your goat: Small gedemor, hurry now, deck table, so is a table with the best food and you can eat as much as you want. and when you have been satisfied and says: Small gedemor, now take away my desk, it disappears instantly. " Then went the wife his way, and Two-eyes would immediately try, if it was true what she had said, and said: "Small gedemor, hurry now, deck table." No sooner had she said this before there was a neat little table with plate and knife and fork and the best food so hot that it had just come out of the kitchen. Two-eyes said the shortest grace she could: "Come Lord, and be our guest," and let the food really taste. When she was satisfied, she said: "Small gedemor, now take away my table," and immediately disappeared it all. "It's an easy household," thought Two-eyes happy, and was again in good humør.Da she evening came home with the goat, there was an iron bowl with leftovers to her, but she did not touch it. That morning she went into the field, she also those chunks, the sisters had thrown to her lie. First and second time I thought the sisters do not realize it, but as it happened every time, they began to notice it and thought, "There must have happened Two-eyes thing. Otherwise, she ate up the last mouthful, and now touches she does not the food." In order to get the matter cleared up would-Eye wear out on the field when she drives the goat out and see if there was someone who brought her mad.Da Two-eyes the next morning would take their journey, said One-Eye: "Today I go along and see if the goat is something decent to eat. " When Two-eyes noticed what was the meaning of it, and drove the goat into high grass and said, "Let us sit down here, One-Eye, I'll sing for you." One-Eye was tired of the heat and the long road, and Two-eyes sang constantly, "Are you awake, One-Eye? Do you sleep, One-Eye?" When she closed her eyes and fell asleep. When Two-eyes saw it, she said: "Small gedemor, hurry now, deck table," and sat down at the table and ate and drank until she was satisfied. Then she said simply: "Small gedemor, now take away my table," and immediately disappeared it all. She now awakened One-eye and said: "You are a fine one to fit in. While you were sleeping, could the goat run away many times. Let's go home." Two-eyes let little dish stand, but One-Eye could not tell anything. "I fell asleep," she said undskyldende.Den next day the mother said to Little Three-eyes: "Today you go with and take care of someone who brings her food, for eating and drinking should she." - "I go with you and see if goat is enough," said Little Three-eyes, because Two-eyes would go. Two-eyes drove the goat into high grass and said, "Let us sit here, and I'll sing for you." Little Three-eyes were tired by the heat and the long road, and Two-eyes began to sing: "Are you awake, Little Three-eyes?" but instead of singing: "Are you asleep, Little Three-eyes?" she errors: "Are you asleep, Two-eyes?" and singing all the time: "Are you awake, Little Three-eyes? Are you asleep, Two-eyes?" When closed Little Three-eyes his two eyes, but the third was open. She seemed indeed as if she slept with all three of them, but she could very well see what was going on. Two-eyes thought she was asleep, and said: "Small gedemor, hurry now, deck table," ate and drank and did it again disappear. "Small gedemor, now take off my table." Little Three-eyes had seen everything. Two-eyes came to her, waked her and said, "You are a fine one to guard the goat. Let's go home." In the evening Two-eyes did nothing, and Little Three-eyes said to his mother: "Now I know why the nasty slut did not eat anything. She says to the goat:" Small gedemor, hurry now, deck table, "so says the board with the best food, much better than we get at home, and when she has eaten, she says: "Small gedemor, now take away my table," it disappears again everything. Two of my eyes she had to close, but the forehead was fortunately open. " - "Should she have it better than we do," mother cried, took a knife and stuck it in the goat's heart, so the døde.Da Two-eyes saw it, she walked sadly out onto the field and began to cry. Suddenly the old woman again beside her and asked: "What are you crying for?" - "What should I do," sobbed Two-eyes, "my mother has killed the goat that gave me all the nice things, now I'm hungry again." - "I'll give you good advice, Two-eyes," said the woman, "you have to ask your sisters about the goat's intestines and bury them outside the door, so you'll probably be happy again." Then she disappeared, and the girl went home and said, "Do not I get some of my goat. Just entrails." The sisters lo. "The dirt you like to get," they said, and tossed it to her. Two-eyes took it and buried it secretly into the ground that his wife had sagt.Da they woke up the next morning, there was a lovely tree outside the door, the leaves were of silver and big golden apples shone between them. Nobody knew where it had come from, except the Two-eyes that could probably imagine that it was raised by the goat's entrails. "Can you climb up and pick some apples," the mother said to One-Eye. But every time she would take one of them, flicking branch from her and she could not grab a single. "Do you looked up, Little Three-eyes," said the mother, "you may well look better with your three eyes than she with her one." One-eye slid down the tree and Little Three-eyes climbed up, but did not see her a bit better. To the mother grew impatient, and climbed even up there, but she had not been more fortunate than the others. "I'll try," said Two-eyes. "What you think you're with your two eyes," sisters cried, but she climbed up, and the apples fell of themselves into her hand, as she had throughout her apron full when she came down. The mother took them, but instead of treating poor girl better, they were jealous, because she was the only one who could pick apples, and she got it worse than før.En time, as they stood by the tree, came a young knight past. "Hurry up to get down," cried the two sisters, "we must of course be ashamed of you." In a speed they turned an empty barrel which was standing next to the tree, and shoved also apples in there. When the knight came closer, they saw that he was very handsome. He stopped and looked admiringly at the lovely wood. "Where is the tree?" he asked. "I would give what it should be, to a branch of it." One-eye and Little Three-eyes answered that it was theirs, and that they would give him a branch. They did every possible effort to grab one but it would not succeed. "It is strange that you can not grab a single branch when it belongs to you," said the knight. They continued to assure that the tree was theirs, but Two-eyes were angry because they spoke the truth, and rolled a couple of golden apples just in front of the knight. He asked astonished, where they came from, and the sisters told now that they had a sister, but they were ashamed to show her any because she had only two eyes like any common person. But the knight would see her and shouted: "Come, Two-eyes." She now came out from his hiding place, and the knight was surprised at her beauty and said: "You can probably give me a branch of the tree." - "Yes, I can," replied Two-eyes, "the tree is mine." Then she broke a branch and handed it to him. "What shall I give you for it," he asked. "Just you would take me with you," she replied, "I suffer from hunger and need from morning to night." Knight took now Two-eyes on his horse and brought her home to his castle, and soon came to hold her so much that he married hende.Da Two-eyes was thus carried away by the handsome knight, her two sisters jealous. "But the wonderful tree, however," they thought, "even though we can not pick the fruit, there is probably someone who notice it. Who knows what happiness can bring us." But when the next morning came out, it was gone, and when Two-eyes looked out of her window, she saw to his surprise that it was udenfor.I long lived Two-eyes happy and pleased. Once, two poor women to the castle and asked for a pittance. When she looked really on them, she knew her two sisters again. They were so poor that they had to go around and beg, but Two-eyes took kindly to them and was so good to them that they truly repented of all the evil they had done to her.
The tale of the one that went forth to learn fear to know	32	326	Danish	A father had two sons. The oldest was sharp and clever, but the youngest was so stupid that there was not anything to do with him. "He will certainly fall her father proper burden," people said about him. When there was something to be done, it was always the elder who had to do it, but when his father late in the evening or at night asked him to fetch something, and the road went past the cemetery, he said: "Oh, father I must not be free, "he was not a bit of a coward. In the evening, when they sat around the fire and listen to stories, there was often someone who said, "Oh, it makes us shudder." The younger sat in a corner and listened, and could not imagine what it would mean. "Always they say that they are afraid," he thought, "I am never afraid, but it is probably also one of the things I do not understand." One day the father said to him: "Look here, my boy. You is now big and strong, and it is time that you learn something by which you can earn your bread. See how your brother works, but all the trouble to do with you, no point a bit. "I also want to learn something, "replied the boy," and that special something I might want. I wanted to learn what it is to be afraid, for I can not imagine. "The elder brother smiled when he heard it and thought:" My God, where is my brother stupid, he will then never in life to something. "the father sighed and replied," it will troth soon learn, but you can not live on. "shortly after the sexton came to visit. the father complained of his misfortune to him and said he did not know what he should do with his younger son was so stupid, so it was impossible to describe. "Just think," he said, "when I spoke to him that he had to learn to serve his bread, he said that he wanted to learn what it was like to be afraid. "-" When there is something wrong, "said the clerk," so send him just to me. I'll set custom on him. "The father was glad to do it:" A little bit it can maybe help him. "The boy did come in the house of the clerk and had to ring the bell. After a few days, the sexton awoke him at midnight and said that he should go up in the church tower and rings. "So you should probably learn what it is to be afraid," he thought, and slipped ahead to the bell tower. when the boy got up there and would address the rope, he saw that there was a white figure on the stairs opposite the sounding hole. "who," he shouted, but the figure made no reply and did not move from the spot. "Will you answer," cried the boy, "or for you will go. You have nothing to do here at night. "But the clerk was standing motionless that the boy might think he was a ghost. The boy cried:" What do you want here? If you are an honest fellow, or I throw you down the stairs. "-" Oh, he thinks it is probably not so bad, "thought the clerk and did not give a sound and stood as still as if he was of stone. for the third time asked the boy what he wanted, and when it was no use, he gave the ghost, so it fell ten steps down the stairs and was lying in the corner. then he rang the bell and went home and crept into bed. sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, but he did not. eventually she was scared, woke the boy and asked, "you do not know where my husband is. He climbed up the tower before you. "-" No, I do not know, "replied the boy," but there was one on the stairs, who would neither answer nor go away, and so I thought it was a rogue and threw him down the stairs. You can of course go and see if it's him, it would hurt me. "The woman ran away and found her husband lying moaning in the corner. He had broken his ben.Hun carried him home and ran crying to the boy's father. "Your son has made a big accident," she cried, "he has thrown my husband down the stairs, so he has a broken leg. I do not want him an extra hour in my house. "The father was very frightened and scolded the boy." What is this bad thing that I hear about you, "he said angrily," it may well be the devil himself, who have gone in you. "-" Look, dad, "the boy said," I am quite innocent. He stood there in the middle of the night and looked as if he had evil intentions. I did not know who it was, and three times I asked him to speak or walk away. "-" God knows what accident you get me on the neck, "said the father." Go away, I will not see you for my eyes. "-" it must be my pleasure, dad, "the boy replied," as soon as it gets light, I draw off to learn what it is to shudder. So for I have nothing. "-" Learn what you will, "said the father," I am quite unimportant. There you have fifty dollars. Then go out into the world, but not to any human being who you are and who is your father, for I am ashamed of you. "-" I'll remember, "replied the boy," when it all, I demand, I will sounds you. "As it began to dawn toward boy put his fifty dollars in his pocket and started walking out by road, while he still muttered:" I wish I knew what it is to be afraid, I just knew what it is to be afraid. "A man who came by, heard what the boy said to himself, and when they had come so far that they could see the gallows, he said to him:" look, there the tree where seven men hanged. Sit down below it, and wait till night, then you will noklære what it is to be afraid. "-" Should I not do anything, "the boy said," it was easily released. If I so quick to learn it, get my fifty dollars. Come here again tomorrow morning. "The boy went to the gallows, sat down and waited until evening. He came to freeze and lit a small fire, but at midnight it was so cold that he could not be warm. the wind took hold of the hanging, so they dangled back and forth, and he thought, "How it must be cold for those up there when I can not even keep warm." he took pity on them and crept up and took them down, one after the other. Then he stirred the fire, caused it to burn brightly, and set them all around it, so that they could warm themselves. the fire took hold of their clothes, but they did not move of the stain. "beware," he said, "or I will hang you up again." But the dead heard nothing and sat quietly and let their clothes burning. Then he became angry and said: "If you will not fit on, I will not help you. I will not be burned for your sake, "and so he hung them up again. Then he sat by the fire and fell asleep. The next morning the man came and wanted to have the fifty dollars." Now you know well what it is to be afraid, "he asked." How should I know of, "replied the boy," those up there have not even bothered open his mouth, but have been stupid enough to let the few old rags which they had on the body burn up. "the man could probably realize that it was no use demanding money and walked away while he thought:" he's not going to get anywhere with. "the boy went out into the world and began to mutter to himself "If only I could get to know what it's like to be afraid." Competitors who walked behind him, heard him talk and asked: "what are you for?" - "I do not know," replied the boy . "Where have you come from?" asked the driver. "I do not know." - "Who is your father?" - "I must not say." - "What is it that you go and mutters in skægg a? "-" Oh, I wish there was someone who could teach me what it's like to be scared, "the boy replied," but there is no one who can. "-" What a stupid talk, "said the coachman "come, go with me, then I will see what I can do." the youth went with the driver, and in the evening they came to an inn where they would spend the night. As they walked into the room, the boy said again loudly, "If some someone who could teach me what it is to be afraid." The landlord heard it and said, laughing: "Here, you'll probably get your feel controlled." - "cool it," said his wife, "there are already so many who have lost their lives here. It would be a pity if the pretty eyes should not be given more." But the boy said, "How hard it is, I will learn it. It is what I have gone out into the world." He did not let the host have no rest until he told that there nearby was a bewitched castle where one might get to know what it was like to be afraid. The king had promised that would watch three nights there, his daughter to wife, and she was a beautiful lady, you could see his eyes. In the palace there were also stored large taxes, which were guarded by evil spirits. They would also be free, and there were so many that a poor man probably would get rich by getting them. Many people had already gone in there, but no one had come out again. The next day the boy went up to the king and said: "I would like to be allowed to be three nights in the haunted castle." The king liked him and said, "You must be allowed to take three things into the castle." The boy asked for a lighter, a leno bench and a workbench with a kniv.Kongen let it all bring into the castle. In the evening, the boy went in there and made himself a bright fire, put the workbench with the knife beside, and sat in the lathe. "If I could be scared," he thought, "but I learn really does not here." Towards midnight he began to stir up the fire, and he heard suddenly from one corner, shouting: "Meow, meow, we are so cold." - "You fools," said the boy, "if you feel cold, then came up to the fire and warm yourselves." No sooner had he said it before two huge black cats came running, sat beside him and looked at him with wild eyes. When they had warmed themselves, they said: "Shall we play cards, buddy?" - "Yes, why not," he replied, "let me your paws." They stretched out their claws. "What long nails you have," he said, "it must first cut." And he took them in the neck, lifted them up on the workbench and screwed their feet fast. "You lose the desire to play cards when you look at your fingers," he said, killed them and threw them into the water. When he'd put put down by the fire, abounding that black cats and dogs up from all sides, more and more, so he eventually could hardly be there. They screamed terribly, and would tear the fire from each other and turn it off. For a time so he quietly, but when it was going too far, he seized his knife and shouted: "Will you look to get away in a hurry," and began to cut them. Some ran away, the others he killed, and threw into the pond. So he began to blow on the fire and put it right, but when he sat warming himself, he was so sleepy that he could not keep his eyes open. He looked around and discovered there in the corner stood a large bed. "It's excellent," he thought, and lay down in it. But when he had closed his eyes, the bed began to run around and around in the palace. "It was right," he said, "but go faster." The bed rolled on as if it were drawn by six horses, up and down stairs, and then all at once, bums, knocked it completely, and he was there with the whole bed of sig.Han threw quilts and pillows away, climbed out and said, "Go ahead run now, who has the desire." Then he lay down by the fire and slept until dawn. When the king came and saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil spirits had killed him. "It is a pity for the beautiful, young man," he said. The boy heard it and stood up. "So wrong it is not," he said. The king was astonished and delighted and asked how he had fared. "Good," he replied, "now is the one night past. The other two are also enough." So he went out to the host that made big eyes. "I thought certainly never, I'd see you again," he said, "now you have learned what it is to be afraid?" - "No," replied the boy, "it helps not at all. If some one that would teach me." The next night he again went into the old castle, sat down by the fire and began his old song: "I wish I could but shudder." At midnight was heard loud and rumbling, first softly, then louder and louder. So it was quite quiet, but at one time there was a loud cry and fell half a man down the chimney. "Hey," he shouted, "it's too little. There is missing half." Uproar began again, there was a roaring and howling And now dropped the other half down. "Wait," he said, "I will just blow a little on the fire." As he had done it, and turned back, he saw that the two pieces were put together, and there sat a horrid man in his place. "I did not mean," the boy said, "it is my bench." The man wanted to push him away, but it took the boy is not in, he pushed him away and sat back in its place. There still more men fell down, one after the other. The downloaded dead men's bones and two skulls, and began to play skittles. The boy wanted to be with and asked: "Can I play?" - "Yes, if you have the money," they replied. "I have enough money," he said, "but came here with your balls. They are not really round." Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe. "Now they will roll better," he said, "Hey, now it must go in a hurry." He began then to play with them and lost some of his money. As the clock struck twelve disappeared it all, and he lay down quietly to sleep. The next morning the King came to hear what had happened. "Well, how have you been?" He asked. "I've played cones," replied the boy, "and lost a few pennies." - "Have you not been afraid?" - "Scared!" he cried, "No, I have made merry. I wish I knew what it was like to be afraid." The third night he sat down again pfå bench and said quite sadly, "I wish I could but shudder." Toward midnight, six tall men in with a stretcher. "It's probably my cousin," he thought, "He's dead for a couple of days ago." He began to wave and shouted: "Come, little cousin." They placed the coffin on the ground, but he went to it and took the lid off that there was a dead man. He felt his face that was cold as ice. "Wait, I will warm you," he said, went and warmed his hands by the fire and laid it on the dead man's face, but it was by being just cold. He took him out of the coffin and sat by the fire with him and rubbed his arms that the blood might circulate. Since it does not help, it occurred to him that when two people lie in bed together, they warm each other well. He placed them dead in bed, covered him and lay down beside him. After a small period of time the dead man became also moving. "You see, little cousin," said the boy, "Now have I warmed you." The dead man stood up and shouted: "Now will I strangle you." - "What," he said, "it was a nice thank you. Thou shalt head back in your box." Then he lifted him up, threw him into the casket and shut the lid, and the six men came and carried him away again. "I was not afraid," sighed the boy, "here I learn never in eternity." At that moment a man entered who was greater and more terrible than any of the others. He was very old and had a long white beard. "You wretch," cried he, "now you must learn what it is to be afraid, for now you must die." - "Take it easy," the boy replied, "I surely have enough little to say." - "Thee I will overcome," the man said. "Well, well, do not be so important," the boy said, "I'm probably at least as strong as you." - "We shall see," said the old man, "if you are stronger than I am, I will let you go. Come on, we must try." He led him through narrow, dark passages to a smith's forge, took an ax and struck an anvil into a stroke, "I can do better," said the boy, and went to the other anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to look at it, and his white beard hung down anvil. Then the youth seized the ax, and with one blow he struck a slot in the anvil the old man's beard in with it. "Now I have you," he said, "enough is enough your turn to die." Then he seized an iron bar and beat the old man till he moaned and told him to stop and promised to give him great riches. The boy pulled the ax out and let him get loose. The old man led him back to the castle and showed him three chests of gold, which stood in a cellar. "One is for the poor," he said, "the other for the king, and the third is yours." In it struck twelve, the spirit disappeared, and the boy was left alone in the dark. "I do well enough," he said, groping, found the way back to the room where he lay down by the fire and slept. The next morning the King came and said, "Well, you've learned what it is to be afraid?" - "No," replied the boy. "How can it be? I've had a visit from my dead cousin and a man with a long beard, who has shown me a whole lot of money, but no one told me what it is to be afraid." But the king said: "You have delivered the castle, and I give you my daughter." - "Yes, it is all very well," he replied, "but I still do not know what it is to be afraid." Gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated, but how happy the young king was and how loud he than loved his wife so he said still: "If I could just get scared." It annoyed the queen and her maid said to her: "I'll teach the king what it means to be afraid." She then went down to the stream which flowed through the garden, and took a whole bucket full of carp. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife blanket from him and poured the cold water with carp out of him, so the small fish was floundering around him. When he woke up and cried: "Oh, little wife, I'm so afraid, so afraid. Yes, now I know indeed what it is to be afraid."
The Fellowship of the mouse, bird and Cumberland sausage	217	85	Danish	There was a time a mouse, a bird and a sausage that had been agreed to move together and keep house together. For many years they lived peacefully and happily together and gathered by now a large fortune. The bird flew every day into the forest to fetch firewood, mouse fetched water, made the fire and set the table, and Cumberland sausage made mad.Men it has yellow hair will also have the mug. One day the bird met another bird in the forest and told it about how well it was doing. The second bird called it a poor simpleton, who had to work strictly, while the other two had their good days. For when the mouse had fetched water and made the fire, it went into her little room and sat there in peace until it had to set the table. The sausage was out with his pots and took care that the food is not cooked over, and at noon twisted it a few times through the porridge or green cabbage, it was finished. When the bird came home with his burn, they sat down to eat and so they slept in a row until dawn. It was a glorious liv.Det succeeded in putting bad blood in the bird, then the next day it would not fly out and collect firewood. It had been long enough fellow, it said, and had been for a ride to the other. Now they again try to prey on. The mouse and Cumberland sausage was not much to it, but the bird was still his will put through. They drew lots and it was now such that Cumberland sausage was to fetch wood, the mouse cook and fetch the bird vand.Nu, listen to how it went. The sausage went into the woods, the bird made the fire and the mouse put the pot over and they were waiting now only for the sausage to come home with firewood. But there was no sausage, and eventually flew the bird out to look for it. Not far away he met a dog that was about to devour the poor sausage. The bird did the many accusations, but the dog replied that the sausage had false passports and therefore had forfeited his liv.Fuglen took distressed wood and flew home and told what had happened. The mouse was also very sad, but they agreed that the two would now look to get by as best they could, and keep confidential together. The bird set the table and mouse grabbed the food. Before wore it in, it would make like sausage and pulled through porridge, but it was hardly begun before it dumped down into the pan, and who died it.When the bird came out of the kitchen, there was no mouse. It was frightened, and began to call on it and searched every corner, but found none. While the flustered ran around out there, it came to set fire to the wood. The hurried out to the well to fetch water to extinguish the fire, but it took no heed, but lost the bucket down and fell even afterwards and drowned.
adventure Riddle	1526	407	Danish	There were once three wives who had been turned into arable flowers, but one of them was allowed to be at home at night. One morning, when she again had to go out to the field to his companions and become a flower, she said to her husband: "If you come out on the field in the morning and pick me, I shall be whole and can always be with you." But how could he know her, for the flowers looked quite alike? You see, she had been at home at night, and there was not dropped dew on her as on the other two, so then known the man her.
Ferdinand the Faithful and Ferdinand incredible	1194	531	Danish	There was once a man and a wife. As long as they were rich had no children, but when they were poor they had a little boy. They could not think of who would be godfather to him, so the man when he would go out and look to find en.På the way he met a poor man who asked where he was going. He said now that he was out looking for one that would be godfather to his son, but he was so poor that he could not get any of it. "It fits," the man said, "I am too poor. I want to be godfather to the child, but no gift I can not give. Go home and tell the midwife that she should come to the church with the child." When they got there, the beggar was already there, and the child was baptized and given the name Ferdinand tro.Da they came out, the beggar said: "Now go home. I can not give you anything, and you will not give me anything. " Then he gave the midwife a key and said she would give the father it when she got home. He should save it until the child was fourteen years old, he would go out on the moor, and there was a castle which the key would fit to. What he found there, he had beholde.Da the boy had been a great guy to seven years, he played one day with some other boys, and they told him about all they had received from their godfathers. The boy went home crying. "Did I not gotten any of my godfather?" he asked. "Yes," replied the father, "you've got a key that can open the door to a castle, located on the moors." He went out, but there was no slot to see. Seven years later, when he was fourteen years old, he went back there, and there stood the castle. He went in there and found a horse that was standing in the stable, and was very happy and galloped back to his father. "Now I have a horse, now I also travel," he said. He rode home, and when he had ridden a little, he saw that there was a feather on the ground. He would bend down and pick it up, but let it lie still and thought, "I can probably grab a pen when I need one." But when he heard someone shouting: "Take me with you, Ferdinand faith." He turned around, but when he saw no one, he picked it up. When he had ridden a time, he came to a stream. On the shore lay a fish and writhed and gasped for breath. "I'll help you," he said, taking it by the tail and threw it in the water. The fish stuck his head out of the water and said, "Because you saved me, I will give you this flute. When you are in need, you simply have to blow into it, I'll come and help you, and if you even have lost something in the water, I shall take it up to you. " He rode forward and met little by a man who asked him where he was going. "Right out of the road," he replied. Then the man asked his name, and when he had been told, he said: "As states we are about the same. My name is Ferdinand incredible." They went away together to the nearest kro.Ferdinand incredible might, however, a whole lot of witchcraft and knew always what Ferdinand faith thought of and intend to do. The inn was a beautiful, young girl with a sweet, friendly face. She fell in love with Ferdinand faith, for he was a nice, young man, and asked where he was going. He replied that he would look about the world. The girl then said that he would much rather be there, he could probably get the service of the king who serve or forridder. Ferdinand faith had no further desire to go up and ask for it, but the girl offered when to do it for him. She immediately went to the king and said she had found a neat serve him. He appeared satisfied with it, and Ferdinand faith came up there. He would rather be forrider in so he could keep his horse, and it was he indeed. When Ferdinand incredible heard it, he said to the girl: "Listen, can not you help me?" The girl thought it was not worth having him unfriendly, and therefore went to the king, who also took Ferdinand incredible in its tjeneste.Når Ferdinand incredible morning dressed king on, sighed this constantly: "Just my girlfriend was here." Ferdinand unfaithful, who had a grudge against Ferdinand faith, said to him: "Your Majesty has indeed a forrider. Send him off her and let him lose his head if he did not bring her." The King sent for Ferdinand the Faithful, and commanded him to pick up his girlfriend, and he did not, he dø.Ferdinand Faithful went into the stable to his horse and wept. "Where am I an unhappy man," he sobbed. "What are you crying for?" shouted a voice behind him. He looked around, but saw no one, and went on lamenting: "Now I must leave you, my little horse, now must I die." - "What are you crying for?" said the voice again, he was aware that it was his horse that spoke. "Can you talk, little horse?" he said in astonishment. "I must go and fetch the King's girlfriend, and I can not imagine how I am to do." - "Go to the king and tell him to give you what you ask," said the horse, "and then ask for a ship full of meat and full of bread, so it probably will work for you. Out on the water you would have to adopt some fights that tear you if you do not have meat in them, and some great birds pecking out the eyes of you if they do not get bread. "the king had now a quantity of cattle meat and baked a pile bread, and it was brought aboard the ships. "Sail now just leave," said the horse, "and when the giants come, you just say: Hush, hush, my fighting small, delicious meat skalaf me receive. For the birds say: Hush, hush, my little birds, delicious bread skalaf me I get, they do you no. You have to get a couple of giants with up to the castle where the princess is sleeping and must carry her on board with the bed and everything. " It was all, like the horse had said. Ferdinand gave the giants and the birds the meat and the bread and the contestants helped him to carry the princess down on the ship. When she came to the king, she said that she could not live if she did not get her letters and other papers that lay at home in the castle. Ferdinand incredible got it again arranged such that Ferdinand faith was nicely and should lose his life if he did not get hold of the letters. He went crying into the stable and said, "I'll leave again, little horse, what should I do now?" Horse said he would load the ships again. It went like last time, the giants and the birds were appeased by the meat. When they came to the palace said the horse that he should go into the sleeping chamber lay the writings on the table. Ferdinand the Faithful went in to fetch them and came aboard again, but on the way home, he lost his gåsepen in the water. "It can not I get you back," said the horse, but Ferdinand came when reminded of the flute, and immediately after he had blown it, the fish came with the pen in his mouth. He took the writings to the princess, and the wedding was fejret.Dronningen could not really like the king, because he had no nose, but she would have liked to love Ferdinand faith. Once, when the whole court was assembled, the Queen said she could do feats. She could decapitate a human and put it on again. There was no one who wanted to try, but Ferdinand incredible got it eventually made such that Ferdinand may believe it. The queen cut off as his head, and got it immediately to grow fast again, there was only a red stripe around the neck. "Where have you learned that?" the king asked. "The I can now once," she replied, "I shall also try with you?" He said yes, and she struck now head of him, but pretended that she could not get it stuck again. The king was so buried and Queen married Ferdinand tro.Ferdinand red still on his horse, and one day he said to him that he should ride out on the moors and ride three times in a circle. When he had done, raised the horse on its hind legs and was turned into a prince.
The fisherman and his wife	181	555	Danish	There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a mud ditch near the sea, and he walked every day there to catch fisk.En day he sat down there and medede while he stared and stared into the clear vand.Pludselig went float to the bottom, and when he overtook the line up, he saw that he had caught a large flounder. It began to speak and said to him: "You must finally let me live, dear fisherman, for I am no flounder, but an enchanted prince. Even if you kill me, I will not taste you really. Put me out in water again. " - "Well, yes," said the man, "you do not have to take this on the road. A flounder that can talk, I would not do anything." Then he threw it out again, and it went to the bottom, and there was a long streak of blood behind him on the water. But the fisherman went home to his wife in the ditch. "Have not you caught anything?" Asked his wife when he got home. "No," he replied, "I got enough hold of a flounder, but it said that it was an enchanted prince, and so I let it swim again." - "Have you not asked the question?" asked the wife. "What in the world would I ask it?" the man asked in astonishment. "You might then like to have prompted a small hut," said the woman, "it is not nice to stay in such a mud ditch, here smells so disgusting. Go, call it and ask for a small cabin, you get it enough. " - "Why should I do that?" the man said. "Go now just go there," she said, "you have caught it and allowed it to retain life, it does troth enough." The man did not much like it, but he would also hate to make his wife against and then he went da.Da he came down to the sea, swelled the yellow and green and was not smooth as before. He asked, however, on the bank and said, "Flounders small flounder, come up to me by the sea river, to my wife Isabilvil much more than I will." The flounder came up and asked, "What does she want?" - "My wife says that when I shall now has given you life, I would also ask you for something. She's so sad to stay in the ditch and would like to have a little hut." - "Go home," said the flounder, "she sits already in the hut." The man went home and found his wife sitting on the bench outside a small hut. She took him by the hand and said, "Come in, then you just see how nicely here." So he went in with her. There was a nice hallway and a tidy living room and a small room with two beds. The kitchen and pantry were white and neat, and there stood shiny tin cup and messingkar. Behind the house there was a small farm with chickens and ducks and a small garden with vegetables and fruit. "Is not it nice here?" she asked. "Yes," he replied, "now we can certainly get well." - "Yes, now we'll see how it goes," said the woman. So they sat down to eat, and then they went in seng.Da had undergone fjortendagestid woman said: "Listen, little man, I still think this is too little space. The courtyard and garden are also terribly small. The flounder could then also like to have given us a larger house. I would probably want to stay in a big castle. Go and ask the flounder about it. " - "Ah, little wife," the man said, "what are we going with it, the cottage is good enough." - "You can like to ask about it," said the woman. "No," he replied, "Now the course given us this house. It could be like to be angry when I now come again." But the woman continued to plague him, and eventually he too, although he was very sorry det.Da he came down to the sea was no more green and yellow, but quite dark and muddy. However, there was no further waves, and he stood again on the shore and said, "Flounders small flounder, come up to me by the sea river, to my wife Isabilvil much more than I will." "What does she want now?" said the flounder and stuck his head out of the water. "She will stay in a castle," the man replied sadly. "Go home," said the flounder, "she sits already in the castle." The man went home, and when he came to the place where the house had been, he saw that there was a large castle. His wife stood outside on the stairs and took his hand, and he went with her into the castle. There were so many servants, which closed its doors and for those walls were shiny shiny who stood gilded tables and chairs, and on all the floors lay soft blankets. Behind the castle there was a large farm with horse and cow sheds, and a lovely garden with flowers and trees. A little further away there was a big forest, and there leapt hares and deer merry about. "Is not it lovely?" Asked the wife. "Yes," the man said, "but now we will also beat us to calm down here." - "let's sleep on it," said the woman, and then they went to bed.The next morning woke his wife first and sat up in bed and looked out on the lovely fertile landscape. The man was still asleep, but once she gave him a nudge, so he woke up and said, "I would probably want to rule the country. Go and say to flounder that you will be king." - "I've never wanted to be king," whimpered the man. "Will you not, then I will," she said, "go and tell the flounder," I will be king. "-" No, I do not, "the man said, but he did it anyway eventually. he went down to the sea, which was black and said, "Flounders small flounder, come up to me by the sea river, to my wife Isabilvil much more than I will." "What does she want now," said the flounder. "she will be king," said the man sadly. "Go home, she is already," said the flounder and dived igen.Manden went home, and when he came to the castle he saw that it had been much larger. in front stood a sentry, and swarmed with soldiers. when he came into the castle, he saw that it was entirely of marble and gold, and hung red velvet curtain with large gold tassels. he went into the great hall where the whole court had gathered, and his wife sat on a throne of gold and gems with crown and scepter and orb in hand. on either side of her stood six maidens, one a head offe e than the other. "Are you now king?" he asked. "Yes, I am," she replied. He stood for some time quite lost and looked at her, then said: "Now can you not ask for more." His wife was quite choppy. "I can not stand it," she said, "go down to the flounder and tell him I will be emperor." - "No I do not," the man said, "because he can not make you." - "What?" the woman said, "you will do as I say. I am king, and you are just my husband. He may just as well make me emperor as king." The man finally had to leave, but he was very afraid and thought that the flounder would certainly be angry. The sea swelled angrily and black, but the man stood on the bank and said, "Flounders small flounder, come up to me by the sea river, to my wife Isabilvil much more than I will." "What is the matter now," said the flounder. "My wife will be emperor," answered the man and looked very unhappy. "Go home," said the flounder, "she has it already." When the man got home, the castle became bigger and more magnificent. Soldiers marched back and forth and blew trumpets and beat the drum. When he came into the room, sat his wife on a very high throne with a large golden crown and scepter and orb in hand. On both sides of the throne stood the guards, and the largest was as tall as a giant, and the smallest no bigger than a little finger. In front of the throne were many distinguished people gathered. The man went out from among them and asked, "Are you now the Emperor?" He stood long and chartered her, so he said: "Where it suits you to be emperor." - "What are you standing there staring for," said the woman, "I am emperor, I would be pope. Go down and tell it to flounder." - "It can not be your opinion," said the man, "there's only one pope in the world." - "But I will be pope," said the woman, "I will be pope even today. Hurry to flounder." The man did not want. "Do you fuss?" said she, "till you leave. Remember, I am emperor, and you are just my husband." He then went on their way, but he was so frightened that his knees shook under him. The wind chased the clouds across the sky and whistled through the trees, and far off he could see the ships were thrown back and forth on the waves. Right in the middle was the sky a little bit blue, but the South drew is powerful storms up. The man's voice trembled, he stood on the bank and said, "Flounders small flounder, come up to me by the sea river, to my wife Isabilvil much more than I will." "What does she want now," said the flounder. "She will be pope," said the man trembling with fear. "Go home, she is already," said flynderen.Da he came home, there was a large church surrounded by palaces. People pressed toward the church where his wife was sitting on an even higher throne in golden robes. Long rows light stood beside her, the largest as big as the tallest tower and the smallest no bigger than a tiny candle. Priests and monks stood around the throne, and kings and emperors knelt down and kissed the tip of her slipper. "Are you now pope," the man said. "Yes," the woman said, nodding. The man walked around and looked at her and was so dazzled by all the splendor that when you look into the sun. "Where, however, you are pope," he said then. She did not answer, and he then said: "Now can you not be somewhat larger." Let's sleep on it, "said the woman, and then they went in seng.Manden was tired and slept soundly, but his wife was nowhere not fall asleep. she threw herself from one side of the bed to the other and wondered what she still could be, which was even more than the Pope. as the sun rose, and the whole sky was blushing, she sat up in bed and thought, "I wish I could also get the sun and moon to stand up." she then gave her husband a mighty push, so he woke up. "Quick, get up," she said, "you have to go down to flounder and say that I will be God. "the man was so frightened that he fell out of bed. he thought he had heard wrong, and opened his eyes wide and said," What are you saying? "- "I can not bear to go here and look at the sun and the moon goes up and down, without that I have something to say," she cried, "I never get any quiet hours more. Go down to the flounder and tell him that I will be God. "The man dropped to his knees and held his hands up to her." He can not do, "he said," but please now pleased to be pope. "When was the wife beside herself, her hair flew wildly about her head, and she gave him a kick. so he rushed to stab the clothes and ran, as it came livet.Udenfor raging storm, so he could hardly stand on their feet, the trees was torn up by the roots, the mountains trembled, and large rocks were thrown into the sea. it was black, and it thundered and lightened. the waves went as high as church towers and the white foam sprayed into the air. the man yelled as loud as he could, but could not even hear what he said, "Flounders small flounder, come up to me by the sea river, to my wife Isabilvil much more than I will." "what's the matter?" said the flounder . "She will be our Lord," the man said, and teeth chattering in his mouth. "Go home," said flynd transferee. "She sits back in the ditch." And there she sits still to this day.
Fitchers bird	437	311	Danish	There was once a wizard who took on the form of a poor man, went out and begged and pretty girls away for themselves. No one knew where they were from, and they never came back. One day he came to a man who had three beautiful daughters. He had a basket on her back and looked really old and miserable. He asked for something to eat, and when the eldest daughter came out with a piece of food to him, he touched just by her, and she was forced into the basket. Then he ran, as fast as he could, into the large, dark forest, where his house was. The house was large and stately, and he said to the girl: "You will probably find yourself well here, sweetheart. You can get everything you want." After a short time, he said: "I'm going away for a few days. There you have the keys to the house. You can see you everywhere except in the living room, which this little key unlocks. I forbid you on pain of death. " He gave her an egg and said, "This egg you must take good care of you should preferably always carry it with you. If you lose it, there is a great misfortune." She took the keys and the egg, and promised to do what he had said. When he had left, she walked around and looked around the entire house. The rooms shone with gold and silver, and she thought she had never seen anything so lovely. Eventually she came also to the door, she was not allowed to open. She went by, but curiosity let her have no rest. She examined the key, it looked just like any other keys, and finally she put it in, turned it a little, and the door sprang open. In the middle of the room was a large vessel, filled with blood and pieces of human bodies, and next stood a chopping block with an ax. The girl was so frightened that she dropped the egg, which she held in her hand. When she picked it up again, it was quite soiled with blood and it was not how much she washed and rubbed det.Kort time after the man came home and demanded immediately the keys and the egg. She handed him the trembling, and he saw at once by the red spots that she had been in the blood chamber. "Because you against my will is gone in there," he said angrily, "then you go back into it against your will. You have forfeited your life." Then he dragged her into the room, beheaded her and threw her into the bathtub to the other. "Now I'll get the other," said the wizard again assumed the guise of a poor man and went to the house and begging. The second daughter brought him a piece of bread, and he took her like the first. It was her sister. Curiosity ran away with her, and when the man came home, he killed also her and threw her into the bathtub. Then fetched sorcerer third daughter. She was smarter than the others, and when he left, she hid until the egg carefully and sow so the whole house and also the blood chamber. There Both her sisters lay lifeless and mutilated. But when she got laid his head and limbs to the body, they grew back together, and both girls stood up and kicking and hugged and kissed each other. When the man came home and saw that there was blood on the egg, he said: "You have passed the test, you shall be my bride." He now had no longer any power over her, but had to do what she demanded. "You must first take a basketful of gold to my father," she said, "I will make the wedding while." Her sisters, she had hidden in a small chamber, and she put them now in a basket and laid gold over them, and asked them to send help to her as soon as they got home. Then she called the magician and said, "Wear saw this basket away, but you must not rest on the road. I stand in the window and careful." The wizard raised the basket on his back and walked away, but it was so heavy that sweat ran down his face. When he sat down to rest, said one of the girls in the basket, "Go on. I see from my window that you rest." He thought it was his bride who shouted it, and began to walk again. Once again he sat, but immediately there came a voice that told him to go ahead. Finally, he reached panting and breathless their parents' house kurven.Bruden went home, however, for the wedding and invited all sorcerer's friends. Then she took a skull & crossbones with grinning teeth, put a garland and then put it up in the loft hatch. When she finished it, she smeared themselves with honey, ripped open a quilt up and rolled around in feathers, so she came to look like a wondrous bird, and no one could see that she was a human. Then she went out of the house, and on her way she met some of the wedding guests, who asked, "Where do you come from, you strange bird?" "I come from Fitchers house." "And what may the young bride?" "She standing up there in the wind and rush, and look of the ceiling hatch out. " She met the bridegroom, who was coming slowly. He also asked: "Where are you from, you strange bird?" "I come from Fitchers house." "And what may the young bride?" "She stands up there in the wind and rush, and look of the ceiling hatch out." The bridegroom looked up at the house, and when he saw the skull he thought it was his bride, and nodded kindly there. But when he and his guests had gone into the house, the girl's brothers and relatives who had gone out to help her, and nailed the doors stuck to. Then stack the fire at the house and they all had to perish in the flames.
Frits and Lise	562	1387	Danish	There was once a man and a wife named Frits and Lise. One day Frederick said to his wife: "I will now go into the field. Be sure to have some good food for me when I get home." - "Just go, Frederick," she replied, "you're gonna be happy with me." When mealtime approached, she took a sausage down from the chimney, put it in a pan with butter and put it over the fire. The sausage sizzled and fried, and Lise stood holding the handle of the pan, completely lost in his own thoughts. Suddenly it occurred to her that the sausage the basically well able to stand and cook on while she went into the basement and tapped beer. She took all a pitcher and went down the stairs, but just as she was beginning to tap, she was afraid that the dog up there should snap sausage, and one, two, three, she flew up the stairs. But it was too late. Spitz had already sausage in her mouth and dragged away with it. Lise was not slow, she ran after the dog, completely beyond the field, but it was faster than she, and ran away with the sausage in his mouth. "Gone is gone," said Kate, and turned back, and when she had run himself tired, she walked slowly home. However, running the beer still out of the barrel, for Kate had not turned the tap on, and when the pot was full, run it on the floor, just to the barrel was completely empty. Lise so already on the stairs, what had happened. "What shall I do for Frederick knowing it," she thought. When she had thought back and forth for some time, she came to remember that the attic was a sack of wheat flour, the she would take down and strew it over the beer. "Yes, there it is," she thought, "save in time, he needs it, you suffer." Then she went up to the attic and carried the sack and threw it just over the beer, which she knocked over, and Frits' beer spilled over the floor. "It was right," she thought, "have you eaten fish, you can eat sennepen with." Then she sprinkled flour all over the floor, and when she was finished, she was quite happy and proud so neat and clean that so ud.Ved noon came Frits home. "Well, what do you have for me, my wife?" he asked. "Yes, I was frying a sausage for you, Freddy," she replied, "but while I tapped beer, snatched the dog sausage, and while I was running after it ran all the beer, and then I would dry up with wheat flour , I came to overthrow the pot with your beer, but do not be sad, the cellar is quite dry again. " - "Lise, Lise," said Frits and shook his head, "it should not have done. First you let the dog snap sausage and all our beer run out, and so you waste even the fine, expensive meal." - "Yes, Frederick," the woman replied, "that, you should have told me. I could not possibly know." "When I have such a wife, it's probably best that I fit better on another time , "said Frits. He had collected a good number of thalers together in silver, which he changed into gold and said to Catherine, "you see all the little counters for playing games I will put them in a jar and bury them in the stable. But I would advise you to keep your hands of the dish. " - "I promise you I will not touch them, Frederick," she replied, and then he left. While she was alone at home, came two pedlars who would sell clay containers and jars. "I have no money," said Lise, "but if I can use counters for playing games, then I'll probably have something." - "Yes, why not, let's look at them," they replied. "Go out into the stable and dig under the manger," said Lise, "then you will find it enough, but I dare not go with you." The rogues went thither, and when they found the gold, the stack and left their pots and bowls behind. Lise thought it was a sin not to use all the new things, and as there was more than enough in the kitchen, she hit bottom out of every pot, and set them to the ornaments on the paling outside the house. When Frederick came and saw it, he asked: "What have you done now, Lise?" - "I have bought them for guldspurvene in the stables," she replied, "but I have not taken any of the jar, I let stampede shopkeepers even go out and dig it up." - "Ah," said Frits how it is, you done? It was not counters for playing games, but pure gold, everything we owned. "-" Yes, Frederick, "she replied," but, you should have told me otherwise could I not know. "Catherine stood and thought for a moment, then said, "Listen, Frederick, we'll get the gold again. Let us run after the thieves. "-" Yes, come on, "Said Frederick," but let's take some butter and cheese that we have something to eat on the road. "They went now on site and as Frits was most rapid for the pin, lagged Lise behind. "it is a pure advantage," she thought, "when we go home it's me way in advance." They came to a hill where, on both sides of the road was deep ruts. "No, just look how they have torn and ripped in the poor soil," said Kate, "it is will never be that in the days of his life whole again." She bent down to stroke the butter on the ruts, the wheels could go easier, and thus fell a cheese out of her pocket and rolled down the mountain. "the way I will not go again," she thought, "it's best, one of the other channels down after it," and then she took another cheese and threw it down the mountain. But they did not come back, and she threw as a third cheese down there. "Perhaps they are not as much of going alone," thought she, and when no a f the three turned out again, the fourth she rolled down to them. "It's very strange thing," she thought, "but it may be that the latter are lost." Eventually, she became angry and threw both the fifth and sixth down there, and she had no more. For a time she stopped and waited, but since there still did not come, she thought, "You are good to send in search of death, for I will be so nice long gone, but do you think I bother stand and wait for you . Now I go, so you can come afterwards, I have younger legs than I do. " She went on, and some time after she reached Frits, who was waiting for her because he wanted something to eat. "Now let me get some of what you have," he said, and she handed him a piece of dry bread. "Where's the butter and cheese?" he asked. "The butter has all my heart lubricated in the wheel tracks, Frederick," she replied, "but the cheeses come soon enough. I lost one, so I sent the others away to get it." - "You should not have done, Lise," he said, "it is to smear the butter on the road and cheeses run down the hill." - "Yes, I could then really do not know Frits," she replied, "that, you then have told me." They ate the dry bread. "I suppose you locked properly before you went away?" asked Frits. "No, you should have told me, Frederick." - "So it's best you go home and do it. Take also some food, so I wait for you here." Lise went on the way home while she was thinking: "Cheese and bread tastes him appear not really. It's better I take some dried apples and some vinegar with." When she came home she bolted the upper half-door and took the bottom on the shoulder, because she thought that when the door was safe house had well be good stored up. She took his time. "So he can rest himself so much the longer," she thought. At last she reached him. "There you can see what a clever woman, you have," she said, "now you can even take care of the house." - "God, what is this thing a wife I have," he cried, "she goes not go and take the door of the house so everyone can run in there. Now it's too late to go back home, but you should indeed be allowed to drag the door itself. " - "Will do, Frederick," she replied, "but the apples and the jar with vinegar is too heavy. I hang it on the door so it can bear it." They went into the forest and were looking for the thieves, but did not find them, and when it was dark, they climbed up a tree to sleep there at night. A moment later a few of the kind of guys who go with what will follow, and finds what no one has lost. They sat down under the tree. Frederick got gently slide down the other side and collected some stones that he would beat thieves to death, but he could not hit them. "Now it will soon be morning," they cried, "the wind is shaking pine cones down." Lise sat up there with the door on the shoulder. It was so heavy, and when she thought it was the apples that had made it, she said Frederick, "I'll have to throw the pears down." - "Do not," he replied, "so betray us after all." - "Well, I can not stand it anymore," she whimpered. "Well do it then in and be hanged." The apples rolled on down between the branches, and the rascals below said, "The leaves are falling somewhat." The door was still to be heavy, Catherine said shortly after: "I will have to pour out the vinegar." - "Do not," he replied, "so betray us after all." - "Well, I can not stand it," she said miserably. "Well, do it as damn it." When the vinegar dripped down on the thieves said: "dew drops enough already." - "It can not surely be the door that is so heavy," said Kate, as it does not help. "Now I throw the door down, Frits." - "You must really not," he replied, "you betray us after all." - "But I can not stand it," she moaned. "Yes do it because the devil's name." It gave a bang as the door fell down, and thieves for up quickly. "It's hell coming after us," they shouted and ran off with all his strength and left everything behind them. When the two came down from the tree, they found all their gold and took it with sig.Da they got home, Frederick said, "Now you must also be diligent and order something, Lise." - "Yes, I will, Frederick," she replied, "I will go into the field and cut corn." When she got there, she thought: "Shall I eat before I cut, or shall I sleep before I cut? It is certain, I will eat first." When she had eaten, she was sleepy, and when she began to cut, and she half in a dream cut all her clothes to pieces, apron, skirt and chemise. When she awoke she lay there half naked and could not find it out. "Is it me, or is it not me," she said, "no, no, it can not be me." Meantime night came, and she ran into the village, knocked on the window and shouted: "Hey, Fritz, I would like to know whether she is at home." - "She's in there and sleep," he replied. "Well, I'm already come home," she thought and ran videre.Lidt after she met some guys who were out to see to find something to steal. "Shall I help you?" she asked, and when the thieves thought that she must be known that, they said yes. Lise went over and stood up outside a house and shouted: "Hey, what have I. We would like to steal." - "It never goes well," said the thieves, and just wished they were with her again. "Can you go out and get us some of the beets, which stands along the parson's field," one of them asked. Lise went out and bent down and started catching them up, but she was so lazy that she did not gather them. At that moment a man came walking by. He stood and looked at her and thought it was the devil who rummaged around in the beets. He ran all forces to the parsonage, and shouted: "Sir. Reverend, sir. Pastor, the devil rooting up in your pipes." - "Oh dear," said the priest, "and I lag so I can not even go out and conjure him away." - "Then I will take you on my back," said the man and he carried with him. When they came out on the field traveled Lise precisely. "It's the devil, that's the devil," cried the priest, and so they ran both, fright ran priest much faster on his lame foot than the man on his two healthy.
Frog king or iron Henrik	4	440	Danish	In the old days, when you could get their wishes fulfilled, there lived a king who had a daughter who was so beautiful that the sun himself, who has seen so much, wondered each time he shone over her. Near the castle there was a great dark wood, and inside was a well under an old lime tree. When it was hot, the king's daughter into the forest and sat down at the water, and when she was bored, she played ball with a gold ball, which was her boyfriend legetøj.En day it happened accidentally that she grabbed the ball again. It rolled away from her right out in the water. She followed it with her eyes, but it vanished, and the well was so deep that you could not see the bottom. She began to cry louder and louder, and was very distraught. At once she heard a voice: "What's the matter, little princess, you're crying, so it could touch a stone." When she turned around, she saw a frog stretching his ugly fat head out of the water. "Oh it's you, old water dog," she said, "I weep because my golden ball has fallen into the well." - "Do not worry," said the frog, "I'll help you. What do I get when I fetch up your ball again?" - "Anything you want," said the princess, "my clothes, my pearls and my gems, and if you care about it, you may also like to get my gold crown." - "Thank you," said the frog, "all that I do not care about. But will you promise me to keep me and play with me and let me sit beside you at the table and eat off your plate and drink from your cup and sleep with you in your bed, I'll dive down and fetch your golden ball. " - "I promise it all together when you just want to pick up my ball," she answered. But when she thought to herself: What a crazy frog! It can not be my playmate. It should probably be nicely down with the other frogs and kvække.Frøen dived down and came gradually up again with the ball in his mouth. The laid it in the grass, and she took the delighted and ran away with it. "Wait," cried the frog, "take me with you. I can not run as fast as you." But it was no use, it croaked so loudly it could. She did not hear it, but hurried home and soon forgot about the poor frø.Næste day when the little princess and the king and the whole court were eating for dinner, she heard something coming up the marble stairs, plop, plop . Then there was a knock on the door, and a voice shouted: "Shut up, little princess." She went to see who it was, and when she opened the door, sat the frog outside. She slammed the door and sat down to the table again, but she was not really happy. The king could probably see that there was something wrong with her and ask, "What is it that you sit and are afraid of? Is there a giant out there and will take you?" - "No, no fight," she replied, "it's a horrid frog." - "But what will it be?" - "Oh father when yesterday I was sitting at the well and played the ball dropped ball in the water. So I cried, and the frog brought it to me and then I had to love it that it was going to be my playmate. But I was sure enough confident that it could not get out of the water. Now it is out there and going in. " However knocked frog once again and shouted: "Small prinsesseluk door, I stand out here and venter.Den salary you me lovedved well yesterday, comes jegnu and downloads." Then the king said: "What you have promised, you must keep. Go and let him in." She did as he said, and the frog came in and jumped right on her heels to her chair. "Lift me up," it said. Princess did, but not before the king told her to. When the frog had first come up on the chair, it would up on the table, and when it came up there, said: "Now push your golden plate to me, then we'll eat together." She did, but everybody might see that she did not like it. The frog feasted heartily, but every morsel seemed to stick in her throat. "Now I'm tired," he said, when he had devoured, "carry me into your living room, so we put us to sleep in your silk bed." She started crying because she was afraid of the cold frog and did not dare touch it, and now must sleep in her pretty clean bed! But the king was angry and said: "You must not then despise the one who helped you in your distress." She took it as two fingers and put it in a corner inside his room. As she lay in her bed, he came creeping up, saying, "I'm tired, I sleep as well as you. If you do not take me up to you, I say it to your father." Then she really angry, took the frog and threw it with all his might against the wall: "Now you may well get rested up enough, your vile seed," shouted hun.Men the same, she was quite frightened, because instead of the frog there was a prince with beautiful kind eyes and looked at her. He said that an evil witch had turned him into a frog, and she was the only one who could save him. She ran after his father, and when he had heard the story, he decreed that the prince was to marry the princess. Then they went to bed, and when the sun the next morning awoke them, a van stopped, drawn by eight white horses. They had white ostrich feathers on his head and was fastened with gold chains. Back off the wagon the faithful Henry, the young king's servant. He was sad because his master was turned into a frog that he had placed three iron bands over his heart, not that it should burst with grief. The faithful Henry lifted now the prince and the princess into the car, and stood behind them, and his heart swelled with joy that his master was frelst.Da they had driven a while, the prince heard that there was something behind him that creaked as if it was broken. He turned and said, "Did you hear Henrik axis burst?" "No, my lord, the carriage goes steady and firm, it was only the band, I carried on my heart that not it would burst of pain as I had tempt a wretched livhos frogs and toads among seaweed and reeds. " Twice more the prince heard something that creaked and both times he thought that the carriage was broken. But it was only iron bands on the belief Henry's heart that jumped because his chest was full of happiness that his men were saved.
Tinderbox	1999	562	Danish	A soldier came marching along the high road: one, two! one two! He had his knapsack on his back and a sword at his side, for he had been in the war and was now returning home. Then he met an old Witch: she was so ugly, her lower lip hung down upon her breast. She said: "Good evening, soldier! Where you have a fine sword and a large knapsack, you are a real soldier! Now you need to get as much money you will have!" "Thank you, old witch!" said the soldier. "You see that big tree?" said the witch, pointing to a tree which stood beside them. "It's quite hollow inside, and you must climb to the top, you will see a hole that you can let yourself down and get deep into the tree I will tie a rope round your body, so that I can pull you up again when you shout at me! "" What am I to do down in the tree? " asked the soldier. "Get money!" said the witch, "you must know that when you get down to the bottom of the tree, then you're a big time, which is quite light, for that burn over a hundred lamps. Then you will see three doors, you can open them up, key sitting in. if you go into the first chamber, as you see on the floor a large chest, on top of it sits a dog; he has a pair of eyes as big as teacups, but do not care for that I give you my blue checked apron, and you can spread out on the floor; then go up quickly and take the dog, and set him on my apron, open the chest, and take as many shillings as you like. They are all copper, but will you rather have silver, then you go into the next room, but there sits a dog that has a pair of eyes as big as mill-wheels, but do not break you, and set him on my apron and roof you of money! Do you want gold, it also lets you get and it so much that you will wear when you go into the third chamber. But the dog that sits on the money chest there has two eyes as big as the Round Tower. It's a real dog, you may think! But do not break you something about! Put him on my apron, and he will not hurt you; and take out of the chest as much gold as you want! "" It was not so bad, "said the soldier." But what shall I give you, you old witch? For something you will well have to, I suppose! "" No, "she replied," not a single shilling will I have! You just bring me an old tinder-box, which my grandmother left behind the last time she went down there! "" Oh! Let me tie the rope round my body, "said the soldier." Here it is, "said the witch," and here is my blue checked apron. "So the Soldier climbed up the tree, let himself slip down into the hole, and stood, as the Witch had said, in the great hall where the three hundred lamps brændte.Nu he opened the first door. Ugh! There sat the dog with eyes as big as teacups, staring at him. "You're a network guy," said the soldier, put him on the witch's apron and took as many shillings as he could have in his pocket, closed the chest, put the dog up again and went into the other room. there sat the dog with eyes as big as mill-wheels. "You should not see so much in me, "said the soldier," you could make your eyes! "and then he put the dog on the witch's apron, but when he saw the many silver money in the chest, he threw away all the copper money he had and filled his pockets and his knapsack with nothing but silver. Then he went into the third room, it was disgusting! the dog there had virkeli gt two eyes as big as the Round Tower! And they ran around in his head like wheels! "Good evening!" said the soldier, touching his cap, for such a dog he had never seen before; but when he saw little of him, he thought, now it may well be enough, lifted him onto the floor and opened the chest, no Heaven preserve us! Where there was much gold! He could buy the entire Copenhagen and kagekonernes sugar pigs, all the tin soldiers, whips and rocking horses that were in the world! It was indeed money! Now the Soldier threw away all the silver money he had filled his pockets and his knapsack, and took gold instead; yes, all his pockets, knapsack, cap and boots were filled, so he could hardly walk! Now he had money! He put the dog on the chest shut the door, and then called up through the tree: "Now pull me up, you old witch!" "Have you got the tinderbox?" asked the witch! "It's true!" The soldier said, "I had clean forgotten," and he went and took it. The Witch drew him up, and as he stood on the road, with pockets, boots, knapsack and cap full of money. "What will you do with the tinderbox," said the soldier. "It's not your business!" said the witch, "now you have the money, now give me the tinder!" "Nonsense!" said the soldier, "you will not tell me what you want with it, I will draw my sword and cut off your head!" "No," said heksen.Så Soldier cut off her head. There she lay! But he tied up all his money in her apron, took it as a bundle on his back, put the tinderbox in his pocket and went straight to the city.It was a lovely town, and the beautiful tavern he went in, asked for the finest rooms and food which he loved, for now he was rich because he had so many penge.Tjeneren who had to clean his boots certainly thought it was some remarkably old pair for such a rich gentleman had, but he had not yet bought any new ones ; the next day he got boots to go with, and handsome clothes! Now the soldier become a fine gentleman, and they told him about all the stuff that was in their city, and their king, and what a pretty princess his daughter was. "Where can I see her?" asked the soldier. "She is not going to get to see!" they all said, "she lives in a large copper castle with so many walls and towers on! No one but the King may go in and out to her because there is prophesied that she will marry a common soldier, and the king may not like! "" the one I'd like to see !, "said the soldier, but he could not be allowed! Now he lived merrily, went to the theater, drove in the king's Garden and gave the poor so much money and it was beautifully done! He knew from old times how hard it was not to own a dime! Now he was rich, had fine clothes, and gained many friends, who all said he was a rare one, a real gentleman, and all this gratified like! But as he spent money every day, and was never carried any, he had at last only two shillings left and had to move away from the beautiful rooms, where he had lived, and to a small garret under the roof, and clean his boots, and mend them with a darning, and none of his friends came to him, because there were so many stairs to go up ad.Det was quite dark night, and he could not even buy himself a light, but then he remembered that there was a piece in the tinderbox he had taken in the hollow tree where the witch had helped him. He got the tinderbox, but just as he struck fire and the sparks flew from the flint, the door sprang open, and the dog with eyes as big as teacups, and whom he had seen in the tree, stood before him and said, "What does my lord!" "What!" The soldier said, "it's a famous Tinder-box, if I can get what I want! Give me some money," he said to the dog, and the VIPs was gone! He was back again, and with a great bag full of shillings in his mund.Nu Soldier knew what it was a tinderbox Did he once, the dog came who sat on the chest of copper money, he struck twice, came the one who had silver money, and if three times, the dog who had the gold. Now the Soldier moved back into the fine rooms, and appeared again in handsome clothes, and then immediately known all his friends to him, and they were so fond of him. Then he thought again: It is very strange thing that one can not get to see the Princess! She is very beautiful, what they all say! But what can it help when she has always to sit in the great copper castle with the many towers. Can I not get to see her? Where is my tinderbox! And so he struck a light, and VIPs came the dog with eyes as big as teacups. "It is midnight, certainly," said the soldier, "but I should very much like to see the princess, if only for a moment!" The dog was outside the door, and before the soldier could, he returned with the princess, she was asleep on the back and was so beautiful that anyone could see it was a real princess; The soldier could not help it, he had to kiss her, for it was a really soldat.Hunden ran back again with the princess, but when it was morning, and the King and Queen were drinking tea, the Princess said she had had a strange dream in the night about a dog and a soldier. She had ridden on the dog, and the soldier had kissed her. "It was certainly a nice story!" said dronningen.Nu had one of the old court ladies watch by the princess's bed the next night to see if it really was a dream, or what it could være.Soldaten longed very much again to see the lovely princess, and so came when the dog at night, took her and ran as fast as he could, but the old lady put on water boots, and ran just as strongly afterwards; When she saw that they were gone inside a large house, she thought, now I know where it is, and wrote with a piece of chalk a large cross on the door. Then she went home and lay down, and the dog came up with the Princess; but when he saw that there was written a cross on the door where the Soldier lived, he also took a piece of chalk and made crosses on all the gates in the city, and it was wisely done, for now the lady could not find the right port when there were crosses on them sammen.Om morning early came the king and Queen, the old court lady and all the officers to see where the princess had been! "there it is!" King said when he saw the first door with a cross on it. "No, there it is, my dear husband!" Queen said that as the second gate with a cross. "But there is one and there is one!" they all said; where they saw was that cross on the gates. So could they probably see it could not help anything to the søgte.Men queen was a very clever woman, who could do more than ride in a coach. She took her large gold scissors, cut a piece of silk into pieces, and made a neat little bag; she filled with buckwheat flour, and tied it round the princess, and when it was done, she cut a small hole in the bag, so the grains could linger all the way, where the princess kom.Om night the dog came again, took the Princess on his back, and ran with her to the soldier, who was very fond of her and would gladly have been a prince, to make her kone.Hunden did not observe how the flour ran way from the castle to the soldier window where he had climbed with the princess. In the morning so when the king and queen enough where their daughter had been, and then they took the Soldier and put him in kachotten.Der he sat. Oh, how dark and dull, and so they said to him: Tomorrow you will be hanged. It was not amusing to hear, and his lighter he had forgotten at the inn. In the morning he could see through the iron grating of the little window watching people rush out of town to see him hanged. He heard the drums and saw the soldiers marching. All the people were running out; there was also a shoemaker's boy with leather apron and slippers on, galloped so fast that one of his slippers flew off and struck against the wall where the soldier sat looking through the iron rods. "Not, you shoemaker's boy, you need not be in such a hurry "the soldier said to him," there will be nothing before I come! But you will not run to where I lived and bring me my tinder-box, you shall have four shillings, but you must put you ! " The shoemaker's boy wanted to get the four shillings, and scurried off to fetch tinder, gave it to the soldier, and now we shall get to hear! Outside the resort had been built a great gallows round it stood the soldiers and many hundred thousand people. The King and Queen sat on a splendid throne opposite the judges and the whole råd.Soldaten already stood on the ladder, but when they would put the rope round his neck, he said that was always granted a sinner before he suffered death penalty to get an innocent request. He wanted so much to smoke a pipe, it would be the last pipe he got in this verden.Det King would not say no to, so the soldier took his tinder box and struck fire, one, two, three! And there stood all the dogs, the one with eyes as big as teacups, the one with eyes as a mill wheel and the one who had eyes as big as towers, "Help me now, that I may not be hanged!" said the soldier, and the dogs fell upon the judges and all the council, seized one by the leg and another by the nose, and tossed them many feet into the air, so they fell down and were dashed to pieces. "I will not!" King said, but the biggest dog took him and the Queen, and threw them after the others; Then the soldiers were afraid, and the people cried: "Little Soldier, you shall be our king and marry the beautiful Princess!" So they placed the soldier in the king's carriage, and the three dogs ran on in front and cried "Hurray!" And the boys whistled through their fingers, and the soldiers presented arms. The princess came out of the copper castle, and became Queen, and she liked! The wedding lasted for eight days, and the dogs sat at the table and made big eyes.
The riddle	209	851	Danish	There was once a king's son who went out to look around the world. The only thing he had brought with him, was a faithful servant. One day they went into a great forest, and when evening came, they did not know where to sleep at night. The prince got her eye on a small house in the distance, and as he got closer, he saw that there was a beautiful young girl outside. He asked her if he and his servant find shelter for the night. "It is I like," the girl said sadly, "but I advise you from it." - "Why?" he asked. The girl sighed. "Because my step-mother practices wicked arts in there," she said, "and she is not disposed toward strangers." The prince could probably understand that it was a bad witch, they had come to, but he was not afraid, and he did not want to wander further around the dark forest, he went into the house. Inside sat an old woman in an armchair by the fire and looked at them with his red eyes. "Good evening," she said, "Sit down and rest only you." Then she began to blow on the fire that burned in a small saucepan. The daughter warned the strangers that they should not eat or drink anything for the old-made potions. They went to bed and slept soundly until dawn. When they were making ready to take off, and the prince was already seated on his horse, the old woman came out to them and said, "Wait, I must first drink farewell." She went in to retrieve it, and however save the prince of the place, so when she came out, there was nobody left except the waiter, who stood bracing saddle onto the horse. "Bring your master," she said, handing him a glass, but at the moment it went broke and the poison that splashed onto the horse, was so strong that it immediately fell down dead. The servant ran after his master and told him what had happened, but he would not lose his seat, he ran back to fetch it. When he came to the house, sat a raven dead horse. "We may not get any better today," said the servant, killed the raven and took it with him. They went ahead and went all day without getting out of the woods. Late in the evening they came to a tavern and went inside. The waiter gave the host the raven, that he should do it. The house belonged, however, twelve robbers, and when they came home and saw the strangers, they would kill them. First, they would not have anything to live on, and they sat down to dinner with the host and began to eat soup and ravnekød. But hardly had they swallowed a mouthful before they all fell down dead, for the raven had eaten the toxic horsemeat. There was no no one else left in the house but the innkeeper's daughter, who had no part in their godless deeds. She showed the prince all the treasures that were found in the house, but he let her keep it all and rode on with his tjener.De flickered time around, and once they came to a town where there was a beautiful and very proud princess . She had let announce that she would marry the one who could give her a riddle which she could not guess, but she guessed it might suitor, his head. She had time to think about for three days, but she was so clever that she always solved the riddle long before. Many had already perished in this manner, but when the prince saw how beautiful she was, he decided to risk all to win her. He went up to her and asked: "What is it: a slew none, and yet slew twelve." She pondered and pondered what it is could be, but she could not figure it out. She opened her riddle books, but there was no solution. The riddle went over her sense. When she did not know how she should do, she ordered her maid to sneak into the royal son's bedroom and hear if he spoke in his sleep. But the waiter had put in his master's bed, and when the girl came in, he tore off her jacket to her and chased her out. The next night the princess sent her maid in there to see if she could succeed better with them, but the waiter also took her jacket and chased her out. The prince thought now that he had nothing more to fear, and the next night he lay in his own bed. Then came the princess into a tågegrå cape and sat down beside him. When she thought he was asleep, she began to speak to him and thought he would perhaps like so many answer in his sleep. "What is this, a slew none," she asked. "It's a raven, which ate of a horse that had gotten married, and died of it," he replied. "And what is it, and slew twelve?" she asked again. "That means twelve murderers who ate the raven and died," he replied. He had not slept, and when she would sneak away again, he took hold of her jacket and kept it. The next morning, the King's daughter that she had solved the riddle, let the twelve judges and told them what the solution was. But the king's son asked if he could be allowed to speak and said, "She stole into my room in the night and caused me to say what it was, otherwise she could not tell it." The judges asked if he could prove it, and he made when the waiter bring the three capes. As the judges saw the gray, as the princess used to wear, they said: "Let it be embroidered with gold and silver, so it must be the King's daughter bride cape."
Gåsepigen	847	533	Danish	There was once an old Queen, whose husband had died many years ago. She had a beautiful daughter who, as she grew up, was promised in marriage to a prince who lived far away. As the wedding approached, and the princess had to travel to the foreign country, packed the old many costly cases together for her gold and silver, precious cups and jewelry in short, everything that belonged to a royal dowry, for she loved her child high. She had also a lady's maid go with who had to give her to the prince. And they were each a horse to ride, and the Princess called Falada and could speak. Since parting came, the old mother into the bedroom, took a knife and cut her finger so that it bled. Then she let three drops fall on a white cloth, gave her daughter and said, "Take care of it, my child, you will need it along the way." Then they took leave of each other, and the Princess put the napkin into his chest , mounted his horse and rode off to his groom. When they had ridden an hour, she was very thirsty, and she said to the maid: "Go down and get me some water from the stream in the cup that you've taken. I would like to have something to drink." - "If you're thirsty, you can even go down and put you on the water and drink," said the chambermaid, "I do not want to be your girl." The princess was so thirsty that she alighted, bent over the stream and drank from it, for she did not dare drink the gold cup. "Oh, God help me," she sighed, and the three drops of blood answered, "If your mother knew, it would break her heart." But the princess was gentle and good, said nothing and mounted her horse again. They rode some mil, but it was warm and the sun was burning, and she was thirsty again. When they came to a river, she said to the waiting woman, for she had quite forgotten the ugly words: "Get me some water in my golden cup." But the chambermaid said still more impertinent: "Get yourself something to drink. I will not be your girl." Thirst-ridden princess so strong that she dismounted and crying bent over the water. "God help me," she said, and drops of blood replied: "If your mother knew, it would break her heart." While she drank and leaned far dropped the cloth drops of blood and floated down the stream, and she was so anxious that she did not notice it. But the chambermaid had seen it and welcomed the fact that she now had power over the princess. When she had lost the drops of blood had, her strength and power left her. When she wanted to mount her horse, named Falada, said the chambermaid, "I will sit on Falada. Set you up on my horse," and the bride had to do it. So she ordered with harsh words princess to take off her rich garments, and her plain, and finally forced her her to swear, out there in the open, she would not tell anyone. If she did not report this oath, she would immediately die. But Falada so it all and laid close attention to det.Kammerjomfruen sat now up Falada and princess on the poor horse, and they rode on till they came to the royal castle. There was great joy at their arrival. King's son hastened to meet them, lifted the waiting woman from her horse, thinking she was his bride. He led her up the stairs, but the princess had to stay outside. When the old king looked out the window, he saw her and saw how beautiful and gentle she was. He immediately went into the prince's room and asked the bride who it was, she had brought with her and that was down there in the yard. "Oh, I took her to have some company on the road," she replied, "Give her something to order so she does not go and run. " But the old king did not know what he was going to put her, and finally he said: "She may well help the little boy who feed geese." The boy named Konrad, and Princess could now help him to guard gæssene.Kort time after the false bride said to the Prince: "Would you do me a favor, dear husband?" - "Yes, I would like," he replied. "Let the knacker decapitate the horse I came here upon. It annoyed me how the way." In fact, she was afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to the Princess. But it was the princess heard that the belief Falada was dying, and she promised when knacker some money if he would do her a favor. In the city there was a large, dark port, and every morning and evening drives she geese through. There she asked him nail Faladas head stuck so she once again could see it. The man promised, and when he had cut off the head of the horse, he beat it up under the dark port.Da she and Conrad quite early the next morning walked through the gate, she said: "Oh, Falada that hang you," and the head replied "Alas, if your poor mother nudin heavy, heavy fate knew Daville break her heart." Then they went out of town and drive geese to the field. There she sat down, took off his hair that shone like pure gold, and Konrad welcomed the golden luster and would pluck a few hairs. But when she said: "Blow now, everyone would win, take Conrad's hat, and let him not findeførend jegmit hair has set." Then there came a gust of wind that the hat wing of Konrad, and he had to run after it, far across the meadow. When he came back, she had combed and arranged her hair, and he could not get any of it. He was angry and did not speak a word to her, and then watched the geese until evening, and they went hjem.Da the next morning walked through the dark gate princess said: "Oh, Falada that hang you," and the horse replied: "Ah, if your poor mother nudin heavy, heavy fate knew Daville break her heart." Out in the fields she sat down again to himself, and when Konrad grabbed at her hair, she said quickly: "Blow now, everyone would win, take Conrad's hat, and let him not find until jegmit hair set. " Immediately flew hat off to him and he had to run far away for it. When he came back, she had her hair, and he could not get hold of any of it. So herded the geese until it was aften.Da they got home, Conrad went to the old king and said, "I will no longer guard the geese with that girl." - "Why not?" the king asked. "Because she vexes me the whole day," said Konrad, and the king ordered him to tell what then was wrong with her. "Well, when we in the morning coming through the dark gate with the geese, she says to a horse's head hanging on the wall:" Oh, Falada that hang you, "and it replies:" Ah, if your poor mother nudin heavy, mother knew, her heart would burst. "and Conrad related all, how it came out on the meadow, and he had to run after her hat.Kongen commanded him to go to drive the geese next morning, went and sat at the gate and listened how the maiden spoke to Falada. then he went after them into the fields and hid in a bush. There he saw now with his own eyes that they drive away with the geese, and a little after she sat down and untied her long hair that shone like gold. Then she said, "Blow now, everyone would win, take Conrad's hat, and let him not find until jegmit hair set." When there came a gust of wind, and Konrad had to rush off after his hat while the maiden combed and braided her hair. the old king saw it all, and listed went unnoticed away. When the goose-girl came home in the evening he called her and asked why she was doing all this. "I dare not tell you," she replied, "not for a human dare I complain my distress. I have sworn it out under the clear sky, otherwise I would have had to be killed." How much he penetrated her, she would not say it. "If you will not tell me, confide oven your grief," he saw and walked away. She crept into the stove, began to complain and cry and came with everything that was in her heart. "Here I am abandoned by all people," she said, "and yet am I a princess. My faithless lady's maid forced me to take my royal garments, and took my place at the prince, while I may serve as a simple goose girl. If my mother knew, her heart would burst with grief. " The old King was standing outside by the oven and heard everything she said. He came in, called her and let her wear magnificent clothes, and she was so beautiful, so it was almost a miracle. Now called the old king of his son and told him that he had been a false break, was really only a virgin. Here was his right bride, and it was she who had been the goose girl. The young king was glad at heart when he saw how beautiful and good she was, and there was now a great feast to which all friends and acquaintances were invited. At the top of the table sat the bridegroom with the chambermaid on one side and the princess on the other, but she was dazzled and could not recognize her in the brilliant splendor. As they ate and drank and were merry, the old King gave the waiting that he would give her an enigma. He told of one who had betrayed his master quite the same way as she had deceived the princess. "What judgment deserve such a person?" he asked. "He shall be clothed completely," replied the false bride, "and put in a barrel inside is studded with sharp nails. Two white horses from the barrel and pull it off, street to street, until he door." - "You are the culprit," said the old king, "and you have condemned yourself." When the punishment was served, celebrated the young king her wedding with the princess, and they reigned long in joy and gladness.
Gåsevogtersken at the well	1711	923	Danish	There was once a very old woman, who lived out in a deserted place among the mountains in a small house and herded geese. Around there was a large forest, and every morning rocked the old woman took her crutch. So she had terribly busy and was so diligent that you would not have thought such an old one could endure. She collected grass for her geese, picked all the wild fruit she could reach, and carried it all home on his back. One would have thought that the heavy load would have weighed her to the ground, but she always brought it safely home. When she met someone she said kindly: "Hello, what a beautiful day it is. Yes, you wonder that I should drag grass about, but each has his carry on." People did not like to meet her and went rather a detour. If a farmer came by with his son, he said softly to him, "Beware of the old that she knows more than the Lord's Prayer. It is a witch." One morning, a handsome young man through the woods. The sun shone, the birds sang, a gentle breeze wafted through the foliage, and he was happy and in good spirits. He had yet to meet any man, but suddenly he saw the old witch who was kneeling on the ground cutting grass with a sickle. She already had a whole load into her cloth, and beside it stood two baskets filled with wild apples and pears. "How can you carry all that, mother?" he asked. "I must now again," she replied. "Rich people's children do not need it. But the farmer said: Turn not on, do not be stupid, you know very well your spine is curved," and as he stood there and looked at it, she asked, "Will you be able to help me? I have a straight back and young legs, you will indeed be an easy matter. My house is not far from here. it is set behind the mountains on a hot, so I will of course be there in an instant. " The young man felt sorry for the old. "My father is certainly a rich count and no peasant," he replied, "but to show you that it is not only peasants who can carry anything, I will take your bundle for you." - "It was great," said the old man. "You must certainly go five miles, but it can not do anything to you. But you must carry the apples and pears." The count was a bit apprehensive when he heard that the road was so long, but the old would not let him. She hung the bundle on his back and gave him the basket on his arm. "You see how easy it goes," she said. "Oh, it's now not so easy," replied the count, and bit his lip, "the bundle is so heavy, as if it were filled with stones, and one would really believe that the apples and pears were of lead. I can hardly breathe. " He had a mind to put everything down again, but the old woman would not have. "There you see," she said mockingly, "a young gentleman will not carry what I so often dragged on. It is easy enough to come up with nice words, but when things get serious, get your heels another sound. What are you standing there now, waiting instead to take the legs with you. there's really not that take the bundle off again. " As long as they went on the flat road, it went fairly well, but when they came up on the mountain, and stones rolled down under his feet as if they were alive, he could not stand it anymore. Sweat beaded on his forehead and took him one moment and cold, warm down your spine. "I can not anymore," he said, "I have to rest a little." - "Not here," said the old woman, "when we come home to me, you can rest, but now you must go forward. You may easily never know what it might be good for." - "Now you are shameless," said the count and tried to throw the bundle from him but he could not. It was as if it had grown fast to his back. He tossed and turned, but it did not help. The old laughed and jumped around on his crutches. "Do not get angry, sir. Count," she said, "you are growing as red in the face as a turkey cock. Wear In your bundle patiently. When we came home, I get good tip." There was nothing else for him to do but to submit to his fate, and crawl along patiently behind the old. She was still nicer to the pin, while the bundle became heavier and heavier. Suddenly she jumped up and sat on top of it, and the wind dry than she looked, she was yet heavier than the stoutest country lass. The young man's legs shook under him, but when he did not go, hit the old him about the legs with a sprig and nettles. Groaning, he climbed the mountain, and when he finally reached the old woman's house, he was about to drop. When the geese perceived the old, they flapped their wings, stretched his neck and ran to meet her, while they screamed: "Endless games, endless games, endless games." Beyond them a female human, something for years, big and strong but ugly as sin. "Has anything happened since I stayed away so long?" she asked the old. "Nothing hurt, my girl," said the Witch, "on the contrary, the kind gentleman, who has carried my bundle for me, and when I got tired, he also took me on his back. And the road has not seemed long to us. We have had themselves heartily. " The old woman slid down, finally, took the bundles and baskets, and said kindly to the young man: "Now seat yourself on the bench in front of the door and the rest of you. You have fairly earned your wages, and they shall not come." Then she said to the goose, "Go into the house, my girl, that's not appropriate that you are alone with a young gentleman. One should not play with fire, he might go and fall in love in you. " The count did not know whether to laugh or cry. "It was a sweetheart," he thought, "even though she was thirty years younger, she could not touch my heart peace." However fondled the old geese and applauded them as if they were children, and then she and her daughter into the house. The youth lay down on the bench, under a wild apple tree. The air was so mild on all sides stretched a green meadow, dotted with primrose, thyme, and a thousand other flowers. A clear brook trickled away as the sun played on it, and the white geese went back and forth, or paddled in the water. "Where here is great," said the Count, "but I am so tired that I can not keep your eyes open. Just now do not come a gust of wind and blow my legs off me, for they are as rotten as tinder." When he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shook him awake. "Stand up," she said, "you can not stay here. I have certainly made it hard enough for you, but I have not killed you. Now you get your salary. Gods and gold, you do the not, here is something else. " And she gave him a small box, which was carved out of a single emerald. "Take care of it," she said, "it will bring you happiness." The count was now fresh and healthy again, thanked the old for the beautiful gift and walked away without so much as to look for the beautiful daughter. When he was already some way off, he heard in the distance geese merry skrigen.Greven had to hike three days in the wilderness before he came out of the woods. He came to a big city, and when no one knew him, he was led into the royal palace, where the king and queen sat on the throne. He fell on one knee, drew the emerald from his pocket and laid it at the queen's feet. She bade him stand up, and he handed her the box, but no sooner had she opened it before she fell as if dead. The count was seized by servants, and was kept in prison, when the Queen opened her eyes and shouted that they should get rid of him and go out of the room all together. She wished to speak with ham.Da they were gone, gave the queen began to cry and said, "What good is all the brilliance and splendor that surrounds me. Every morning I wake up just sad. I have had three daughters, and the youngest was so lovely that it was a miracle. she was white as snow, as red as the apple blossom, and her hair shone like the sun. When she cried, not tears fell, but pearls and gems from her eyes. When she was fifteen years old the king had them all come before his throne. you should have seen how people gazed when the youngest came in. It was as if the sun broke through. So the king said: "I do not know when my last hour strikes and today I decide what I need when I'm dead. I keep all of me, but he who loves me best, be the best. "Every thought you she loved him most." Can not somehow express how much you love me, "king said," so I can see what I mean. "-" I'm so fond of you as the sweetest sugar, "said the elder." I'm so fond of you as my prettiest dress, "said the other. The youngest said nothing. "How much do you keep so of me, my little girl?" the king asked. "I do not know," she replied, "I can not compare my love with nothing." But the king wanted her to say something. Finally she said: 'The best food does not please me without salt. I love so much like salt. " The king was furious and said: "When you care so much for me like salt, thy love shall also be rewarded with salt." He now divided the kingdom between the two elder. Then, tied a sack of salt on the back of the youngest, and two servants had to lead her out into the wild forest. Where we have not begged the king for mercy, but he did not relent. The poor girl cried and cried when she had to leave us, and the road was strewn with pearls which flowed from her eyes. King soon afterwards repented of his great severity, and had the whole forest search, but she was nowhere to be found. When I think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I am quite beside myself with grief. Sometimes, I hope that she is still alive and hiding in a cave or found shelter with compassionate people. But think, when I opened your smaragdæske, there was one of those gems that fell from my daughter's eyes, and I can understand what an impression it made on me. Now you tell me where I have the pearl. "The Count told him that he had received it from an old woman in the woods. He had not been very nice to her and probably thought she was a witch. Your child he had neither seen nor heard anything. the king and queen resolved to seek out the old. they thought that there where the pearl had been, they also might have something about their datter.Den old woman was sitting in her small place at her spinning and spinning. It was now dark, and the room was only dimly lit by a chip which was burning on the hearth. Suddenly there was a noise outside, the geese came home from the pasture, and uttering their hoarse cries. Gradually the daughter also entered, but the old barely said hello to her and just nodded his head slightly. the daughter sat down to her spinning wheel and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl. for two hours they sat and spun without saying a word . Then there was something that tumbled over by the window, and t o fiery eyes peered in. It was an old owl, and three times it screamed "Uhu." The old turned his head a little towards it and then said to her daughter: "Now is the time that you go out and do your work." Then she got up and went far beyond the meadow, right into the valley. There, she eventually got to a well, there were three old oak trees. The moon was big and round over the mountain, and it was so light that one could have found a needle. Then she took a skin of lying over her face, bent over the well and began to wash. When she was finished, she dipped the skin in the water and laid it on the meadow, so that it could dry in the moonlight. But where was she, however, transformed. When she took the gray wig, welled golden hair back and hung on her like a cloak. His eyes shone like the stars of heaven, and her cheeks apple blossom the fine rødme.Men the beautiful girl sat sorrowfully down and cried. One tear after another rolled out of her eyes and fell to the ground. She sat there a long time, but suddenly she heard that the branches rustling in the tree. She sprang up like a roe which belong hunter shoots. There was just a cloud of the moon, and in an instant the maiden had its old skin and vanished, like a light blown out of vinden.Skælvende like a leaf, she ran home. The old stood outside the door, and the girl would tell her what had happened, but she smiled and said: "I know all." She led her into the room and lighted a new log. She sat down not to spin again, but fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour. "All must be clean and neat," she said. "But why do you begin so late in such a thing," said the girl, "what will happen?" - "Do you know what time it is?" asked the old man. "It's not midnight yet," replied the girl, "but already past eleven o'clock." - "Thinking not that today it is three years since you came," asked the old man, "but now it's over, now we can no longer remain together." The girl was frightened. "Will you cast me," she said, "I have no friends that I can ask for help. I have done everything I have said and I have always been happy with me. Do not send me away . " The old woman would not tell the maiden what should happen. "I can not be here anymore," she said, "this must be nicely clean everywhere when I depart. Do not interrupt me in my work and be just do not worry. You'll get a roof over your head, and you will also be happy with the pay you get. " - "But tell me, what will happen," asked the girl. "I have said to you that you need not to disturb me," said the old man, "ten now still and go into your room, remove the skin and remove the silk dress that you were wearing when you came to me. then wait there till I call you. "Now I must once more tell of the king and Queen, who had journeyed forth with the count in order to look for the old. The count had strayed away from them in the woods and had to go on alone, and the next day he thought he was on the right path. He went on to nightfall, so he climbed up a tree to be there that night, because he was afraid of getting lost. As the moon shone clear across the meadow he saw a figure coming down the mountain. He saw immediately that it was the gåsevogterske he had seen in the old, although she had no stick in his hand. "Here she comes, yes," he cried, "I have only one witch, I also soon get another." But how astonished he was when she took the skin and washed herself in the well. The golden hair fell about her, and he thought she was the most beautiful woman he had seen. He hardly dared to breathe, but he leaned forward as far as he could and stared at her. He bent over too far, or something else is to blame for it, enough is it bough suddenly cracked, and that very moment the girl into the skin, sprang away like a raw, and as the moon immediately went behind a cloud, he could not see where she was af.Næppe she disappeared, before the count climbed down the tree and hurried after her. He had not been gone long before he in darkness saw two figures coming over the meadow. It was the king and queen, who had perceived the light from the old woman's house and were going to it. The count told them what he had seen at the well, and they did not doubt that it had been their lost daughter. Happy they went ahead and soon came to the little house. The geese were sitting outside and slept with his head under the wings, without moving. When they looked through the window, the old woman was sitting quite quietly spinning. She did not turn round, but sat and nodded his head. There was so clean the room, like wisps lived there, and they have never dust on the feet. But their daughter so they do not hurt. As they had stood and looked over there, they took courage and knocked on the window. The old woman appeared to have been expecting them, got up and called out quite kindly, "Come in, I know you already." When they came into the room, she said: "The long road might have spared you if not three years ago unjustly driven away your good, loving child. She has not been damaged. She has three years herding geese but them she has learned no evil, she has retained her purity of heart. but I have now been sufficiently punished by the misery in which you have lived. " Then she went to the chamber and called on her. And when the door opened, and the princess stepped out in her silken garments, with her golden hair and her shining eyes, lovely as an angel from himlen.Hun dropped his father and mother neck and kissed them, and they all wept with joy. The young count stood by, and when she saw him she became as red as a moss-rose, she did not know why. "What shall I give you, my child," said the king, "for I have given away my kingdom." - "She needs nothing," replied the old man, "I give her the tears that she has wept for your sake, it's gems, if just one does not find in the sea, and they are worth more than all your kingdom. And to pay for her service, I give her my house. " When the old woman had said this, she disappeared. It creaked and rattled off the walls and suddenly the house was transformed into a magnificent castle, the table was laid and the waiters ran back and tilbage.Historien longer yet, but my grandmother who told me it had a faint memory and forgot the rest. But I am quite sure that the beautiful princess married the count, and they lived happily together at the castle, as long as God has given them permission. Whether the snow-white geese have been girls (which no one need take offense), as the old has taken to heart and now received their human form again, and served the young queen, I do not certainly, but I think however. So much is certain that the old was not a witch, as people thought, but a wise woman, who meant well. Very likely it was she who, at the princess's birth, gave her the gift of weeping pearls instead of tears. Nowadays does not happen, or else the poor would soon become rich.
The glass coffin	1556	410	Danish	No need to say that it is impossible for a poor tailor can not honor and dignity in life. It's just that he gets on his niche and have good luck. A civil, adroit tailor's apprentice once went hiking into a great forest, and when he does not know the way, he lost. Night fell, and he had to be out there in the terrible loneliness. Although he was soft and well on the moss, he was so afraid of the wild animals that he no rest for a while, and finally he climbed into a tall oak to spend the night there. He settled himself as best he could and thanked God because he had his goose with him, for otherwise the wind which blew through the forest, carried him away sig.Da he had been sitting up there in the dark for a few hours and shaken by anxiety, he suddenly saw a light nearby, and when he thought that might be a house where he could have it better than in the tree, he climbed carefully down and went towards the light. So he came to a small hut that was woven from reeds and rushes, and knocked gently on the door. It opened, and there stood an ancient, gray-haired man in a strange costume, which was sewn together from all sorts of rags. "Who are you?" he asked snarling. "I am a poor tailor," he replied, "darkness has attacked me in the woods. Can not I be allowed to stay the night?" - "Go away," said the old man sullenly, "I do not want anything to do with such a tramp." Then he would again go into, but the tailor grabbed his coat and prayed so earnestly that the old was eventually moved and took him into the hut, gave him something to eat and combed a very good bed for him over in one krog.Den weary tailor needed no rocking asleep, but slept sweetly till morning and thought really no to stand up before a loud noise made him wince. Through the hut thin walls penetrated the sound of screaming and roaring to him. He was quite sudden unusually brave, dressed in a hurry and ran out. He was then spotted a large black bull and a beautiful stag, which was in furious battle. They rushed at each other with such ferocity that the earth shook, and their screams cut through the air. He was long in doubt as to who would walk away with the victory, but eventually ran stag's horn into the lives of his opponent, who sank to the ground with a terrible brøl.Skrædderen had astonished seen, and before he could escape, came stag leaping toward him and swung him up on his great horns. He had no time to think, it went away over hill and dale, over field and forest and mountain and valley. So clutching himself with both hands and began his fate, but he was quite a feeling, as he flew. At length the stag stopped in front of a rock, and gently let the tailor down to earth. He was more dead than alive, and it was some time before he could collect his thoughts. When he had come more or less to himself again, came stag with such a force horns against the rock, a door burst open. Flames of fire shot out to meet him and a thick hid the stag so he could not see it. The tailor did not know what he had to do to escape from this terrible place, but suddenly he heard a voice shouting: "Get in here and do not be afraid. It does not happen you any harm." He waited a bit, but powered by a secret power, he obeyed the voice and went through the door. He came into a large hall, whose walls, ceiling and floor consisted of square-cut stones, which were carved strange characters. He looked admiration, and was about to go out again when he again heard the voice shout: "Go on the stone, located in the middle of the hall. There you find your happiness." He had already gotten so much courage in the chest that he immediately obeyed, and the stone began slowly sinking. When the bus stopped so the tailor that he stood in a hall that was as big as the previous one and even more magnificent. The walls were carved depressions where there were transparent glass filled with colored liquids or bluish smoke. On the floor stood opposite each other two large glass coffins, which immediately aroused his curiosity. When he went to the one he saw that there was a beautiful castle with stables and outbuildings and everything that belonged to it. Everything was small, but so neat that one could immediately see it was an artist who had made det.Han was not yet done admiring it when he again heard the voice that urged him to turn around and look at the glass coffin. To his amazement, he saw a lovely girl lie therein. She lay as if she slept, wrapped in her long, blonde hair and a robe. His eyes were firmly closed, but her fresh face color and her chest that rose and fell, showed clearly enough that she was alive. The tailor looked at her with a beating heart, and suddenly she opened her eyes and looked pleased at him in amazement. "Now my deliverance is at," she shouted, "Hurry up, help me out of my prison, then I'm saved." The tailor obeyed immediately and she was as out of the coffin and covered himself with a large cloak that hung in a corner of the hall. Then she sat down on a stone, ordered the young man, and when she had pressed a kiss on his lips, she said: "Heaven has gracious and sent you to put an end to my suffering, and now your happiness begin. You are my groom and to live by my side in peace and joy. I will tell you my history.I is the daughter of a rich count. my parents died when I was very young, after they had given, that I was brought up with my oldest brother. we were so fond of each other and fit together so well that we decided never to marry, but to stay together as long as we lived. we were bored us never. Neighbors and friends visited us often and we were very hospitable. One evening there came a strange man riding and begged for a night when he could not reach any house before night. we took kindly to him and he told us at supper by his experiences. My brother seemed so well of him that he invited him to stay a few days with us, and after some hesitation, he said yes. We arose from table until late, and I hurried to bed to rest my weary limbs. Hardly had I fallen asleep before I was awakened by the faint and delightful music. Since I could not conceive from whence it came I would go in and wake my lady's maid, who slept in the next room, but it was as if that were weighing on my chest, and I could not get a sound out. Suddenly I saw by the light of the bedside lamp the stranger enter through two doors to my room was locked. He walked over to me and said that he was using witchcraft had caused the lovely music wake me up and was now forced his way through closed doors to me to offer me his hand and heart. My repugnance to his magic arts was so great that I did not answer him. He waited for some time to see if I would not consent, but as I continued to remain silent, he said angrily that he would know how to punish my pride, and then went his way. I spent the night in the greatest anxiety and fell asleep towards morning. When I awoke, I hurried to tell my brother what had happened, but he was not in his room, and the waiter told me that he quite early had ridden hunting with the fremmede.Jeg immediately thought that was something wrong going on, let my horse saddled and rode full gallop to the forest, followed by one of my servants. His horse fell, however, and broke his leg, so I had to ride on alone. A few minutes after I met the stranger who kept a beautiful deer in a rope. I asked him where my brother was and how he had come by this stag, whose eyes were full of tears. Instead of answering, he burst into laughter. I became enraged, grabbed a pistol and discharged it at the monster, but the ball rebounded from his breast and went into my horse's head. I fell to the ground, the stranger muttered some words and I lost bevidstheden.Da again I came to my senses, I was lying in this cave in a glass coffin. The wizard stood beside me and told me that my brother was turned into a stag. My castle was quite small and was enclosed in glass coffin there, and my people were turned into smoke and stored in bottles. If I would abide by his wishes, he would resolve the spell, he had only to open the chest, then everything would be business as usual again. I replied just as last time. He disappeared now, and I fell into a deep sleep. Many visions passed before my eyes, among them also the image of a young man who came and freed me, and when I opened my eyes and saw you, I knew that my dream would come true. Now we should first move the glass coffin with my castle onto the big stone. "When they had done, raised the stone immediately up to the room, which was above and from there they went out in the open. Now they opened the coffin, and the was strange to see how the castle and all the surroundings grew and got natural size. they then went back and fetched glass bottles, and no sooner had they opened them before the blue smoke rose up and became living people. the joy was even greater when her brother who had killed the magician in the bull's figure came out of the woods. the same day celebrated the happy tailor his wedding with the beautiful count daughter.
The godfather	399	332	Danish	There was once a poor man who had so many children that all the people he knew, had stood godfather to one of them. When he got yet another, he did not know what he should do, and sadly he went to bed. At night he dreamed that there came and said to him that he should go and ask the first person he met to be the child's godfather. He decided to do it and the next morning he went out and met a man, whom he asked to be godfather. The stranger gave him a glass of water and said: "It's wonderful water, with it you can heal the sick. Simply notice where death stands. Stands he at the head, give the patient some of the water, then he recovered, but he stands at the foot it has no effect, and the sick must die. " The man could henceforth always tell whether a sick could live or must die, and became very famous and earned much money. Once he was called up to the king because his son was sick. The first time Death was standing at the head, and the child was healed, the second time went just the same, but the third time Death was standing at the foot of the bed, and the child døde.Engang decided the man to visit the godfather and tell him how he had fared with the water. But it was a very strange house, he got into. The first floor was a broom and a flounder and quarreled and fought with all his might. He asked them where godfather lived. "A staircase higher up," answered the diet. On the second floor there was a quantity of severed fingers. He asked where godfather lived, and one of the fingers replied, "One flight of stairs higher." On the second floor there was a quantity of skulls that showed him another staircase up. On the fourth floor there was some fish over the fire and fried itself. They also said, "One flight up higher." When he came up on the fifth floor, he found a door and looked through the keyhole. Inside sat godfather with a pair of long horns. When the man opened the door, he jumped in a hurry up in bed and pulled the blanket over his head. "What kind of a strange house," the man said, "when I came up on the first floor, there was a broom and a scrub that had the hairs on each other." - "Where, however, you are stupid," said the godfather, "that is the servant and the girl who talked." - "On the second floor there was a quantity of severed fingers." - "What a lot of nonsense, it was the salsify." - "On the third floor there was a pile of skulls." - "It was cabbage heads, your fool." - "On the fourth floor there arose certain fish fried itself." At that moment the door opened and forehead came strolling in with the fish. "And when I came up on the fifth floor, I looked through the keyhole and saw that I had long horns," the man said. "It's a lie," shouted godfather. The man got scared and took to his heels, and it's not good to know what godfather had done to him if he had not come so quickly leave.
Gold children	809	555	Danish	There was once a poor man and a poor woman. They lived by catching fish and had nothing but from hand to mouth. One day when the man was sitting by the water and had thrown his net, he caught a fish entirely of gold. As he puzzled sat and looked at it, it began to speak: "Listen fisherman," it said, "throw me back again, and I will change your little hut into a castle." - "Why would I want a castle when I do not have anything to eat," said the fisherman. "I will be taken care of," said the fish, "there is a cupboard in the castle, and when you close it up, there are dishes of the best food." - "Well, then I can do you a favor," said the fisherman. "There's just one condition," said the fish, "you can not tell a human from which your happiness comes. If you say a single word, it's all over." The man threw the fish into the water again and went home and where his cabin before had stood, there was a magnificent castle. He made big eyes, and when he went inside, he saw his wife sitting in a beautiful room in costly apparel. She was very happy and said: "How is it happened. It suits me very well liked." - "Yes, I can, too," the man said, "but let me get something to eat, I am very hungry." - "I have nothing," the woman replied, "and I can not find anything in this new house." - "It is no fear," said the man, "close once the big closet yonder up." When she did, she saw that there stood cakes, meat, fruit, wine, just waiting to be taken. "What could you want more," cried the wife happy, and they sat down and ate and drank. "But how come all these riches?" asked his wife when they were filled. "Do not ask me about it," he said, "I dare not say it to a human, then all the glory past." - "Yes, yes," she said, "when I do not have to know it, I can also do without it." But it meant she did not. Her curiosity left her no peace day or night, and she persecuted her husband as long as he told her that all was owing to a wonderful golden fish which he had caught and given free again. But as he had said it, the splendid castle with the cupboard and sat back in the old fiskerhytte.Manden had now again address to fish, but he was fortunate again to catch goldfish. "If you want to throw me out," said the fish, "I will again give you the castle and cabinet with the good food, but do be steadfast and supply under any circumstances where you have it off, otherwise it all again." - "I'll take good care," said the fisherman, and threw it out. Everything was now in its previous glory, and the wife was very happy. But her curiosity let her have no peace, and after a few days, she began to ask him about how it had happened. The man was silent for a time, but eventually he became so upset her plague cleaners, he jumped in with the secret. In an instant the castle and they sat in the old cabin. "Now you can have it as well," the man said, "Now we can begin to suck on the paw." - "I Thou wilt rather be free of the wealth," said the woman, "I have nevertheless no peace when I do not know where it comes from." The man went out to fish, and some time after he got back the gold fish . "I will constantly fall into your hands," he said, "take me home and cut me into six pieces. Give your wife two, your horse and bury two into the ground, it will bring you happiness." The man took the fish home and did as the had said. Of the two pieces that were buried in the ground two golden lilies sprang, the horse had two golden foals, and the fisherman's wife bore two children who were completely gyldne.Børnene grew and became big and beautiful, and the lilies and horses grew also. Then they said: "We will mount our golden horses, father, and ride out into the wide world." - "How can I stand it when I am gone, and I do not know how things are going you," said the father sadly. "Look at the two golden lilies," they replied, "if they are fresh, we are in health;, we are sick, and they fall on, we are dead." They rode away and came to an inn that was completely full of people. When they saw the golden children they began to laugh and make fun of them, and when one heard it, he felt ashamed and would no longer, but rode home to his father. The other went on and came to a large forest. People warned him not to ride there. "It is full of robbers," they said, "they will hurt you, and when they see that you and your horse are golden, they will surely kill you." But he was not deterred. "I must and must go through," he said, threw bearskin over him and the horse, so you could not see anything of the gold, and rode fearlessly into the forest. A little later he heard that there was a rustling in the bushes, and that there was someone who talked. "There will be one," there was a crying, but so was the answer: "Let him go, it's a tramp. He is as poor as a church, what should we do with him." Gold child rode joyfully through the forest, without befell him something ondt.En day he came to a village where he saw a girl who was so beautiful that he thought she might be the most beautiful in the world. He was so in love with her that he went to her and said, "I love you with all my heart, will you be my wife?" She also kept him and replied: "Yes, I will be your wife, and I will be faithful to you as long as I live." Then they were married, and just as they were at their happiest bride's father came home and was very surprised that his daughter had kept the wedding. "Where is the bridegroom?" he asked, and she showed him the gold child, who had his bearskin on "Never be A vagabond get my daughter," he shouted furiously and tried to kill him. Bride begged for mercy and said: "He is now again my husband and I love him." He allowed himself eventually relent, but he was still thinking about the matter, and the next morning he rose early and wanted to see if his daughter's husband was a common ragged beggar. But when he came over to the bed he saw that there was a beautiful golden man in the bed, and bear skins lying on the ground. "Where it is good that anger does not run away with me," he thought, "these had been a great crime." Gold child was, however, and dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag, and when he awoke the next morning he said to his bride: "I go out hunting." She was afraid and asked him to stay home. "There is so easy to be an accident," she said, but he replied: "I must and will go." He went out into the forest, and soon after came a beautiful deer, as in his dream. He aimed and would shoot, but the stag ran away. He gave chase over hedges and ditches all day without getting tired, and in the evening disappeared deer. And when he looked around, he noticed that he was standing outside a small house, and there was a witch. He knocked, and an old woman came out and asked: "What will you late midst of the great forest." - "Have you not seen a stag?" he asked. "The deer know I will," she replied, and a small dog that had brought her out, began to bark vehemently by him. "Will you be silent, thou odious toad," he said, "or I will shoot you." - "Do you want to shoot my dog," cried the witch happy and turned him into a stone. The bride sat at home and waited and waited, and when he did not come, she thought: "There's certainly been an accident. That is why I was so scared and heavy heart." The other brother was standing at home and so on guldliljerne, and suddenly fell one on. "There must have been a great misfortune," he said, "I got to go and see if I can save him." - "Stay here," asked the father, "what should I do if I lose you also." But he wanted to go, sat on golden horse and came to the forest, where his brother lay turned to stone. The old witch came out of her house and called him and would also get hold of him, but he was where he was. "If you do not make my brother alive again, I'll shoot you," he shouted. How unwilling she than would, she had to obey, and the moment she touched the stone, it was human again. The two brothers embraced and kissed each other happy and rode out of the woods, one to his bride, the other to his father. "I knew well that you had rescued your brother," said the father, "the golden lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again." They lived happily and well to their death.
golden bird	544	550	Danish	For many, many years ago, once lived a king who had a beautiful garden, in which stood a tree that bore golden apples. When they mature, it was discussed how many there were, but the next morning missing one. It was reported to the king, and he decided that each night had kept guard at the tree. The first night he sent the eldest of his three sons. He watched at first, but towards midnight, he could not keep his eyes open anymore and fell asleep, and the next morning lacked another apple. The following night had the second son guard, but missed him a bit better; when the clock struck twelve he went to sleep and in the morning there was again an apple disappeared. Now came the turn of the youngest son. The king had less trust in him and thought it would go to him like brothers, but he did get the chance to try. In the evening he went down and sat under the tree and tore at it as not to fall asleep. As the clock struck twelve, he heard a whistling in the air, and in the moonlight he saw a bird that shone like gold, come flying. It sat in the tree and chopped off an apple, but just then sent the prince an arrow at it. The bird flew away, but the arrow had struck its wing, and one of its golden feathers fell to the ground. He picked it up, brought it the next morning to the king and told him what he had seen. The king called his council and showed them the feather, and they stated that such a single feather was worth more than the whole kingdom. "If so, I can not do with it," King said, "so I must have the whole bird." The eldest son thought he was so clever that he would find the bird, and went on way. When he had gone some distance, he saw a fox sitting outside a forest, and put his gun to aim at it. "Do not shoot me," cried the fox, "I will in return give you good advice. I know very well that you are out to find the golden bird. The evening will come to a village, where two inns facing each other. one is brightly lit and it goes merrily on, but you must take into the second, even if you think it looks very uninviting. " - "Such a dumb animals can not possibly give me advice," said the prince, fired loose, but missed him that quick run into the woods with his tail in the air. He went farther, and in the evening he came to the village with the two inns. From the one singing and dancing beam of light, but the other so dark and wretched. "I would then be a great fool if I did not go into the neat tavern," said the prince. But there he lived in the lap of luxury and soon forgot both his father and guldfuglen.Da had gone some time without the eldest son came home, went the second oldest on the way to search for the bird. He also met the fox, who gave him the same advice, but he did not keep it. When he came to the village, his brother was standing in the inn's window and called to him. He could not resist, but went inside and drank with the others and forgotten quite what he had set out for.Efter some time would also be the youngest son go and try his luck, but his father would not allow him to it. "It would be useless," he said, "you want is much less than your brothers find the bird, and if there would befall you something, you do not sense enough to get by." But the son continued to plague, and finally gave the old for, and he went off. In the woods he met the fox, begged for his life, and gave him the same advice. "Do not worry," he replied, "I promise you I will not hurt you." - "Do not come to regret it," said the fox, "come here, sit on my tail, and you will quickly leave." No sooner had he sat up there before the fox away over hill and dale, so the wind whistled in them. When they came to the village, took the prince into the dark tavern and slept quietly until dawn. When he came outside the city, he met again the fox, who said: "Let me tell you how you need to carry you along. Set yourself up so that we ride to a castle that is completely surrounded by soldiers. You must, however, do not be afraid of them, they sleep all together. Go into the castle through all the rooms, until you come to a living room where the bird is hanging in a træbur. beside it stands a magnificent guldbur, but do not put the bird in there, it will get you dearly to stand. " Then took the prince up on his tail, and now it went back over hill and dale, until they reached the castle. Everything was as the fox had said, and he eventually came into the room where the bird hung in træburet. The three golden apples lay down on the floor. He thought it was pointless for the beautiful bird sitting in the ugly cage, opened the door and put it into the golden cage. The moment the bird uttered a piercing cry, so the soldiers awoke, rushed in and grabbed him and put him in prison. Next morning he was put on trial, he confessed and was sentenced to death. The king would be in a condition spare his life. If he could get him the golden horse which ran faster than the wind, he should be allowed to take off again and even get the golden bird med.Kongesønnen went sadly on the road and did not know where he should go. Suddenly he saw his old friend the fox sitting by the roadside. "There you can see how it went because you did not follow my advice," he said, "but let's just be to mope. I'll tell you how to get hold of the horse. Sit up again, so you will come to a castle, where the horse is in the barn. Staldkarlene is outside and snoring so you can quietly pull the horse out. But one thing you must remember. you must give it a plain leather saddle and not the golden hanging next to it, otherwise you will get into trouble. " The prince seated himself up on the fox's tail, and away they went over hill and dale. He found everything as the fox had said, but when he came into the barn and saw the beautiful animal, he thought: "It is a pity that it does not need to have the nice saddle on." But hardly had he put gold saddle on the horse's back before it began to whinny so high that staldkarlene woke up. They came immediately rushed in, grabbed him and put him in prison. The next morning he was sentenced to death, but the king promised to spare his life and the golden horse even if he could give him the princess of the golden slot.Med heavy heart went prince on the way, but fortunately he met again the faithful fox. "You deserve true that I left you to your fate," it said, "but I feel sorry for you and will help you once again. This road leads straight to the golden castle. In the evening when we were there, and in the night when all is quiet, walk the beautiful princess into the bathhouse to bathe. When she passes you, you jump back and give her a kiss, then she will follow you. But you must in no way give her permission to go in and say goodbye to his parents, it will come to regret afterwards. "The prince sat up on the tail, and away they went over hill and dale. In the evening the castle, and at midnight came the beautiful princess walking down toward the bathhouse. the prince jumped up and gave her a kiss, and she was immediately willing to follow him, but asked with tears in her eyes, though she had to say goodbye to his parents. at first he was steadfast and said no, but when she cried and fell at his feet, he gave in. the moment she came into his father's bedroom, he woke up and the whole palace, and the king's son was seized and thrown in fængsel.Den next morning the king had him before and said, "you have forfeited your life, but I will let you go free and give you my daughter in marriage, if you within eight days to remove the mountain that is outside my castle and block the view. "The prince pitch yndte chopping and digging day and night, but when after seven days the saw how little he had accomplished, he gave up all hope and was very distressed. On the evening of the seventh day, he suddenly fox for him. "You deserve no means that I help you," he said, "but go now just in bed, so I'll do the rest." When he woke up the next morning and looked out the window, he saw that the mountain was gone. Full of joy he hastened to tell the king, and whether this is sour or sweet, he had to keep his promise and give him his daughter to ægte.Prinsen and the princess marched away together, and when they had gone a little way, met the fox. "Now you have got the best," he said, "but when you have the maiden from the golden castle, you should also have the golden horse." But how do I get hold of it, "said the prince." I'll tell you , "said the fox," first you have to bring the king who sent you to the golden castle, the beautiful princess. He will be beside himself with joy and immediately lead the golden horse to you. Get on it and stretch them gradually to leave, but finally the beautiful maiden. Swing saw her in front of you and ride away. No one in the world will be able to overtake you, for the horse runs faster than the wind. "The prince left off when it safely away with golden horse and the beautiful princess, and the fox said to him:" I will help you grab the golden bird. When you get near the castle where it is, leave the princess to stay out here with me, I'll take care of her. When you come into the courtyard and the king sees the golden horse, he will bring the bird out to you. Once you've got the cage in your hand, put spurs into the horse's sides and hurry up here to draw your bride. "When the king's son joyfully returned with the bird, the fox said," Now I should probably also have a reward, because I've helped you as well. "-" What do you want? "asked the prince." When we get in there in the woods, you shoot me down and chop off my head and paws of. "-" It was a nice reward, "said the prince," you must not expect me. "-" then we must part, "said the fox," but first I will give you some good advice. Buy no to the gallows, and sit at the edge of a well. "When it had said it ran off into the woods." It is a strange animal, "said the prince," who on earth wants to that any one buy gallows and it is yet never occurred to me to put me at a well. "they rode on and soon after came through the village where his two brothers had stayed. There was much fanfare, and when he asked what was wrong, he was told that there were two criminals who were hanged. When he got closer, he saw that it was his brothers who had squandered all their money up and guilty various mischief. "if they can not escape," he asked. "Yes, if you want to pay for it," came the reply, "but they are really no worth wasting his money on." but the king's son bought them so; and the continued now all four journey sammen.Solen burned hot, and when they came into the forest where they had first met the fox, said the older brother, "This is cool. Let us rest a little by the well and get something to eat and drink. "They did it, and in the course of conversation put the younger prince on the brink of the well without thinking about it. His brothers gave him a shock, so he fell backwards into the well, and went home with the princess horse and bird. "See, we have not only found the bird," they said, "but also the golden horse and the princess of the golden castle." the king was very happy. but the horse would not eat, the bird did and the maiden wept and græd.Den youngest brother was not dead. Fortunately, the well was dry, and he fell down on the soft moss without injury, but could not get up again. the faithful fox forgot him in his distress, but came running and reproached him because he had forgotten its advice. "I still can not bear to let you down," he said, "I will help you into the light of day again. "Then let the prince grab his tail and pulled him on the way out of the wells n. "You're not escaped danger yet," he said, "your brothers are charged silent guard around the forest because they were not sure that you were dead. As soon as any of them sees you, they kill you. "Near them was a poor old man, and the prince changed into clothes with him and went to the palace. No one knew him, but the bird began to sing the horse to eat and the beautiful maiden weeping. "Where it may be," said the king, astonished, and the princess replied: "I do not know it. Before I was so sad, but now I'm happy again. I have a feeling as if my true bridegroom had come home. "She told him everything that had happened, although the two brothers had threatened to kill her if she revealed it. The king ordered all the people in the palace call ahead and his youngest son came in his rags. the princess knew him immediately and fell on his neck. the wicked brothers were now executed and royal son's wedding was celebrated with great pomp, and the king gave him his arving.Da prince one day long after came out in the woods, he met the fox. "Now you have everything you could wish for," he said, "but my misfortune is just great even though it is in your power to save me." the bath him now again earnestly to kill it and cut off his head and feet. At last he yielded to their prayers, and no sooner had he done so before the fox was turned into a human being. he told him that he was the brother of the beautiful princess, and they all lived happily together to their death.
Gold goose	611	571	Danish	There was once a man who had three sons. The youngest was called the Simpleton, and everyone laughed at him and pushed him aside at every opportunity. One day, the elder into the forest to cut wood, and his mother gave him a delicious pancake and a bottle of wine, that he should not go hungry and thirsty. When he came into the forest, he met an old gray man, who said hello and asked: "Give me a small piece of cake and a little wine, I am so hungry and thirsty." - "If I did that, I had nothing to myself," replied the wise son, "go your way." Then he went on. When he began to chop wood, he came to chop errors and the ax hit him in the arm, so he had to go home and let them connect. It was the little gray man who was to blame for it.The next day went to the second son into the forest and mother gave him an omelette and a bottle of wine. He also met the old, gray man who asked for a piece of cake and a little wine. But the second son spoke out plainly, saying, "What you get, go out myself. Go away," leaving the little man standing and went on. The punishment did not fail when he had made a few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg and had to be carried home. "Now let me go and cut wood, father," said the Simpleton. "You can really no," replied the father, "you see, yes, your brother is hurt thereby, let you just have to try it." But the Simpleton went on begging and finally he said, "Go then just. For Once bitten twice shy." The mother gave him a cake which was boiled with water in the ash, and a bottle of beer acid. When he entered the forest he met the old man who asked for some cake and wine. "I have nothing but a cake that is baked in the ashes, and some sour beer," Simpleton answered, "but if you want something go ahead." Then they sat down, and as the Simpleton took the cake out, it had been a rich pancake, and his sour beer became good wine. When they had eaten and drunk, the man said: "I will give you anything because you are so good and generous. Hug the old tree over there on, you'll find something in the roots." Then he said goodbye and gik.Fjollehans went and felled tree and then when there sitting among the roots a goose with feathers of pure gold. He picked it up and went to an inn to be there that night. The host had three daughters, and when they saw the goose, were curious and wanted to know what it was a strange bird, and they also had enough desire to get one of its golden feathers. "I'll find an opportunity to take one," said the eldest, and as the Simpleton was once gone out, she seized the wing, but her hand was hanging by it. Then came the second solely to tweak a feather, but no sooner had she touched her sister before she was hanging on to her. Finally came the third, and the sisters shouted to her: "Do not come here," but she could not understand why, and when she touched them, she too became stuck and they had to be all night inside of the goose. the next morning the goose under his arm and walked away without caring about the three girls who hung on to it. They had to run behind, right and left, as it pleased him to go. Out in the fields they met the priest, and when he saw the procession, he said: "Shame on you, naughty chick, running after a young fellow," and then he took hold of the youngest to hold her back. But hardly had he touched her before he was obliged to run with. Then came the clerk and was astonished when he saw the parson on the heels of the three girls. "Whither so fast, sir. Pastor," he shouted, "remember, we've christening today." Then he took hold of his arm, but was also hanging. The five tramped on, one after the other and anything after they met two farmers who came from the field with their scythes. The priest cried out to them and asked if they would help him and the clerk to escape, but the moment they touched them, they hung fast, and now ran seven afterwards Simpleton and his goose. They came then to a city where there reigned a king who had a daughter who was so serious that she never laughed, and the king had therefore charged announce that the one who could make her laugh should have her wife. When the Simpleton heard this, he went to the palace with the goose and all the long tail, and when the princess saw the seven people on the heels of each other, she began to laugh heartily and could not keep up. Simpleton requested that the bride; but the king did not seem right about the son and did a whole, some objections and demanded that he first bring a man who could drink a whole cellar of wine. Simpleton thought that the little gray man could help him, and went into the woods to the place where he had felled the tree. There sat a man who looked so sad, and Simpleton asked what was wrong. "I'm so terribly thirsty," the man replied, "I can not tolerate water and I have indeed just emptied a cask of wine, but what helps a drop of water on a hot stone." Come with me, then I will help you, "said the Simpleton, and went with him into the king's wine cellar. the man bent over the huge barrels, and drank and drank, so that he eventually was quite tired in the back. Before the day was over, it was the basement empty. Simpleton again asked for his bride, but the king was annoyed that such a guy who everyone called Simpleton, should own his daughter, and demanded that he first bring a man who could eat a mountain of bread. Simpleton did not hesitate long but went out in the woods. at the same place as last sat a man and laced a belt along the waist with a pitiful mine. "Now I have eaten an oven full of bread," he said, "but what is it, when you are so hungry as I. My stomach is so empty that I have to strap myself in order not to die of hunger. "-" Come with me, then you should probably be satisfied, "said the Simpleton happy and went with him to the palace. The king had sent total meal in the kingdom bring up there and bakers had baked into a mountain of. the man from the forest stood before it and began to eat, and when the day was over, the whole mountain gone. Simpleton demanded again his bride, but the king asked third condition and demanded a ship that could be used equally well on water and on land. "When you come sailing along with it, you shall have my daughter," he said. Simpleton went straight into the forest, and there sat the old man, he had given his cake and his wine. "You've been good to me and given me to eat and drink," he said, "I will help you." Then he gave him the ship that could sail on the water and country, and now the king could no longer withhold his daughter. the wedding was celebrated, and after the king's death inherited Simpleton his kingdom and lived long and happily with his queen.
wren	1634	221	Danish	In the old days every sound still had its meaning. When the blacksmith's hammer sounding, cried: "Turn to turn to." When the carpenter's plane grated, it said: "Hang in, hang in." When the mill wheel chattered, they said: "God help us, God help us." But Miller was an impostor, then talked mill fine when he put it in again, and first asked slowly, "Who is it? Who is it?" - "The miller, the miller," answered quickly, and finally said it in a gallop: "He steals a bushel." The birds also had their own language. Now it sounds like whistling and screaming and whistling or singing without words, but then all understood it. Once the birds were agreed that they would no longer be without men, they would choose a king. Only lapwing did not think about it. It would live and die like a free bird. And anxiously flying back and forth, shouting: "What will become of me? What will become of me?" It flew away to remote, lonely swamps, and would no longer live together with other fugle.Fuglene however, would talk to each other about the case, and a lovely May morning they met. From all fields and forests came the flying eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, and many others. Cuckoo materialize the hoopoe, the cuckoo called deacon, because it always make its voice heard a few days before the cuckoo. Then there was also quite a small bird, which had not even a name. The chicken had happened not heard anything about the whole thing and was very surprised to see the great assembly. "What is it?" cackled; but the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said: "Only rich people," and told her what they had. It was now decided that it should be king who could fly the highest. A tree frog that sat in the bushes, cried a warning when she heard it: "Water, water, water," the thought that there would be shed many tears. But the crow said, "Caw-caw," and thought it would pass off peacefully of altsammen.Det was now certain that they had to fly into the air immediately in the morning, that no one should be able to say: "I would have flown much higher, but in the evening I was tired and could no more. " On a given signal the whole troop rose into the air. The dust flew up from the field, were heard murmuring and rustling, and it looked as if a black cloud was rising up. The little birds were soon abandon it and fell to the ground. The major held out longer, but none could equal the eagle, who mounted so high that it could have chopped the eyes out of the sun. And when he saw that the others could not reach him, he thought: "Why should I make myself the trouble to fly higher? I am anyway king." All birds shouted: "You will be king. No one has flown so high as you." - "Except me," cried the little guy who had no name. It had hidden between the eagle feathers, and was not tired. It rose now up in the air so high that it could see God sitting on his throne. Then it folded its wings together and sank while it cried with thin, shrill voice: "I am King, I am king." "You king," cried the birds angrily, "you little, miserable trick and cunning." They therefore that it should be King who could go down lowest in the ground. It may be enough that it gave a flap about when the goose fell to the ground with his broad breast. He scraped in a hurry a hole. Second came the worst of all, for she leapt into a ditch, but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a neighboring pond, crying, "Rakkerpak, rabble." The little bird without a name found a mouse hole, slipped down into it and shouted in a thin voice: "I am King, I am king." "Bilderberg you feel it in," cried the birds angrily, "do you think your anything goes." They decided to keep the prisoner in the hole and starve to death. The owl was vague, and if it had valued her life, had to make sure that rascal not escaped. In the evening the birds feeling very tired after the day's exertions, and went to bed with the wife and kids. The owl was standing at the mouse hole, gazing steadfastly into it with her big eyes. However, it was also tired and thought to herself: "One eye can certainly shut, I watch with the other, and the little miscreant shall not come out of the hole." The closed so that one eye and then the second pin of the hole. The little guy stuck his head out and would slip away, but the owl came forward immediately, and he drew his head back again. Now closed owl the other eye in and the first up, and would change this through the night. But when she next shut the one, she forgot to open the second, and when it had both eyes closed, fell asleep. The little fellow soon observed and stuck af.Fra now the owl has never dared show up on the day, as she does the other birds after it and tore it. It flies only out at night, but hates and pursues mice because they make such ugly holes. But the little bird, not much to meet him for the fear that it must also go beyond it. He steals about in the hedges, and when it is quite safe, he sometimes cries, "I am king." Therefore, the birds have nicknamed gærdesmutten.Men no one was happier than the lark at not having to obey the little King. When the sun rises, ascends high in the air and cries, "How beautiful that is wonderful how beautiful that is nice."
Wren and the bear	966	222	Danish	One summer went the bear and the wolf out for a walk in the woods. Suddenly they heard a bird singing so beautifully and the bear said, "What kind of bird that sings so pretty, brother wolf." - "It is the king of birds," said the wolf, "that we must bow down." However, it was the wren. "If so, I would also like to see the palace," said the bear, "let us go." - "It is not as easy as you think," replied the wolf, "you must wait until the Queen comes." Shortly after the king and queen with his beak full of food for their young. The bear would immediately go into, but the wolf pulled the sleeve and said, "No, you must wait for the king and queen is gone again." They laid so close attention to the hole where the nest was, and trotted so away. But the bear had no rest until he had seen the royal palace, and soon after they returned. The King and Queen had just flown out, and when it looked into the nest, so the there were five or six kids in there. "Is that the royal palace?" cried the bear. "It's a miserable palace. You are not King children, you are illegitimate children." Since chickadees heard it, they shouted furiously: "It is not true our parents are honorable people, it must come to answer for." The bear and the wolf was scared and turned and sat down in their dens. The small wrens continued to cry and scream, and when their parents again brought food they said: "Whether we should starve to death, we touch not so much as a check until you have settled whether we are respectable children or not. the bear has been here and has insulted us. " - "Be easy, little children, the case must be punished," said the old king and flew with the Queen to the bear cave and shouted: "Why have you insulted my children, old growler. It should get you dearly for to stand, it must be decided in a bloody war. " Now the war was thus declared, and all four-footed animals, oxen and donkeys, deer and roes were called together. Wren summoned everything flying in the air, not only all large and small birds, but also mosquitoes, hornets, bees and fluer.Da war was about to begin, the wren sent scouts to get to know who was the enemy states . The mosquito was the most cunning of them all, the swarmed around the forest where the enemy were gathered together, and sat down beneath a leaf of the tree, which held war council. The bear and he called the fox and said: "You are the most cunning of all of us. You shall be our captain." - "Well," said the fox, "but what signal shall we agree upon?" It was, no one knew, so the fox said, "I have a fine long, red, bushy tail. It almost looks like a plume. When I lift it up, it goes well, and you shall march forward, but I let it hang down, run away as you can. " When the gnat had heard that, she flew away again, and revealed everything to gærdesmutten.Da the day came where the battle was to begin, all the four-footed animals rushing, hu, that the earth shook. The wren flew with his army, the whistled and screamed and buzzed so it was anxiety and fear, and the armies walked away at each other. Wren sent down the hornet, that it would sit in the fox's tail, and sting with all his might. At the first jack gave it a set of fox, so it eased slightly on one leg, but still kept his tail, the second time it had to put it down for a moment, but the third time it could not stand it, screamed and stack the tail between the legs. When the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and ran away each to his cave, and thus won the birds slaget.Kongen and Queen flew home to their children and cried: "Rejoice children eat and drink to their heart . We have won the battle. " - "No," replied the little wrens, "we do not eat a bite before the bear come here and ask for pardon and say that we are true children." The wren flew to the bear cave and shouted: "Come to my children and ask them for forgiveness and say that they are real children, old growler, or I'll kick your ribs broken." The bear was horrible anxiety and hastened to creep forward and do what wren demanded. Now the little wrens satisfied, and sat down together and ate and drank and enjoyed themselves until late at night.
The straw, spark and prayer	171	295	Danish	There was once a poor woman who lived in a small village. One day she did fire on the hearth to cook up some beans, and for it to burn faster she ran a handful of straw in the fire. When she shook the beans into the pot, dropped one of them next, without her noticing it. It was located next to a straw, and soon jumped a spark off the fire and fell near them. "Where do you come from, good people," said the straw. "Thank God I got out of the chimney," said the spark, "otherwise I would have been burnt to ashes." - "I should be glad that I have kept life," said the prayer, "if I had come into the pot with my peers, I had been cooked to mush." - "And my destiny was near not improved," said the straw, "the old took all my brothers, the whole sixty, and threw them on the fire. Luckily I got rid of her and fell down here." - "What shall we do now?" Asked the spark. "I think we should stay together for the future," answered prayer "and that we should not be exposed to more dangers here, I think we must go away to a foreign land." The other two liked the idea, and they immediately set out on the road. But when they had gone a while, they came to a small stream, and as there is no bridge was, they did not know how to get over. The straw found, however, on the advice and said, "I lie across the water, so you can use me to the bridge." It sprang out of the water and lay over it, and the spark that was brisk at it, went boldly out on the bridge. But when the basket was a small piece out, was afraid when she heard how the water roared, and stopped and did not dare go further. It went on fire in the straw, it burned in two pieces, and the spark fell hissing into the water and drowned. The prayer that still stood on the shore, burst into laughter, as it saw it and laughed so hard that it cracked. It had now been out of it, if not fortunately had come a tailor past. He took pity on prayer, took a needle and thread back and sewed it together. The prayer thanked him many times. The man had stitched with black yarn, and thus it comes that there is a black stripe on all beans.
The beam	1417	1290	Danish	There was once a wizard who stood in a large crowd of people performing his wonders. He also had a rooster, who wore a bar as easy as it was a feather. However, there was a girl present who had found a four-leaf clover that had made her so wise that no wizardry could disappoint her, and she saw that the beam was nothing but a straw. "Can not you see that it is no bar, but just a straw," she shouted, and was immediately spell powerless, and people drove the magician away with scorn and mockery. Some time after the girl's wedding, and went with the whole entourage across the field to the church. Suddenly they came to a rushing creek, and there was no bridge over. The bride lifted brisk her dress up and would wade through it, but as she stood in the water shouted one of the men, who was no other than the Wizard, mockingly: "How have you done with your eyes that you think it's water ? " The moment she discovered that she stood with her clothes lifted up in a field of flax with blue flowers. All the people saw it now and chased her away with scorn and laughter.
Hansel and Gretel	141	327A	Danish	Near a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel bed. They had little to bite, and once, when there was famine in the country, knew the man did not know how he even gain the daily bread. In the evening, when he was in bed and was thinking about his accident, he sighed and said to his wife: "What will become of us. We have no food for the kids, barely enough for ourselves." - "You know," said the woman, "early tomorrow morning we follow the children into the dense forest, and light a fire there. We give them each a piece of bread, and then we go to work. They can not find their way home and then we are of them. " - "No, I do not," the man said, "I really can not bear to let my kids be quite alone in the great forest. They come and devour the wild animals." - "You're a real fool," said she, "then we will all starve. You had better get the coffins ready." She kept pestering him until he gave in. "But it makes me really pity the poor children," said han.De two children had not been able to sleep for hunger, and had heard what their mother had said. Gretel wept and said to Hansel: "Now it's over with us." - "Be quiet, Gretel," he replied, "I'll find a way." When the parents had gone to sleep, he got up and tiptoed out. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles which lay outside on the road, shone like silver. He stopped his pockets full of them and went home and said to Gretel: "Put you you only quietly to sleep, little sister. The good God will not forsake us." Then he climbed into his bed igen.Da it began to dawn toward today, woke his wife children. "Get up, you lazy bones," she said, "we're going into the forest to cut wood." She gave each of them a piece of bread and said, "There you have your dinner. We have not." Gretel took the bread under her apron, because Hans had his pockets full of stones, and they went all now under way. When they had gone a little way, Hansel still and turned around and looked after the house, and when they had come a little further, he turned around again. "Why do you turn all the time about?" asked the father, "we have not time to remove the legs with you." - "I look at my little white cat," said Hans, "the sitting on the roof and will say goodbye to me." - "how beautifully you can talk nonsense," said the mother, "it is nothing but the sun shining on the chimney." His had not been looking at the cat, but just thrown pebbles behind him on vejen.Da they had gone deep into the forest, the father said: "Can you now collect firewood, small children. So I light the fire, that you may not be freeze." Hansel and Gretel gathered a small pile risk showed the father set fire to it, and then it was off to a good fire, the woman said: "Now lie down by the fire and rest yourselves while we go into the forest and chop wood. When we is finished, we will come and fetch you. "Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and at noon they ate their dry bread. They could hear the blows of an ax and thought therefore that the father was nearby, but the sound came only because he had tied a branch hanging to a tree, and now beat the wind the other hand. Eventually they became sleepy and fell also asleep, and when they woke up it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry. "How will we ever get out of the woods," she said. But Hans consoled her. "Wait 'til the moon appears," he said, "so we'll find the way home." And when the moon had risen, Hans took his sister by the hand and the luminous pebbles showed him the way. They walked all night, and early in the morning they came to their father's house. They knocked, and when the woman opened it and saw that it was them, she said: "Where have you been all this time, you naughty children. We did not believe I had come home more." But the father was glad when he saw them, he had remorse because he had let them be left alone in skoven.Kort time after there was great misery again, and the children heard their mother at night said to the father: "Now we have only half a loaf back, then the pot out. If children do not get out of the way, we lost all together. we must take them farther into the woods, so they can not find their way home. " The man felt hurt and he thought: "It was better to share the last mouthful with her children." But the wife would listen to nothing about what he said. Once you've said A must also say B, and as he had yielded the first time, he had also bend nu.Børnene had not asleep, and had heard it all. When the parents had gone to sleep Hansel got up and wanted to go out and get more flint like the previous time, but the mother had locked the door. Nevertheless he comforted his little sister and said: "Do not cry, Gretel. The good God will help us." Early the next morning the woman came and said to the children that they should stand up. They each received a piece of bread, but it was much less than before. He took bread in his pocket and broke it into small pieces, and as they walked, he turned every moment on and threw a small piece of ground. "Hurry up a little, Hans," said the father, "what it is now, you look for." - "It's my pigeon sitting on the roof and will say goodbye to me," said Hans. "Your blockhead," said the wife, "it is nothing but the sun shining on the chimney." But as they went, threw his all brødsmulerne on vejen.Konen led the children far into the forest, which they never in their lives had been. There was a large fire and the mother said, "Sit still there, you children, and sleep if you are sleepy. Tonight, when we have finished chopping wood, we come and fetch you." At noon came Grethel her bread and shared it with Hansel, who had strewed his path. Then they fell asleep, and it was evening, but no one came and fetched the poor children. When they awoke, it was dark night, but Hans consoled his sister and said: "Wait 'til the moon appears and we can see brødsmulerne, then we'll find home." But the forest thousand birds had pecked all breadcrumbs up, and there was not one left. "We find enough way anyway," said Hans, but they did not. They walked all night and all the next day, but they did not come out of the woods. They had not gotten to eat but a few berries they had found, and was so tired that they could not stand. So they lay down under a tree and fell sleep.The next day they went forth, but they came only deeper and deeper into the forest, and they were just dying of hunger. At noon they saw a snow-white bird sitting on a branch and sang so sweetly that they stopped to listen. When he had finished, he flew up from the branch, and they followed after him until they came to a small house, and the bird perched on the roof. When they came right up to the house, they saw that it was built of bread and covered with cakes. The windows were of white sugar. "Now can we get something to eat," cried His happy. "Come Grete, take a piece of the window, it will taste sweet, I'll eat anything of the roof." His stood now up and broke off a small piece of the roof to try how it tasted, and Grethel stood by the window and gnawed at. Then they heard from inside the living room a thin voice: "Who is it out there that gnaws at my window?" The children replied, "It's just great while sus who hoots and squeals through jert house," and ate on without being disturbed. Hansel, who found that the roof tasted very nice, took a large piece of, and Grethel pulled out a large small window in and made himself really benefit thereby. Suddenly the door opened and a very old woman, leaning on a crutch, came out. Hansel and Gretel were so frightened that they lost it, they kept in hand. Old shook his head and said, "How have you come here, little children. Come in with me and stay with me, I will not hurt you." She took them by the hand and went with them into the house. There was the lovely food, milk and pancakes with sugar, apples, and nuts. Then she put them in two small soft beds, and Hansel and Gretel thought they had come in himlen.Den old was, however, an evil witch, and certainly not as nice as she did. She had built the little house to entice children to her. When she had a child in her power, she killed it cooked it and ate it, and it was a feast day for her. Witches have red eyes and very far, but they have a fine nose like animals and can smell as soon as there are people nearby. When Hansel and Gretel came towards the house, she laughed maliciously and said: "They will not get from me." Early the next morning before the children were awake, she got up, and when she saw them lying there with their red cheeks and sleep soundly, she thought: "What a fine feast." Then she grasped Hansel with her withered hand, carried him into the barn and shut him up behind a grating, without caring that he cried and prayed for him. So she went and shook Gretel awake and said, "Get up, you lazybones, and fetch some water and cook something nice for your brother. He sits out in the barn, and when he is fat enough I will eat him . " Gretel began to cry, but it was no use, she had to do what the wicked witch forlangte.Nu was Hans the best food, but the poor Gretel got nothing but waste. Every morning the old down to the barn and shouted, "Put your finger out so I can see if you got fat." Hansel, however, a mangy legs out between the bars and the old who could not see it with his weak eyes, thought it was his finger and could not imagine that he was about to be so skinny. Since four weeks had passed and Hansel was a bit thin, she lost patience. "Hurry up to bring water up," she said to Gretel, "be Hansel fat or thin, I will eat him tomorrow." Tears ran the poor little Grete down her face, but she had to go. "Help us, however, good God," she said, "just wild animals in the forest had devoured us, so we were at least as been together." - "Stop it tuderi," said the old man, "it does not help." The next morning Grethel had to make the fire and put the kettle on. "We will do the baking," said the witch, "I've already fired during baking oven and kneaded the dough." She pushed poor Grethel towards the oven, and flames were out of it. "Creeping in and see if it now is really hot," she said. Grete would probably feel that it was intended that she should fry in there, and said thus: "How shall I get in there?" Goose, "said the witch," the opening is big enough. You see, there is even enough room for me, "and with that she put her head in the oven. Then Grethel gave her a push, she saw smoke in there, and in a hurry she shut the iron door and put up the bar. The old began to cry and scream, but Gretel ran away place, and the witch had to burn op.Grete ran straight to Hansel, door, and cried: "Now we are saved, Hans, the old witch is dead," and Hans jumped out, as happy as a bird escaping his cage. They embraced and kissed each other and then went back to the witch's house, for now there was nothing to be afraid of. there stood chests of pearls and precious stones . "they are better than pebbles," said Grete and took a whole load into her apron. "Let us hurry to get out of the woods," said Hans, and they went on their way. When they had gone a few hours they came to a large lake. "the we can not get over," said Hans, "I can no bridge watch." - "There is no boat either," answered Gretel, "but here e n and white. It will help us when we ask her. "Then she shouted:" Come dulille white and carrying us tilde another beach. "Duck came swimming, and Hans sat on the back of it and wanted Grete had put up behind him. "no, I do not," replied Gretel, "it is too heavy for the second. The'd better come back and get me. "It made it nice and so and as they joyfully had come ashore on the other side, they seemed enough that the forest saw them looked familiar, and it was not right long before they could see their father's house among the trees. When they began to run with all his might and rushed into the room and fell on his neck. the man had not had a happy hour since he had left the children in the woods, and the wife was dead. Grete threw beads and gems out of her apron, and Hansel took one handful after another out of his pocket. now it was all care at an end, and they lived in joy and gladness. Snip, snap, snout This story is.
hare bride	629	311	Danish	There was once a woman who lived with her daughter. They had a lovely cabbage garden and a winter came a hare ongoing and began to devour it. "Go out and bustle it away," said the woman to her daughter, and the girl went out. "Away with you, you eat well all the cabbage," she said. "Come and sit on my tail and go with me," said the hare, but she would not. Next day came the rabbit and ate the cabbage, and the woman said to her daughter: "Go out and bustle it away," and the girl went out. "Away with you, you eat well all the cabbage," she said. "Come and sit on my tail and go with me," said the hare, but she would not. The next day came again, and the woman said to her daughter: "Go out and bustle it away," and the girl went out. "Away with you, you eat well all the cabbage," she said. "Come and sit on my tail and go with me," said the hare. The girl did and the hare ran with her to his cabin. "Can you make kale and millet porridge, then I go out to bid the wedding," said den.Skal I tell you who the wedding guests were? It was all the hares, and the crow was a priest and the fox clerk, and the altar was just under regnbuen.Pigen felt so alone and was very distressed. Haren come to her and shouted: "Open up, open up, here's all the wedding guests in high spirits." But she did not answer, just cried. Haren went away, but soon came back again and shouted: "Shut up, close up, wedding guests are hungry." But the bride sat and cried and did not answer. Haren went away again and they came back and said, "Shut up, close up, wedding guests sitting out there waiting." The bride did not answer, but when the hare was gone, she made a doll of straw, gave it his clothes on and a spoon in his hand, put it onto the stove and ran home to his mother. Haren came back once more and shouted, "Get up," and finally closed on itself and gave the doll earful, then head fell af.Da rabbit thought that it was not its breach, and hung his head and walked way.
Mermaid	750	313A	Danish	There once was a little boy and a little girl who was running along the sea front, and they were so careless that they both fell in. Down in the sea came a mermaid up to them and said, "Now I have you now shall be allowed to order anything. " Then she went away with them and gave the girl something uncombed flax to spin, and let her tug water in a barrel. The boy had to cut down a tree with a blunt ax, and they got nothing else to eat than rock hard buns. Eventually, the children were sick and tired of it, and one day when the mermaid was in the church, they fled away. When the mermaid came home she saw that the birds were flown, and followed them with long strides. The children saw her from afar, and the girl threw a brush behind her. It was a completely brush mountain with thousands and thousands of spikes, and it was very difficult for the mermaid to climb more, but finally succeeded, however. When the children saw this, the boy threw behind him a comb, and it became a great mountain ridges with thousands and thousands of teeth, but the mermaid clung to them and at last crossed over. Then the girl threw a mirror behind him, and it turned into a mirror mountain which was so slippery that she could not possibly get over it. "I will go home quickly and fetch my ax and chop it to pieces," she thought, but when she came back and got the mountain shattered, the children were long ago far away, and the mermaid had to re-emerge into the water.
Mermaid in pond	1725	316	Danish	There was once a miller who lived with his wife. They had money from, and each year that passed, they became richer. But the accident comes as a thief in the night, as their wealth had gone to it again decrease, year on year, and at last the miller could hardly call the mill of his own. He was very worried, and when he went to bed at night, after working all day, he could not fall asleep, but plagued by all sorts of sorrows. One morning he got up before dawn, went to the outside and thought that he would be easier to fashion. As he walked across the mill dam broke just the first sunbeam up, and he heard a rustle in the reeds. When he turned around, he saw a beautiful woman rising slowly out of the water. The long hair that she kept with her hands, covered her white body. He soon saw that it was the mermaid, and was so frightened that he did not know whether he should go or stay. But the mermaid called him with his soft voice and asked why he was so sad. Miller could at first not utter a word, but when she was so kind, he took courage and told her that he had once been rich and happy but now he was so poor that he did not know how he would cope . "Be easy," said the mermaid, "I will make you richer and happier than you have ever been, but you must promise to give me that which has just been born in you." - "It can not be anything other than a dog or a cat," thought the miller and said yes. Nix back down, and he hurried and in good spirits home to the mill. Before he reached it, the girl came out of the door and shouted to him that he could rejoice, for his wife had given birth to a little son. Miller stood as if struck by lightning, he saw enough to the evil mermaid had known this and tricked him. Hanging his head, he went to his wife's bed, and when she asked him, "Why are you not rejoice over the fine boy?" he told her what had happened and what he had promised the mermaid. "What good does all my happiness and wealth me," he said, "when I have to lose my child. But what can I do." Even the relations, who came to wish them luck, knew råd.Imidlertid prosperity again returned to the miller's house. All that he undertook succeeded, it was as if presses and coffers filled themselves, and during the night became more and more money in the closet. It was not long before his wealth was greater than ever. But he could not rejoice over. The promise that he had given nix tormented him. So Whenever he passed the pond he was afraid that she might ascend and remind him of his debt. He also arranged for the boy never came near the water. "Beware," he told him, "if you touch the water comes up a hand and drag you down." But since it took one year after another, without the mermaid turned out, he began however to become beroliget.Drengen grew up, and when he grew up he apprenticed to a hunter. When he was trained and had become a skilled hunter, took squire him in his service. In the village there was a beautiful and good girl who huntsman liked, and when his master heard about it, he gave him a small house. They held the wedding and lived happy and pleased with hinanden.Da hunter did not come home at night, his wife scared. She went out to look for him, and as he had often told her that he had to take care of the mermaid's persecution and dared not venture into near the pond, did she already know what had happened. She hurried down to the water, and when she found his hunting bag on shore, she could no longer doubt the accident. She wrung her hands and called crying on her beloved, she ran over to the other side of the pond and called again, she accused nix with harsh words, but no one answered. Surface of the water remained calm, only the crescent moon flashed up to hende.Den poor wife was down at the pond. Restless, she went around it, sometimes silent, sometimes loud cry softly sobbing. Eventually she could not. She sank to the ground and fell asleep. And then dreamed hun.Hun thought she climbed between two large boulders. Thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in her face, the wind tossed her long hair. When she had reached the top, so all quite different. The sky was blue, the air soft. Ground sloped gently down towards a green meadow with variegated blpmster and there stood a pretty cottage. She went there, opened the door, and there sat an old woman with white hair and beckoned to her kindly. The moment the poor woman awoke. It was broad daylight, and she immediately decided to follow the hints she had received in dreams. She climbed with difficulty up the mountain, and everything was exactly as she had seen it at night. The old woman received her kindly and asked her to sit down. "There must have met with a misfortune, since thou hast sought out my lonely cottage," she said. The wife told her tears, the what had happened. "Teams now just crying," said the old man, "I'll help you. Here you have a golden comb. Wait until the full moon has come back and then go down to the reeds, sit on the shore and rode your long, black hair with this comb. When you are done, put it on the banks, and then see what happens. "the woman returned home, but the time passed slowly for her. At last the shining moon in the sky, and she went down to the reeds, and sat down to comb her long black hair with the golden comb. When she was finished, she laid it on the shore. Soon after came a roar in the depths, a wave rose up and washed over the shore and took the comb with him. It lasted no longer than one could imagine, the comb to sink to the bottom, then raised hunter's head above the water surface. He said nothing, but looked sorrowfully at his wife. The moment came a wave crashing and swept over his head. Everything disappeared, reeds lay peaceful as before and only full moon shone in vandet.Bedrøvet went the young wife home, and in the dream she saw again the old in the cottage. Next morning she again set out and complained of his misfortune to the wise woman. She gave her a golden flute, and said, "Wait until the full moon comes again. Sit so by the pond and blowing a pretty song and put the flute on the banks, when finished. Then see what happens." The wife did as the old had said. When she had put the whistle on the sand stirring in the depths, a wave washed over the country and train whistle with sig.Lidt the water parted, and not only the head, but half of his body came into view. Longingly he spread his arms, but another wave swept over him and he disappeared into the depths. "What does it help that I see my beloved, only to lose him again," said the unhappy wife. She was as sad as before, but in the dream she came for the third time to the old man's house. She set out, and the wise woman gave her a golden spinning-wheel, consoled her and said: "It is not finished yet. Wait till the full moon, and sit so the pond and fiber spindle full. Ask spinning wheel close down by the water when you're done, and then see what happens. "The young wife did quite as she had said. When it was full moon she sat down on the bank and spun eagerly, for she had spun flax came, and the spindle was full of thread. When she had the wheel standing on the banks rustled the water even stronger than before, and a huge wave swept him away. The moment shot a jet of water high up, and her husband's head, and the whole figure appeared. Quickly he jumped up on the shore, grabbed his wife's hand, and they fled away. But when they had gone a little distance away, there came a mighty roar, and streamed changing rapidly across the field. The two fugitives already saw death come when the woman in her anxiety the old to help, and at that moment she was turned into a toad, he into a frog. The water, which had overtaken them could not destroy them, but it separated them and carried them far away from hinanden.Da water had dispersed and they again touched dry land, they received their human form. But neither knew where the other was. They were among strangers who do not know their native land. Mountain and valley lay between them. For many years they drifted their flocks through field and forest and mourned and yearned hinanden.Da spring once again had made its entry, they went both one day away with their herds, and so would they come close to each other . The hunter saw in the distance a herd on a mountain slope and drive his sheep in that direction. So they met in a valley, they did not know each other, but was pleased not to be so alone. They walked on each day out with their flocks. Quite a lot they did not talk together, but they felt a little happier. One evening when the full moon rose in the sky, took the hunter her flute and blew a beautiful, sad song. When he stopped, he saw that the shepherdess was crying. "Why are you crying?" he asked. "How shone the full moon when I last time blew the song on the flute, and my beloved's head popped out of the water," she replied. When he looked at her, it was as if a veil was taken from his eyes, he knew his wife, and when the moon shone on his face, she knew him too. They embraced and kissed each other, and you do not have to ask if they were happy.
The story of a turnip	1388	1737	Danish	There were once two brothers who both served as soldiers, but one rich and the other poor. To try to get a little greener branch, took the poor uniform, and turned farmer, chopped and dug in his small piece of land and sowed beet seeds. The seeds took root and grew a turnip up, which was big and fat, and would not stop growing. The queen of all beets, one might rightly call it, for such a large plant has not been seen before or since. Eventually it was so enormous that it filled a whole cart and two oxen to pull it. The farmer did not really know what he should do with it, and whether he should be happy or sad. Finally he thought, "If I sell it, I get nothing on it, and I might as well eat the small tubes as big. It's best I go up and put before the king." He placed it on a cart, harnessed two oxen and drove up to the castle. "What is this strange thing?" King said, "I have seen very strange in my day, but such a monster has never come to my mind. From what seed is grown, or are you perhaps a happy child, for whom everything goes at will." - "I'm just a poor old soldier," he replied, "but I took off his uniform and began to cultivate the land, to see to earn a little. I have a brother who is rich, as you know well, but I is poor and therefore has the world forgotten me. " The king felt sorry for him. "I'll take care of you," he said, "you have to be so rich that you do not have to stick up for your brother." He gave him both gold and land and cattle, so he was so rich that his brother could not be compared with him. When this was told that he had achieved all this with one single turnip, he was very jealous and began to wonder what he had to do to achieve such happiness. He would carry a much wiser way and brought the king gold and horses and thought that he had to get something wonderful in return when his brother had gotten so much for a paltry turnip. The king thanked him and said he could not give him any more rare than the great turnip. He then had to unload it on the cart and run home with it, but he was beside himself with anger and did not know who he was going to let his anger go beyond. Finally, he conceived the plan to kill his brother, and hired some murderers who should stand in the ambush and fall upon him when he passed. Then he went up to him and said: "I have found a secret treasure. Come on, we share it." The other agreed with it and harbored no suspicions. But when they came out, the murderers fell, bound him, they would hang him up a tree. At that moment there came hooves and cheerful singing in the distance, and they were so terrified that they are in a hurry stopped him in a bag, hung it on a branch and took flight. He, however, was not other than a young companion that very merry came riding through the woods. He up there, had worn so long, he had made a hole he could stick his head out of, and then another came riding by, he shouted: "Well met." The student looked round about, and when he could not make out where the voice came from, he asked: "Who is it that calls me?" - "Look up here," the voice replied, "Here I sit in wisdom sack. Everything you learn in schools is nothing against it, I have learned up here a very short time. In a little while I trained, I am the wisest person in the world. I can read the stars, understand the wind's voice and know what is written on the ocean floor. I can cure all diseases, knows the secret herbs and at what power living in the stones. If you were here, would you feel what noble things of wisdom sack. " As journeyman heard it, he was astonished, and said: "Thank God, I have met you. Do not I get a little down in the sack?" He up there pretending he was not much of it. "Yes, good words, and pay you must at least be allowed to come down here for a moment," he said, "but wait a minute, there's something I must first be done." The time fell journeyman down there long, and a little later he asked again whether he soon had to get up there and get his thirst for knowledge. "Yes, yes," he said, "then take hold of the rope, and down, so you need to get into." When the journeyman had helped him out, he would even let the sack down and shouted: "draw me up in a hurry," but the man grabbed him. "So easy it will not work," he said, put him on the head in the sack, fastened it, and hoisted as the inquisitive young man up in the tree, so he swung back and forth in the air. "How are you my friend?" he said, "you've already noticed that wisdom come? Sit so nicely quiet, for you have become wiser." Then he sat up in s horse and rode away and sent an hour after a bid like that should help him down again.
Six soldiers coming through worldwide	675	513A	Danish	There was once a man who understood a great deal. He had been in the war and fought bravely, and when peace was made, he received his dismissal, and three farthings on the road. "Wait just," he thought, "it seems I am not satisfied with. Once I find the right man, I can use the king will have to give me all the treasures." He went into the forest, and there he saw a man there by six trees up so easily as if it were grass. "Will you go with me and be my servant?" he asked. "Yes, I will," answered the other, "but I must just take this bit of wood home to my mother." Then he twisted one tree on the other five, put them on the shoulder and went away with them. Then he came back to his master. "We two will come from around the world," he said. When they had gone a little, they saw a hunter who was on his knees with the gun to the cheek. "What are you aiming at?" asked the gentleman. "Two mil from here there sits a fly on a oak branch," said the hunter, "I will shoot its left eye out." "Oh, go without me," the man said, "When we three stay together, we'll get through Worldwide." The hunter immediately said yes, and they went on. And then they came to seven windmills whose wings went round gallop, although there was a wind that moved. "How can the mills but go when it is calm," said the man amazed. When they had resulted in two mil on, they saw a man sitting in a tree, holding one nostril and blowing out through the other. "What in the world are you doing up there?" asked the man. "I blow seven windmills that stand two mil from here," he replied. "Come and go with me," the man said, "four of us together throughout the world." Blower got down from the tree and went with them, and after a while they came to a man who had hitched one leg, and laid it beside him. "It is a really convenient way to rest," said the man. "I'm running," he replied, "and I've taken the leg of, that it should not go too fast. When I run on both legs go faster than a bird can fly." - "Will you go with me?" asked the man, "five of enough stand against the world." They walked them all together, and soon after they met a man who had the hat on one ear. "How is it, however, you look like," said the man, "You look just like a fool. Set thy hat off." - "I do not dare," he replied, "for when I do it, it becomes so cold that birds freeze and fall dead to the ground." - "Come and follow me," the man said, "when we have six stick together, we get enough through the whole world." Then she came to a city. The king had let announce that it could run faster than his daughter would make her break, but he did not succeed, he would lose his head. The man came forward and said that he would let her run for him. "Then you must also put his life in pawn," King said, "then it's both your and his head." The man went in to tense the leg on the runner, and exhorted him to do the thing well. It was decided that the one who should fetch water from a well which was far away, had won. They each received a mug in her hand and began to run at the same time. But when the princess had come a little, was the runner already out of sight and rushed by like the wind. Shortly after he reached the well, filled the mug and turned. On the way home he was so tired that he put the mug down and lay down to sleep. For that it should not last too long before he woke up, he put a very hard stone under his head. However, the king's daughter, who ran as good as any ordinary man, had reached the well and hurried back with the mug. When she saw the runner lying there and sleeping, she thought happy: "Him have I in my power," emptied his pitcher and ran on. Now all had been lost if not for the huntsman who was standing on the castle and seen it all with his sharp eyes. "We're gonna be us against the princess," he said, loaded his gun and shot the stone from under the runner's head without doing anything to him. He awoke and jumped up and saw that the mug was empty and she had a long way in advance. But he did not lose heart, ran back to the well, filled the mug and was home ten minutes before the princess. "See, now I only used my legs," he said, "the other was not anything to talk about." But the king and even more the princess was vexed that she should have a discharged common soldier; and took counsel together how to get rid of him and his comrades, and finally found the king of anything. "Do not be afraid," he told his daughter, "I have found a way, so you probably will not need them." Then he said to the soldier: "Now you will get food and drink, so I can have a little themselves heartily," and he brought them so into a room where the floor and the door was of iron and the windows barred with iron rods. There was a table with the best food and the king commanded them take care of the dishes. So locked and bolted his door right securely and ordered the cook to fire in the living room, the iron was glowing. He took hold, and the six men began to feel that there was something warm, but they thought it was because they ate. Unit trains, however, and finally could not stand it anymore. But when they would go their way and found the door locked, they felt the that the king had an evil plan and had wanted to strangle them. "It shall not succeed," he said with his hat, "now it's come such a cold, the fire should be ashamed, and creep into a mousehole." Then he took the hat, and immediately it was ice cold and the food on the dishes began to freeze. Since there had been a few hours the king thought they might have died from the heat, and went himself to look for them. But when the door was opened they stood there all six healthy and said it was nice, they could come out and warm themselves, for the great cold that had been there, the food was frozen to the dishes. The king was furious down to the chef and asked why he had not obeyed his command. "There is fire enough," said the cook, "see only yourself." The king so now that an immense fire burning in the living room and felt well enough that he is not on the show could get six to livs.Men he was still thinking about how he should be rid of them and let the soldier call for himself and said: "If you will give up your right to my daughter, you need to get as much gold you will." - "Let go," he replied, "when I get just as much as my servant can carry, I do not care about your daughter." The king was pleased with it and it was determined that the man had to have it in two weeks. He let all the tailors in the whole kingdom called to him, and they had in the 14 days sit and sew a sack, and when it was ready, the strong guy who came up trees on the neck and went up to the castle. "What kind of a huge guy with a roll of canvas as big as a house on the shoulder," said the king, but he was the somewhat horrified at the thought of all the gold he could carry with them. Sixteen of the strongest men was dragged with a ton of gold, but the guy grabbed it with one hand, put it in the bag and said, "Why do not you bring more of the same. This hardly covers the bottom." King eventually had to leave all his treasures download, but the bag was not even half full. "Bring more," cried the man, "the bit does not take anything." Seven thousand carts laden with gold driven up in a row and was in his sack, wagon and oxen and all. "Now I take what comes, so the bag can be full," he said, but when he had put it all in it, there was room for much even. "Now I tie the bag, even if it is not full, however to get the end of the matter," he said, put it on his back and walked away with his kammerater.Kongen was furious when he saw that one man walked away with all its treasures, and let his riders mount their horses and ride after him and take the bag from him. It was not long before two regiments reached them, and the captain shouted, "You are prisoners, put immediately sack from you otherwise chipper we you to pieces." - "What," said the fan, "do you think we are your prisoners. It will probably be you who comes to dance in the air." Then he held for one nostril and blew through the other, and both regiments flew up in the air over the hills, the one facing east, the other west. A sergeant begged for mercy. It was a brave guy who had nine wounds, and did not deserve such a disgrace. The fan held a little inside so he unscathed came down to earth, and then said to him: "Go home and tell the king that he should just send more, I will blow them all up in the air." When the king heard the message, he said: "Let the fellows be; they have more than their Lord's Prayer." The six comrades carried home their treasure, divided it and lived happily until their death.
Sir. Korbes	390	210	Danish	There was once a hen and a rooster, who decided to make a journey together. Cock built a beautiful carriage with four red wheels, and harnessed four mice, and then sat up in it and drove off. Shortly after they met a cat who said: "Where are you going?" "Our small muskører us out to Mr. Korbes house." said tap. "Take me with?" asked the cat. "Most willingly," said the cock, "get up behind, lest you enter ned.Men beware, the wheel not in soiling må.Rask off, remove the legs med.Vores small muskører us out to Mr. Korbes house." Then came a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin, and finally a sewing needle, and all they were allowed to run. But when they came to Mr. Korbes house, he was not home. The mice put the car into the shed, the tap and the chicken wing up on a rod, the cat lay down in the chimney-corner, another in the basin, the egg is wound into the towel, the pin seated himself in the chair seat, the sewing needle in the pillow of the bed and the millstone above the door. When Mr. Korbes came home, he went to the stove and would light a fire, but the cat threw the ashes up in his face. He ran into the kitchen to wash herself, but another splashed water in his face. When he grabbed the towel to dry himself, he came to crush the egg and sticky his eyes. He then sat on the chair to rest, but the pin pricked him, and when he furiously threw himself on the bed, he was sewing needle into the head so that he screamed and jumped up to run away. But when he came to the door, fell millstone down and killed him. But Mr. Korbes must certainly have been a very bad man.
Dog and the Sparrow	553	248	Danish	There once was a shepherd who had a gentleman who was kind to him, but let it starve. Eventually it could no longer bear to be with him, but ran away. On the road he met a sparrow who asked, "Why are you so sad, brother dog." - "I'm hungry and have nothing to eat," said the dog. "Come with me into the city, then I will help you," said the sparrow, and they journeyed. When they came to a butcher's shop the sparrow said, "Stand here, and I'll throw a piece of meat down to you." Then, as the round to be sure that no one noticed it, and chopped and toiled so long in a piece of meat until it fell off the hook. Dog snapped it in a hurry, dragged him into a corner and ate it. "Come with me to another shop and get a piece," said the bird. When the dog had eaten it, asked it: "Are you now satisfied?" - "Yes, the meat I've had enough of," said he, "but the bread I have not tasted." - "This is what we get," said the sparrow, and flew to a bakery shop. There chopped it a few bread down to the dog, and since it would have even more, it flew to another store. "Are you now satisfied?" asked the saw. "Yes," replied the dog, "now let us go a little outside the city." They went out on the road. It was very hot, and when they had gone a little dog said: "Now I could probably have wanted to sleep a little. I'm tired." - "Yes, do only that," replied the bird, "then I sit up in a tree for so long." The dog lay then to sleep in the middle of the road, and a moment later a cart loaded with two casks of wine and three horses. The sparrow saw that the driver did not intend to run to the side of the dog, said: "If you do not turn the coachman, I make you unhappy." - "I'll see before I believe it," grumbled the coachman cracked his whip and drove right over the dog, so the immediate died. "It must cost you a horse and cart," cried the sparrow. "You imagining probably something in," said the coachman, and drove on. Sparrow crept under the vogndækkenet and chopped as long as the bunghole to bung went loose and all the wine ran out without the driver noticing it. As he gradually turned around, he saw that the cart was dripping, and when he looked more closely, it was one dish empty. "I unhappy man," he shouted, but the sparrow said, "You have not had enough yet," and flew away and pecked out the eyes of one horse. When the driver so he pulled vognkæppen out and threw it at the sparrow, but she flew away, and the blow struck the horse in the head, so that it fell down dead. "I unhappy man," he shouted. "You have not had enough yet," said the sparrow, and when the man drove on with the two horses, he crawled under the car deck and chopped hole on the second platter, so the wine flowed. When the driver discovered it, he shouted again: "I'm unhappy man." But the sparrow flew and pecked out the eyes of the other horse. Enraged struck the driver after but hit the horse, who fell down dead. "I unhappy man," he shouted, but the sparrow said, "You have not had enough yet," and also chopped out the eyes of the third horse. The driver hit out in blind rage and hit the horse in the head so that it crashed dead. "I unhappy man," he shouted. "You have not had enough yet," said the sparrow, "Now I fly home to your house." The driver had to leave the car and went home. "You do not know where I've had bad luck with me," he said to his wife, "all the wine has run out and all my horses are dead." - "You can not imagine what a terrible bird here has come," she replied, "it has attracted all sorts of birds here, and they have embarked upon the wheat and eat it." - "I'm unhappy man," shouted the driver. "You have not had enough yet," said the sparrow, "it must be costing you your life." The driver had now lost everything he owned and had, and was sitting by the stove and was beside himself with rage. The sparrow sat outside the window and shouted: "It must be costing you your life." The driver grabbed a stick and threw it at the, but broke the window without taking it. The sparrow flew up on the stove and sat there and cried out: "It must be costing you your life." Competitor up and beat the oven on, and as the sparrow flew around the room, he threw everything he could get hold of, for it mirrors, benches and tables and finally he tore the walls down without taking it. But finally he caught the dog in his hand. "Shall I kill it," he thought, "no, that was too easy a death I will eat her." There on he put it in his mouth, but the sparrow began to fly on down in his belly and wing finally up and stuck his head out of his mouth. "It must be costing you your life," shrieked as the coachman, handed his wife the pole and said, "Turn the bird to death." The woman struck, but hit her husband on the head so that he fell dead, and the sparrow flew away.
House in the Woods	1614	431	Danish	There was once a poor woodcutter who lived with his wife and three daughters in a little hut on the edge of a large forest. One morning when he was at work, he said to his wife: "Let our eldest daughter bring my food into the forest to me, otherwise I can not finish. For her not to get lost I'll take a bag of grain with and sprinkle it on the road. " As the sun rose high in the sky, the girl set out on the road with a pot of soup. But skovspurvene and larks and bogfinkerne had long ago chopped grain up, and she could not find the way. So she went on at random, the sun sank and night broke. It whistled in the dark trees, owls hooted, and she began to be afraid. When she saw in the distance a light flashing through the trees. "There must be some people living there who will give me shelter at night," she thought and went towards the light. It was not long before she came to a house with lighted windows. She knocked, and a rough voice called out: "Come in." The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked on the room door. "Come in," cried the voice again. She opened the door and walked into the living room. There sat an old, gray-haired man at a table; he supported his face in both hands and his white beard was so long that it was completely over the floor. At the furnace was three animals, a hen, a cock and a patchy cow. The girl told the old man what had happened to her and asked if she could stay the night. The man said: "Pretty little hen, what should we do? Dun cow cow, let your opinion heard." "Duks," answered the animals, and it must have meant for the old saying, "Go into the kitchen and make dinner." The girl went out, there was full up of everything. She cooked a good soup and put the dish on the table in front of the old man sat down beside him and ate and drank. When she had enough, she said: "Now I'm tired. Where there is a bed I can sleep in?" The animals replied, "Only for yourself you have made, and not a bite to us you bar.Sov as you can and where you want, we look for." But the old man said: "Go up the stairs, so you come to a room with two beds. Them up, and put white linen on them, I'll come up there and put me also to sleep." The girl went up there, and when she had shaken the beds, she lay down in the one without waiting for the old. Some time later, the old man up there, held the light over the bed, looked at her and shook his head. When he saw that she was asleep, he opened a trapdoor in the floor and let her fall into kælderen.Brændehuggeren came home late at night and scolded his wife, because she had made him hunger all day. "It's not my fault," she replied, "the girl went out with your dinner, she must be lost. Tomorrow, she will return home." Before dawn, the woodcutter up and go into the forest. The day had the second daughter to bring him food. "I take a bag with lentils," he said, "they are larger than hemp seed, the ones she can better see, so she can not mistake the way." At noon, the girl took out the food, but the lentils had disappeared. Forest birds had pecked them up every single one. The girl went so haphazardly about in the forest until night, then came she to the old man's house, knocked and asked for food and shelter. The man with the white beard again asked the animals, "Pretty little hen, what should we do? Flecked cow, let your thoughts us know." The animals again replied head of the class, and it was like the day before. The girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank with the old and did not think of the animals. When she asked to get in bed they answered: "Only for yourself you have made, and not a bite to us you bar.Sov as you can and where you want, we look for." When she was asleep, the old man came, looked at her, shook her head and let her fall into kælderen.Den third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife: "Send our youngest child out with the food. She always been good and obedient; she will be on the right path and not wander around like the other wild cats. " The mother would not have it and said: "Am I to lose my dearest child?" - "Do not be afraid," he replied, "the girl does not get lost, she is too prudent and sensible. I even enjoy peas and sprinkle on the road, they are even bigger than lenses, they'll show her the way. " But when the girl came out of the forest with the basket on her arm had doves already swallowed the peas and she did not know which way she should go. She was very distressed and kept thinking that her poor father got no food, and that her mother would cry if she did not come home. Since it was dark, she saw a light and came to the house in the woods. She asked modestly if she could stay the night, and the man with the white beard again asked his animals, "Pretty little hen, what should we do? Flecked cow, let your thoughts us know." "Duks," they said. So the girl went over to the stove where the animals were, applauded cock and hen and tickled the brindled cow between the horns. And when she at the old man's command had made soup and applied it to the table, she said: "I would first make sure the animals have enough food for them out there. They're not going to starve, while I sit here and eat my fill . " She went out and brought some barley and stewed it for the hen and cock and brought the cow one armful of sweet smelling hay. "Now let it taste you," she said, "now you must also get something to drink." She fetched a bucket of water, the chicken and the rooster jumped up on the edge, dipped their beaks in the water and stretched his head up, as the birds do when they drink, and the spotted cow took also a long draft. When the animals were fed, the girl seated herself to the old at the table and ate what he had left. Little by stack cock and hen head under the wing and the cow likewise began nearly failed his eyes. The girl asked, "Should we go to bed?" "Pretty little hen, what should we do? Flecked cow, let your thoughts us know." The animals answered "You little girl, gentle and good, which gave us of your abundance, your rent waiting, white and soft, slept sweetly." The girl went up the stairs, made the beds and put clean sheets on, and when she had finished the old man came up there and lay in one bed and his white beard reached down to his feet. The girl lay in the other, said her prayers and slept ind.Hun slept quietly till midnight, when there was such a noise in the house that she awoke. It crackled and rustled in every corner, the door burst open and banged against the wall, beams groaned as if they were torn out of all joints, it sounded as if the stairs collapsed, and finally roared as if the whole roof fell in. Then it was quiet again, and since there had been her any harm, she was lying quietly and fell asleep again. But what do you think she saw when she awoke the next morning, and the sun shone into her? She was in a large hall and around her shone in royal splendor. The walls were covered with green silk, woven with golden flowers. The bed was of ivory and purple velvet sky and on a chair next to was a pair of shoes embroidered with pearls. The girl thought it was a dream, but then came three richly clad servants and asked what she had to command. "I can go," the girl said, "Now I get up and boil soup for the old man and feed the chicken, cock and the spotted cow." She turned to see if the old man had stood up, but when she saw that there was a young, handsome man in his bed. At that moment he woke up, stood up and said: "I am a prince and was by an evil witch turned into an old man and had to live out in the woods. No one other than my three servants might be with me in the guise of a hen , a rooster and a brindled cow. the spell was not lifted until there came a young girl who had such a good heart that she not only loved the people, but also animals. You have saved us, and the old house in the forest now once again turned into my royal palace. " King said the servants to pick up the girl's father and mother to the wedding. "Where are my two sisters?" she asked. "They are locked up in the basement," he replied, "tomorrow they led into the forest to a charcoal-burner and serve with him until they have learned to be kind to animals."
What the old man does is always right	2527	1415	Danish	Let me tell you a story that I heard when I was little, and every time I have since thought about it, I think it was much prettier; for it is with stories as with many people, they become more and more beautiful with age, and it's so enjoyable! You've been out of the country? You have seen a very old farmhouse with a thatched roof; moss and weeds grow by themselves; a stork is on the ridge, the stork can not do without, the walls are crooked, windows low, yes, there's only one of which can be closed up; baking oven sticks out like a small thick stomach, and shelf bush leans over the gate, where there is a small puddle of water with a duck or returns, just below the rugged willow tree. Yes, and then there is a watchdog, which makes of all and enhver.Netop was a farmhouse that out in the country, and it lived a few people, a peasant and his wife. In how little they had, they could not do without one piece, it was a horse that was grazing on the road ditch. Father rode into the town, the neighbors borrowed it, and he got service for service, but it was probably more expedient carefully for them to sell the horse or exchange it for one thing and another, even more could be the ones to benefit. But what would it be. "That you, cousin, best understand!" said the woman, "It's market day in the market town, ride you in, get money for the horse or make a good exchange; as you do, it's always right. ride to the fair!" And then she tied his cravat, for it understood she is much better than he; she tied with double loop, the so gallant, and so she plastered his hat with the flat of her hand and she kissed him on his warm mouth, and then he rode off on his horse to be sold or bartered. Yes, summarizes understood det.Solen burned, there were no clouds up! The road dusty, there were so many market people, in wagons, on horseback and on their own feet. It was a fierce sun, and there was no shade on the way.There came along, driving a cow, as pretty as a cow can be. "It gives good milk!" I thought the farmer, it could be a very good exchange to get it. "You know, you with the cow!" he said, "Let's have a little talk, you see, a horse, I think, costs more than a cow, but it's the same, I have more use for a cow Shall we exchange?" "Certainly, " said the man with the cow and then swapped de.Nu it was done, and so could the farmer have turned back, he had accomplished what he wanted, but as he once had thought that would come to the market, he would come to market just to look at it; So he went with his cow. He walked briskly, and the cow walked briskly, and so they were soon to go right next to a man who was driving a sheep. It was a good sheep, in good condition and well with wool. "I'd like to have!" thought the peasant. "It would not really miss grazing beside our ditch, and the winter we could take it into the room with him. Perhaps it would be more correct of us to have a sheep than a cow. Shall we exchange?" Yes, it would as the man with the sheep was quite ready, and the bargain was made, and the farmer went with his sheep along the road. Overtook he saw a man with a big goose under his arm. "It's a tough one, you have!" said the farmer, "it has plenty of feathers and fat, and would look great in tether water at our place it was something for the mother to collect the scraps for She has often said, 'If we had a goose!' Now she can get it - and she must get it! you prey? I give you my sheep for your goose, and thanks to "Yes, it would then the other enough, and so they swapped; the farmer got the goose. Close to the city he was, congestion on the road increased, there was a rush of men and cattle; they went on the road and the ditch straight up in bommandens potatoes, where one fowl was tethered for not scare straying and be gone. It was a bobtailed hen that winked with one eye, so good. "Cluck, cluck!" said; what the thought that, I would not say, but the peasant thought when he saw her: She's the prettiest hen I've ever seen, she is prettier than our parson's brood hen, the I'd like to have! A hen can always a grain, it can almost take care of itself! I think it is a good exchange if I got it for the goose! "Shall we exchange?" he asked. "Exchange!" The second said, "So it was not so bad!" and so they swapped. Bommanden got goose farmer got hønen.Det was a great deal, he had done on the trip to the city; and hot it was, and tired he was. A drink and a bite he needed; Now he was at the inn that he would enter; but krokarlen wanted out, met him at the door with a sackful of something. "What is that?" asked the farmer. "Rotten apples!" said the youth, "a whole sackful for the pigs!" "It's a dangerous amount! the vision begrudged me mother. last year we had only one single apple on the old tree by the peat shed the apple should be saved, and it stood on the cabinet till it burst. it is always a wealth! 'mother said here she could get wealth to see! Yes, I wish she could have it! "" well, what'll you give? " asked the servant. "Gives? I give you my hen," and then he gave the hen, took the apples and went into the inn, straight up to the bar, his bag of apples he put up against the stove, and was established in it hesitated he did not. Many guests were in the living room, horse dealers, cattle dealers, and two Englishmen, and they are so rich that their pockets were bursting with gold coins; bet they do, now you shall hear! "Hiss-hiss-ss" what was that noise at the stove? The apples were beginning to roast. "What is it?" Yes, it was the then soon to know! the whole story of the horse that had been traded for sex and straight down to the rotten apples. "Well, your old woman will give, when you get home!" said the British, "there will be a noise?" "I have not scolded but kissed!" said the farmer, "our mother would say: What man does is the right thing!" "Shall we bet!" they said, "gold by the barrel! hundred pounds is a weight?" "It's probably a bushel!" said the farmer, "I can only set a bushel of apples and myself and mutter, but that's more than strygmål, it is heaped!" "Top! Top!" they said, and so was the bet gjort.Kromandens carriage appeared, the English came up, the farmer came up, the rotten apples got into it, and so they came to the peasant's house. "Good evening, mother!" "Thanks, Dad!" " now I have made prey! "" Yes, you understand it! " said the woman, took him around the waist and the sack and the stranger. "I have exchange for the horse for a cow!" "Thank God for the milk!" said the woman, "Now we can have milk, butter and cheese on the table. It was a nice booty!" "Yes, but I changed the cow for a sheep!" "That's still better!" the woman said, "you're always so thoughtful for a sheep, we have just enough pasture. Now we can get sheep's milk and sheep's cheese and woolen stockings, yes, woolen nightgown! the cow could not give her hair only! You think of everything man! "" But the sheep I gave away a goose! "" Then we shall have roast goose to eat this year sums up! You always think of something to please me it's a beautiful thought! the goose can stand in the tether and be even fatter for Michaelmas "" But the goose I gave away for a hen! " said the man. "Ladybug! it was a good exchange," said the woman, "hen will lay eggs, hatch them, and we have chickens; we get chicken run! I have just so fervently wished me!" "Yes, but the chicken I swapped for a sack of rotten apples, "" Now I kiss you! " the woman said, "My dear, good man! Let me tell you something. When you were away, I thought of making a really good meal for you: omelette with chives. I had the eggs, chives. Then I went over to the schoolmaster's having the chives, I know, but the wife is barren, so sweetly I asked to borrow -! loan? she said. Nothing grows in our garden, not even a rotten apple! not that I can borrow her now I can lend her ten, yes, a whole bag full! it funny, father! " Then she kissed him right in the mouth. "I like that!" said the English. "Always downhill and always merry it is probably worth the money!" So they paid a hundred-weight of gold to the peasant, who was kiss and not knubs.Jo, it always pays when the wife realizes and explains that knows best, and whatever he does, it rigtige.Se, it is now a history! that I heard as a child, and now you have heard it and know that what man does is always right.
Hørskæverne	1486	1451	Danish	There was once a girl who was beautiful, but very lazy. When she had to spin she was so impatient that she tore an entire lump of linen on the floor if there was a small knot. She had a servant who was industrious, and she gathered all the linen, which was on the floor, cleaned it and spun it and got a beautiful gown made of it. The lazy girl had been engaged to a young man. The evening before the wedding danced the studious girl merrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said, "No, see, she does jump around in my odds and ends." The groom then asked what it meant, and she told him that the girl was wearing a dress that was made of the flax, she had thrown away. When the bridegroom heard it, it dawned on him how idle she was, and he gave her up and went and asked the industrious girl if she would be his wife.
Iron John	1293	502	Danish	There was once a king who had a great forest, in which there were all kinds of wild animals. One day, one of the hunters had been sent there to shoot a deer, he did not come back. "There is perhaps accident has befallen him," said the king and the next day he sent out two more huntsmen to look for him, but they too stayed away. As he gathered all his huntsmen, and charged them explore the forest criss-cross to find the three, but none of them came back, and not a single one of all the dogs they had brought with him, appeared again. From now on, no one dared venture into the forest, and for many years was the deserted, only sometimes an eagle or a hawk over it. Once, a foreign hunter to the castle and would have service there, and he offered to go into the dangerous forest. The king, however, would not allow him to, saying, "It is not safe there. I am afraid it will go just like the others, you come really does not back out." The huntsman by its decision and said: "I am not afraid of anything." He went all into the woods with his dog. Shortly after getting the wind of an animal and would run after it, but because it had run a few steps, came before a deep lake, and a long, bare arm sticking out of the water, grabbed it and pulled it into the depths. When the hunter saw it, he went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the water. They saw then that down there at the bottom was a great man who was quite dark brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung down over her face right up to his knees. They bound him and brought him to the palace, where there was great amazement, and the king had him put in an iron cage in the yard and banned the death penalty anyone to open the door. The Queen was given the key to the cage. From now on there was peaceful in the woods, so one could again move der.Kongen had a son of eight years. One day when he ran out in the yard and played ball, dropped his golden ball into the cage. The boy ran to him and said to the man that he should throw it out to him. "Not until you close the door," the man replied. "I do not dare," said the boy, "the king has forbidden it." The following day he again went and asked for his ball. "Open the door," said the wild man. The boy would not, but the third day, when the king was hunting, he came back and said: "Even if I wanted to, I could not shut up for you, for I have no key." - "It lies under your mother's pillow," the man said. The boy, who wanted to have his ball back, cast all thought of himself and brought the key. The door was hard to open, and he squeezed her fingers skillfully, but finally succeeded. The man gave him the ball and walked away with long strides, but the boy cried anxiously: "Do not go, do not go, then I get a beating." The man turned around, put the boy up on his shoulders and went quickly into the woods. When the king came home and saw the empty cage, he asked the queen how it had happened. She did not know anything about it, but the key was gone, and when she called his son, there was no one answered. The king sent out people to look for him, but they did not find him. They could easily guess how it had happened, and was very bedrøvede.Da the wild man had come into the woods, he took the boy to the ground and said, "Your father and mother see you never more, but you have freed me and I feel sorry for you, so please stay with me, and if you do what I say, you need to get well. I have more gold and more tax than any other in the world. " Then he combed a bed of moss for the boy who lay then and fell asleep. The next morning he woke him, went with him to a golden well and said, "Look, the water is clean and clear as crystal. You must keep watch here and take care that nothing falls into it, it becomes unclean . Every night I come and look after you've done what you had to. " The boy sat by the well and saw that several times appeared a goldfish and also once a snake down there and took care that nothing fell into the water. Suddenly he so sore finger that he involuntarily put it in the well. When he picked it up, it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold off, failed. In the evening came the man who was called Iron John, there, looked at the boy and asked, "What happened to the well?" - "Nothing," replied the boy and held his hand on his back, but the man said: "You stuck your finger into the water. This time I forgive you, but beware of disobeying more." By daybreak the boy went to the well again. His fingers ached, and he passed it over his head, unhappily a hair fell into the water. When Iron Hans came, he knew already what had happened. "You have a hair fall into the well," he said. "This time even I will let justice with mercy, but it happens once the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with me." On the third day the boy sat without moving your finger, however much it hurt did. But time was long to him, and he bent over the edge of your reflection. Eventually he bowed so low that his long hair fell into the water. He raised himself up, but the hair was already golden and shone like the sun on his head. He took his handkerchief and tied it on his head to hide it, but when the man came in the evening, he knew already know. "Take the handkerchief off," he said, and when the boy did it, poured the golden curls back and all his excuses did nothing. "You have not passed the test," said Iron John, "you can not stay here any longer. Go forth into the world, then you should get to know what it is to be poor. But you have a pure heart, and I think it is still good with you. When you get in trouble, you just have to go out there and shout, "Iron John," I'll come and help you. My power is greater than you think, and gold and silver, I have enough of. "the prince went out of the woods, across roads and fields, until he came to a big city. There he looked for work but could not get anything since he had learned nothing. Eventually he went to the palace and asked if he could get service there. They did not know what to use him, but liked him, and let him be. Finally the cook took him into service, saying he could carry water and firewood and sweep up the ashes. One day when there was not anyone else at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal table, and when he did not want anyone to see his golden hair that he kept his cap on. The king was not used to and said: "Duma did not really come to the royal table with his hat on." - "Excuse me, sir," he replied, "but I have to, because I have a bad sore head." The king became angry and asked the chef where it could occur to him to take such a boy into his service, he was immediately driven away. The cook had pity on him and exchanged him with gartnerdrengen.Han now had to plant and dig in the garden in any weather. One summer when he was alone down there, it was so hot that he took his hat on to the wind would cool his brow slightly. As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the princess's bedchamber, and she jumped up to see what it was. Then she saw the boy and shouted, "Bring me a bouquet of flowers, boy. "He put his hat on and gathered wild flowers and bound them together. On the stairs he met the gardener, who said," How canst thou take the princess such tacky flowers. Hurry down and pick up some of the precious and rare plants that stand out in the garden. "-" She'll probably think better of these, "replied the boy," wild flower smells strongest. "When he came into the room, said the Princess "Take your hat off. It is not proper that you keep it in the room. "-" I have to, "he replied," I have a sore head. "The princess was in a hurry his cap away from him, then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders. He wanted to run away, but she held on to him and gave him a handful of ducats. the prince did not care about the gold, but gave it to the gardener: "Here's something your kids can play with," said he said. the next day the King's daughter him again on a bouquet of wild flowers, and when he came into the room she would tear the hat of him, but he held on with both hands and the gold pieces, she gave him, he gave back the gardener's children. the third day was the same. She could not get his cap away from him, and he did not like guldet.Kort time after the country went to war. the king gathered together his people, but doubted, however, that he could stand against the enemy, whose army was much larger. "I will also be at war," said the gardener's boy, "I'm big enough to it. Give me a horse. "The others laughed at him and said," We'll let one be to you. When we are drawn to the place you can go down in the stall and take it. "When they were gone, the boy went down in the barn. There was indeed a horse, but it was lame in one leg and limped. He sat down anyway up on it and rode away to the great forest. There he called Iron John, so loud that it echoed through the trees. A moment later the man came and asked what he wanted. "I would like a strong horse, because I going to war, "he replied." What you get and more, "said Iron John. It was not long, then a groom out of the woods with a lovely horse, which snorted and huffed and was hardly to control . Afterwards him was a large crowd armed warriors whose lances flashed in the sun. the prince gave staldkarlen the lame horse, climbed up on the other and rode at the head of his men to the battlefield. A large part of the king's men had already fallen, and the rest could make little resistance. Then came the prince rushing like a whirlwind at the head of his iron-clad crowd and cut down indiscriminately. The enemy would escape, but they were cut down, every one. Instead of returning to the King's son out to the woods and called Iron John, who asked what he wanted. "Take your horse and your warriors again," he replied, "and give me my three-legged horse." He got what he demanded, and rode back to the castle on his old nag. When the king came back, walked his daughter to meet him and wished him joy of his victory. "It is not me who is the victor," replied he, "but a strange knight who came to my aid with his men." She wanted to know who it was, but the king did not know, and said, "He followed the enemy, and I have not seen him since." She went down to the gardener and asked where his boy, and he told her: "He has just come home on his three-legged horse" and the other pointed a finger at him and shouted: "Hinkeben behind what a bush have you been sleeping? " He replied: "If I had not been, it would have gone badly off." And then he obviously even more of ham.Kongen called now at her daughter and said, "I will give a big party, which will last three days. You have to throw the golden apples in grams, maybe the unknown knight." When it was announced, the youth went out into the woods and called Iron John, who came and asked what he wanted. "Can you help me to seize the princess's golden apple?" he asked. "You can be as safe as if you already had it in hand," said Iron John. "Wait a minute, I'll give you a red armor and a magnificent chestnut." When the day came, the youth galloped and kept quiet amongst the knights. No one knew him. The princess stepped forward and threw a golden apple to them. He grabbed it and rode off at once. Next day Iron John gave him a white armor and a mold. He again seized the apple and red instant away. The king was now angry. "He must present himself to me and say who he is," he said, and ordered that when the knight next day had ridden away, had his people put him, and if he voluntarily came back, use force. On the third day gave Iron John a black armor and a black horse, and he caught that day princess's apple and rode off. The men pursued him, and one of them got so near him that he wounded him in the leg with the tip of his sword. He escaped yet his pursuers, but again did the horse so violently that the helmet fell off his head, and they could see the golden hair. They rode back and told kongen.Næste day the King's daughter gardener and asked where his boy. "He works in the garden," he replied. "The queer creature has been at the festival and only came home last night and showed my children three golden apples which he had received." The king had him summoned to him, and he came in with his cap on. But the king's daughter went and took it off, then his golden hair fell over her shoulders. All were amazed when they saw how nice it was. "Are you the knight who has been at the party, every day in different colors, and who caught the three golden apples?" the king asked. "Yes," he replied, "here are the apples, and if you want further proof, you can see the wound which your people gave me when they followed me. I am also the knight who triumphed over your enemies." - "You can not be a gardener's boy, when you can perform such deeds," King said, "Who is your father?" - "He is a mighty king," replied the prince, "and gold and silver can I get just as much as I want." - "I am you owe thanks," said the king, "there is nothing I can do for you?" - "Yes," he replied, "Give me your daughter to wife." - "He goes straight loose on the matter," The maiden laughed, "but I have long since looked at his golden hair that he was no gardener's boy." Then she went and kissed him. Word was sent to his father and mother, who was beside himself with joy, for they had given up all hope of seeing their dear son again. At the marriage feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors opened and a stately King came in with his entourage. "I am Iron John," he said, "I was bewitched into a wild man, but you've saved me. Therefore, you also inherit all my treasures."
the iron furnace	1204	425A	Danish	In the old days, when you could get their wishes fulfilled, there lived a prince who was enchanted by an evil witch, so he had to sit in an iron stove in the forest. For many years he was there, and no one could save him. Then a King's daughter lost in the woods and could not find her father's kingdom again. Nine days she walked around in there and came to the iron stove. Suddenly she heard a voice: "Where are you from and where are you going?" - "I can not get home to my father's kingdom again," she replied. "I will help you home," came the voice from the oven, "if you will promise me to do what I ask. I am a prince and will marry you." - "What shall I do with an iron stove?" she thought frightened, but when she wanted to go home to her father, she promised to do what he wanted. "You must return here with a knife and scrape a hole in the iron," he said then. Then there was a next to her, who did not speak to her, but within two hours he took her home. There was great joy in the castle when the Princess came back, and the old King fell on her neck and kissed her. But she said sadly: "I'll tell you how it's done me. I never found out the great forest, if I had not come to an iron stove. I had to promise to come back and liberate it and marry it . " The old king was so terrified that he was about to faint, for it was his only daughter. They therefore resolved they would let the beautiful miller's daughter, who was very into the forest instead of her. She was thus shown there, and they gave her a knife and said she was to scrape at the iron stove. She scraped at twenty-four hours, but there was not the slightest gap. When the day dawned, a voice in the stove said, "I think it is day outside." - "Yes," she replied, "and I think I can hear the noise of my father's mill." - "So you are a miller's daughter," said the voice, "then go straight home and get the princess." She went home and said to the king that the man outside there would have none of her, but wanted his daughter. The king was terrified, and her daughter began to cry. In the city lived, however, a swineherd, who had a daughter who was even prettier than the miller's. She got a piece of gold to go and the iron stove. She tugged at it for twenty-four hours, but there was not a bit to see. When the day broke, a voice inside the stove: "I think it is day outside." - "Yes," she replied, "I also think I hear my father's horn blowing." - "So you are the daughter of a shepherd," said the voice, "go straight home and tell the king's daughter that if she does not keep its promise, the whole kingdom will perish." When the princess heard this, she began to cry, but it was no dear mother, she had to keep what she had promised. She then said goodbye to his father, took a knife and went into the woods. She began to scrape at the iron, and after two hours there was a hole, and when she looked into it, that she there sat a handsome young man whose clothes were adorned with sparkling gems. She scraped on, and after some time the hole so large that he could get out. "You have saved me," he said, "now you are my bride." He wanted to take her to his kingdom, but she asked if she only had to say goodbye to his father. The prince allowed her there, but she had to promise him not to say more than three words and then immediately return to him. But when she came home, she said more than three words, and at that moment the furnace was moved far away over glass mountains and sharp swords. But the prince was saved. She now took leave of his father and went into the woods to look for the oven, but she could not find it. She walked about for nine days, and was then almost died of hunger. In the evening she climbed up a tree because she was afraid of wild animals. At midnight, she saw a light shining in the distance. She climbed down from the tree, knelt down and prayed, and then went after the light until she came to a small house. Around it grew tall grass and lay in front of a stack of firewood. "Where on earth is, however, I come to?" she thought, and looked through the window. In the room sat a whole big and little toads around a table with rose and wine. Nice was covered and the plates were of silver. When she had seen little of them, she took courage and knocked. Then there was a big toad, who shouted: "Green frog, beautiful frog, little maiden! Slip of a thing, slip of a thing, rap now, rap.Brug your shanks, jumping up and look in a hurry, who is there." Immediately came a little toad went and opened the door for her, and they welcomed her and put a chair up to her. She had to tell them what had happened to her and that she had disobeyed the king's son, and now neither could find him or oven. But she would go to the ends until she found him. The old, thick toad now said: "Green frog, beautiful frog, little maiden! Slip of a thing, slip of a thing, rap now, rap.Skynd you to jump, my major shrine in a hurry you bring me," and the little went and retrieved casket. They put her meat and drink before her, and when she had eaten, she went to bed, said her prayers, and fell asleep. When she got up the next morning took the old three needles out of the big box and gave them to her and said that she would get good use for them, she was going over a glass mountain, three sharp swords and a great lake. If she succeeded, she would get her lover back. Then she gave her three things, three large needles, a plow-wheel, and three nuts and told her to take good care of them. She marched off again, and when she came to the slippery glass mountain, she ran the first three needles behind by the feet and then laid them somewhat ahead, and the way she let go of. Then she stuck needles stuck in the ground and laid close attention to the site. Shortly after she came to the three piercing swords, but she stood on the plow-wheel and rolled over. Eventually she came to a deep water, and when she had got over it, she saw a beautiful castle lie for him. She went in and asked if she could come in service there, but she knew that the prince iron stove lived there. She was taken as a cook and would have only a very small salary. The prince thought, however, that she had died long ago, and had already found another maiden. When she had washed up in the evening, she felt in her pocket and got hold of the three nuts which the old toad had given her. She broke one and would eat the kernel, but instead there was a splendid dress in there. When the bride heard about it, she came and bought it for her. "It is not a dress for a maid," she said. But the Princess would not sell it unless she had to be allowed to sleep one night in her bridegroom's chamber. The bride said yes, because the dress was so beautiful and she had not yet received any, and in the evening she said to her bridegroom, "That silly girl will sleep in your room tonight." - "Yes, if you do not mind it, I have not," he replied. And she gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a sleeping powder. He fell into so firm a sleep that she could not get him aroused. "I have saved you from the iron stove in the great forest," she said crying, "I've gone over a glass mountain, three sharp swords and a deep water to get to you, and now you will not hear me." The servants sat outside the door, heard her cry all night and morning they told it to their lord. Evening when she had washed up, she broke the second nut, and a dress that was even more beautiful, and when the bride saw that she would buy it. But the girl would not take money, and begged that she might once again sleep in the bridegroom's chamber. The bride gave him a sleeping-draft, and he slept so soundly that she could not wake him. "I have saved you from the iron stove in the forest," she said crying, "I have gone over a glass mountain, three sharp swords and a deep water to get to you, and now you will not hear me." The servants stood outside, heard it, and told the next morning to their master. In the evening she broke the third enjoyed and found a dress that shone pure gold. When the bride saw that she wanted to have it, but the girl would only give her that, if she were allowed to once again sleep in the bridegroom's chamber. But that night made the king's son to pour sleep drink out beside him. When she began to cry and say, "I have saved you from the iron stove in the great forest," he jumped up and shouted: "You are my true bride." Then they took the other bride's dress, so she could not get up, and immediately set up in a cart and drove off. When they got to the deep water, they sailed across it, and when they came to the sharp swords they seated themselves on the plow-wheel and rolled over them. By means of the needles came the glass mountain and reached shortly after the place where the little old house had stood. But instead there was a magnificent castle, and all the toads had become princes and princesses. The wedding was celebrated, and they dwelt in the castle, which was much larger than her father. But when the old man complained that he had to stay all alone, they went over and took him home with him, and they had two kingdoms, and lived happily together until their død.Snip, snap, snout, now the story is out.
Jorinda and Joringel	655	405	Danish	There was once an old castle outside in a large dark forest where there lived an old woman all alone, and she was a real witch. By day she changed herself into a cat or a night owl, and in the evening she was back to a human. She lured the birds and animals to him and slaughtered and fried them. When someone came so near to the castle, there was only a hundred paces away, he had to remain standing, without being able to move until she gave him free. When an innocent maiden came within this circle, she changed into a bird, and shut her down in a basket and carried her into a room in the castle. She had no less than seven thousand cages of fugle.Nu there was a girl named Jorinda and was more beautiful than all the other girls, and she had become engaged to a beautiful young man named Joringel. They were so excited and happy, for they had just got engaged, and one day they went into the forest to really talk. "Be careful that you do not go too near the castle," said Joringel. It was a lovely evening. Sun shone brightly through the dense foliage and the lovebirds sat up in the trees and sang their sad viser.Jorinde was heavy heart and sat down in the bright sunshine and wept, and Joringel was also strangely melancholy. They were so afraid that they were going to die, and when they looked around, they knew not where they were, and could not find his way home. The sun had not sunk behind the mountains, and when Joringel looked through the bushes, he saw the old castle nearby and were terrified. Jorinda was to sing: "My little bird, with the necklace red, sings so sad, you predict the dove must soon be dead, you sing so - tweet, tweet, tweet -so you sing behind the foliage." And when Joringel so around for Jorinda she was turned into a nightingale, and sang, "Tweet, tweet." An owl flew three times around her and said three times: "Hututu, Hututu, Hututu." Joringel could not move from the spot but stood stiff as a support and could neither weep nor speak. Now sank The owl flew into a bush, and immediately after, a yellow, lean, with large red eyes and a pointed nose, which hung down to his chin. She mumbled something, caught the nightingale, and took it with him. Joringel and could not speak nor move from the spot, and the nightingale was gone. At last the woman came back and said in a hoarse voice: "Hail Zakiel. When the moon shines in the cage, it's time. Fix him." Then Joringel free. He dropped to his knees and asked if she would give him Jorinda back. But she said that he got her never to see, and went away, it did not help how much he cried and complained. "What will become of me," he wailed and walked slowly out of the woods and at last came to a strange village, where he lived for a long time as fårehyrde.Ofte he went into the woods around the castle, but took care not to get too close. One night he dreamed that he found a blood-red flower, and the middle of which was a beautiful large pearl. He picked the flower and went into the palace, and everything he touched with the flower was freed from the spell and he also Jorinda back. When he awoke the next morning he began to seek over hill and dale to find such a flower. He searched and searched, and the ninth day he found a blood-red flower, and in the middle of it there was a dewdrop as big as the finest pearl. He picked it and went day and night, until he came to the castle. He went at it without being petrified. His heart pounded with joy, and when he touched the door with the flower, and it sprang up. He went into the courtyard and stood still and listened, until he could hear where all the birds were sitting. When he came into the hall there the witch was feeding the birds in the seven thousand baskets. When she saw Joringel she became angry and spewed poison and gall at him, but she could not come within two paces from him. He cared not about her, but went and looked at all the many baskets and did not know how he would know his beloved again. When did he suddenly noticed that the witch secretly took one of the baskets and would sneak out the door. Swiftly he sprang towards her, touched the cage and her flower. Now her power was broken and Jorinde stood before him, as beautiful as always. He turned now all the other birds to virgins took Jorinda in his hand and went home, and they lived happily together.
The Jew in the thornbush	1042	592	Danish	There was once a rich man. He had a servant who served him diligently and honestly, every morning, he was first on his feet and he always stayed far out in the evening. When there was a difficult work, and no one else wanted it, he always first grasp. He never complained about anything, but was always happy and in a good mood. When a year had passed, gave his hubby him no pay. "It's the brightest," he thought, "so I save it and then going guy not his way, but being nicely in his service." Karlen said nothing and did his work as the first year. Since the second year had passed, he received no salary, but he found it and was. When the third year had passed, the householder hesitated a little, put his hand in his pocket, but did not take anything up. So said the youth: "I have served you honestly for three years. I want to have the salary is for me. I want to see me in the world." - "Yes, you've been a good fellow," said the avaricious man, "therefore you must also be paid well." He put his hand in his pocket, gave the youth three pennies, one by one, and said: "There you have three dime. So good a salary you had not got very many places." The honest servant, who understood little about money, put them in his pocket, and thought, "Now I have everything I need. Now I'm really no more pestering me with hard work." He went away, up and down hill and sang and jumped to his heart. One day, when he passed a thicket a little man out of it and shouted: "Where are you going, brother merry? You're probably not further burdened by life's sorrows." - "Why should I be sad," said the servant, "I have three years' salary in his pocket." - "How much is it?" asked the little man. "That would indeed all three shillings." - "Look here," said the dwarf, "I'm a poor old man, and can not order anything. Give me the three dime. You are young, you can easily earn your bread." And the servant had a good heart, and felt sorry for the man. "There you have them in the name of God," he said, handing the man the three farthings, "I'm doing well enough even." - "You have a good heart," said the little man, "you must get three wishes fulfilled, one for every dime." - "You can probably more than your Lord's Prayer," said the youth. "But let go. So I want me firstly, birds gay, affecting everything I aim at; the other a violin that is such that everyone must dance when I play on it, and thirdly, no one shall be able to say no to what I ask for. " - "You shall have it all," said the little man. He stuck his hand into the bush, and there were already birds gun and violin ready. He gave to the servant and said, "No man shall be able to say no to you, whatever you ask for." "What can I ask for more," said the youth, and went merrily on. Soon after he met a jew with a long beard, he stood listening to a bird sitting high up in a tree and singing. "It's Good heavens," he cried, "how can such a small creature should have such a great voice. Just it was my bird. I wish I could come to sprinkle salt on the tail of it." - "Is there something wrong," said the servant, "the bird shall soon be down." He put the gun and hit the bird, which fell into the hawthorn hedge. "Go and fetch the bird, your trickster," he said. "Since I even have shot it, I'll take it," said the Jew, lay down on the ground and began to climb into the bush. When he came into the midst of the thorns, took the servant in a fit of exuberance his violin and began to play. Immediately began the Jew to light on his feet and jump and jump, and the more the servant rubbed, the merrier went dancing. But the thorns tore his shabby coat, pulled at his goatee and stuck and poked him all over the body. "Stop!" He shouted, "stop playing. I do not want to dance." But the youth did not like what he said. You've ripped so many people, now can thorns do the same to you, "he thought, and went on playing, so the Jew leaped high in the air, and the rags of his coat was hanging on the thorns." Ow, ow, "he shouted," I will give you everything you demand when you want to stop playing, even if you want to have a whole bag full of gold. "-" when you are so nice, I'll quit, "said the youth; "but it must let you, you can get proper legs with you." then he took the money and went vej.Jøden stood and looked after him, and when the servant was so far away that you could not see him, cried he frantically: "you miserable musician, you rørfidler, wait just till I get hold of you. I'll chase you away, so the soles fall of feet on you. Ragamuffin! Just put in your mouth, that you may be five shillings worth. "He was using the mouth as long as he could find on new expletives. When he had acquired the air in this way, and had become somewhat calmer, he ran into the city and went to the judge. "my lord. judge," he said, "see how a rascal has robbed and abused me on the open road. It had to be able to touch a stone. See how my clothes are ragged, and where I am torn and scratched. My poor little money is gone, all my ducats, one brighter than the other. Look for God's sake to grab the villain, and let him put in jail. "-" Is it a soldier who cut you with your saber? "The judge asked." No, God is preserved, "replied the Jew, "sharp weapons he had, but he had a gay old and is a violin neck. The guy is easy enough to know. "The judge sent his people out, and they found the good servant who slowly had gone ahead and gold money upon him also. When he stood before the judge he said:" I have not touched Jew, nor take his money. He has voluntarily offered me them to stop playing, because he did not like my music. "-" God save us! "Cried the Jew," his lies are as thick as a horse can run . "the judge believed him not, saying," It's a poor excuse. Wearing no jew themselves apart. "He sentenced the good servant to be hanged because he had committed robbery in the street. When he was led out to the gallows Jew cried after him:" Now you get your well-deserved salary, your vagabond! You dog . "Then the others went quietly up the ladder with the hangman. on the last step he turned and said to the judge:" Will you meet me a prayer before I die. "-" Yes, if you do not ask for your life, "the judge said." I do not. I only ask for the last time to be allowed to play on my violin. "The Jew uttered a terrible cry:" Give him lest not allowed to do so. "-" Why should I not begrudge him the pleasure, "said the judge, "I said yes, and it remains." He could also not say no to it, because of the potential of youth had got. "Alas!" cried the Jew, "bind me fast." Karlen took now his violin, placed it to the right, and when he had made the first stroke, they all began to trip and jump, both the judge, clerk and court usher. the rope fell out of his hand, which would tie the Jew. at the second scrape lifted they all legs, the hangman slipped servant and was about to dance, and at the third street, they jumped all together in the air and began to dance, the Jew and the judge in front, and they jumped the best. all that curiosity had come to the square young and old, thick and thin, had to dance with, and even the dogs sat on bagbenen e and started jumping around. The longer he played, the higher sprang the dancers, often bumped their heads against each other and cried pitifully. The judge cried, breathless: "I give you your life when you want to stop playing." Karlen persuaded, strung violin neck and went down the ladder. He went straight to the Jew, who was on the ground and gasped for breath. "Will you now confess where you got the money, your villain, or I'll take my fiddle and begin to play again." - "I stole it, I stole it," he said, "but you have honestly earned it." Ref let so Jew lead to the gallows and cluster up as a thief.
Cat and mouse in the housing arrangement	14	15	Danish	A cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much about the great love he felt for her, that at last the mouse agreed to move in with the cat and keep house together. "Now we must gather together for the winter, so we're not going to starve," said the cat, "and you must be very careful so you do not fall into a trap." They bought a pot of fat, but could not agree on where to store it. The cat thought a long time and finally said: "We can not make it any safer place than the church, there is no one dare take anything. We put it under the altar and touches it before we seriously need it . " The jar was thus brought to safety there, but it was not long before the cat wanted to taste greasy. One day she said to the mouse: "It's true, little mouse, I'm asked to christening with my cousin. She has a son who is white with brown spots, him will I be godfather to. You can probably arrange for the house alone tomorrow. " - "Just go in the name of God," answered the mouse, "and think of me when you eat something good. I could also probably want to taste the sweet red wine." However, it was not true that the cat was going to the christening, it had not no cousin. He went straight to the church to fat jar and licked the top of the fat. Then he went for a walk on rooftops, looked around and sunning themselves and licked his lips every time the thought of fat. Only in the evening came home again. "Well, are you there," said the mouse, "You must have had good." Ah yes, "answered the cat." What did they give the child? "Asked the mouse." Top, "said the cat." Top, "cried the mouse "it was a strange name. If you use it in your family? "-" Take it easy, "said the Cat," that's just as good as brødkrummetyv, as your godchildren are called. "Shortly after, the cat again ditty." You must do me the service again today to take care of the house, "said the mouse," I again asked for christenings, and when the child has a white ring around the neck, I can not say no. "the good mouse did not object, the cat crept into the church and ate half of the fat. "however, there is nothing that tastes as good as it can even eat," he thought, quite satisfied with his day's work. When he arrived home the mouse asked, "What was this child christened with? "-" Half-Gone, "answered the cat." Half Past! It was ludicrous. The name I never heard, "said the mouse puzzled," I'll wager it is not in the calendar. "It was not long before the cat's teeth again began to water." All good things come in threes, "said the mouse," today I shall turn to the christening. The child is completely black with white paws, and otherwise not a white hair on the entire body. This only happens once every two years. You will not mind that I go there? "-" Top, Half Past it's such odd names, "said the mouse," they make me think of so many things. "-" You're sitting at home in your gray vadmelskjole and capturing fantasies, "said the cat," it comes from never to go out during the day. "While the cat was gone, did the mouse order throughout the house. the cat crept however, went and ate the fat up." When it all is eaten, has peace, "he said to himself, and only at night came home, thick and dull. the mouse immediately asked what the third child had come to be called:" the name you will probably not like , "said the cat," His name is All Gone. "-" Completely Gone, "cried the mouse," the name I have never seen in print. Completely Gone, what do you mean? "Then she shook her head, curled up and lay down to sove.Nu the cat was never asked for christenings. Since it was winter, and they could not find more food, thought the mouse on their winter supplies and said to the cat: "Come, let us go and call the fat we have stored, it should taste good." - "Yes, I think so," answered the cat, "it will taste good, like when you are grinning out the window. "they went on their way, and when they came to the church, stood the jar is enough, but it was empty." Oh, "squeaked the mouse," now I understand it all. Now it comes to light how good a friend you have been me. You ate everything when you said you were the christening. First top off, then half done, then ... "-" Be quiet, "cried the cat," if you say a single word, I will eat you. "" All, "had the poor little mouse is already on the tongue but hardly had spoken it before the cat sprang on her, grabbed it and ate it. How is the world going.
The Emperor's New Clothes	2054	1620	Danish	Many years ago lived an emperor, who thought so much of new clothes that he spent all his money to obtain them. He did not care about his soldiers, cared not about comedy or to run in the woods, without alone to show off his new clothes. He had a dress for every hour of the day, and like they say about a king, He is in, so they always said here: "The Emperor is in the wardrobe!" The great city where he resided was very gay every day many strangers, one day came two swindlers; they pretended to be weavers and said that they knew how to weave the finest cloth to be imagined. Not only colors and patterns uncommonly fine, but the clothes which were made of the clothes, possessed the wonderful quality of being invisible to any man who was unfit for his office or unpardonably stupid. "It was some splendid clothes, "thought the emperor; "By having them on, I could come by the men in my kingdom are unfit for the office they have, I could distinguish the clever from the stupid! This stuff must be woven for me immediately!" He paid the two swindlers a lot of money on hand, so that they might begin their arbejde.De also set up two looms, and pretended to be working, but they did nothing whatever on the looms. They asked for the finest silk and the most precious gold; put both into their own bag and worked at the empty looms until late at night. "Now I should very much like to know how they are with the clothes!" thought the emperor, but he felt rather uneasy when thinking that the one who was stupid or not fit for his office could not see it, now he believed enough that he did not need to be afraid of themselves but he would also send somebody else first to see how matters stood. Everybody in the town knew what a remarkable quality the stuff possessed, and all were anxious to see how bad or stupid their neighbors were. "I will send my honest old minister to the weavers!" thought the emperor, "He can judge best how the stuff looks, for he is intelligent, and nobody understands his office better than he!" Now went the old minister into the hall where the two impostors sat working at the empty looms. "Heaven preserve us!" he thought, and opened his eyes wide! "I can not see anything!" But he said ikke.Begge swindlers begged him to be so good as to come near, and asked if it was a beautiful pattern and lovely colors. They pointed to the empty looms, and the poor old minister tried his best, but he could not see anything, for there was nothing. "Jesus Christ!" he thought, "can I be stupid! I never thought, and it should not people know! I should not fit for my office? No it is not right that I tell, I can not see the cloth!" "Well, they say nothing about it! " said one of the weavers, "Oh this is neat! quite sweetheart!" said the old minister looking through his glasses, "this pattern and these colors! Yes, I will tell the Emperor that it pleases me very!" "We are pleased!" said the two weavers, and described to him the colors and explained the curious pattern. The old minister listened attentively, that he could say the same when he returned to the emperor, and it did han.Nu swindlers asked for more money, silk and gold, which they required for weaving. They put everything in their own pockets, the loom was not a stitch, but they continued, as before, weaving at the empty væv.Kejseren now sent another honest courtier to to see how it went with the weave, and the cloth was nearly finished. He fared just like the other, he looked and looked, but since there was nothing but the empty looms, he could see nothing. "Is it not a beautiful piece of cloth?" asked the two swindlers, showing and explaining the magnificent pattern, which there was not. "I am not stupid!" said the man, "It is therefore my good appointment for which I am not fit to? It was amusing enough, but I must not let others!" and he praised the cloth, he did not see, and expressed his joy at the beautiful colors and the fine pattern. "Yes it is quite a sweetheart!" he said to kejseren.Alle people in town talked about the precious tøj.Nu the Emperor wanted to see it himself, while it was still on the loom. With a whole host of exquisite men, between which the two good old officials were, as before had been there, he went to the two clever swindlers, who now woven of all forces, but without stitch or thread. "Yes, it is not magnificent? " said both the honest officials. "Your Majesty must see the pattern, what colors!" And then they pointed to the empty looms, for they imagined the others could see the cloth. "What!" thought the emperor, "I do not see anything that's terrible! I'm stupid? Am I unfit to be emperor? it was the worst thing that could happen to me!" - "Oh it's very beautiful!" said the Emperor, "has our most gracious approval;" and he nodded approbation at the empty loom; he would not say that he could see nothing. The entire entourage, who were with him, looked and looked, but did not get more out of it than all the others, they said, like the emperor, "it is very beautiful!" and they advised him to wear the new magnificent clothes at first time at the great procession which was soon. "It's absolutely magnificent! Nysseligt, excellent!" it went from mouth to mouth, and they were all so in the general satisfaction. The Emperor gave each of the swindlers a knight cross to hang in his buttonhole and the title of vævejunkere.Hele night before the procession was to be, rogues sat up and had sixteen lights burning. People could see that they were busy getting the Emperor's new clothes ready. They pretended to take the cloth from the loom, cut the air with big scissors, and sewed with needles without thread, and said at last: "See now clothes are ready!" The Emperor, with the grandees of his then came and swindlers held their arms up as if they were holding something, and said, "See here are the trousers! here is the dress! here jacket!" and so on fort. "It's as easy as a cobweb you would think you had nothing on your body, but it's just the beauty of it!" "Yes!" said all the courtiers, but they could see nothing, for there was nothing. "If Your Imperial Majesty graciously pleased to take off your clothes!" said the swindlers, "that we offer you the new suit before the large mirror!" The emperor undressed, and the swindlers went about as if they gave him each piece of the new ones had to be made, and the Emperor looked at himself in the mirror. "God, how well they look, how they fit!" they all said. "What a design! What colors! It is an expensive suit!" "Outside they stand with tronhimlen which was to be carried in the procession!" said the master of the ceremonies. "Yes, I am ready!" said the Emperor. "Sitting is not good?" and then he turned once more to the mirror! the people should think he admired his stads.Kammerherrerne, who were to carry the train, stretched their hands to the ground as if they lifted up a train, they went and stayed in the air, they did not dare to let others that they nothing could se.Så went the emperor in procession under the beautiful canopy, and all people on the street and the windows exclaimed: "Indeed, the emperor's new clothes are incomparable! what a long train he has! how well it fits him!" Nobody wished to let others know he saw nothing, for then he would have been unfit for his office or too stupid. Never emperor's clothes were more admired. "But he has nothing on," said a young child. "Oh, hear the voice of innocence," said the father; and one whispered to another what the child said. "But he has nothing on!" cried at last the whole people. It crept into the emperor, because he thought they were right, but he thought to himself: "Now I must bear up to the." And the chamberlains walked and bar on the train, which was not.
Bellflower (Rapunzel)	111	310	Danish	Many years ago there lived a man and a wife, who had long wished for a child, but in vain. Finally, it seemed that the good Lord would fulfill their desire. On the back of the house there was a small window from which you could look into a lovely garden where grew the most beautiful flowers and herbs, you could imagine. It was surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to go into it because it belonged to a powerful witch who was feared throughout the country. One day the wife stood by the window looking down into the garden. She saw a bed which grew purple bell flowers, and they looked so fresh out that her teeth properly watered them. For each day that passed, she got more and more like them, and when she knew she could not get some of them, she lost interest spirits and came to look pale and bad out. The man was startled and asked, "What ails you, dear wife?" - "I will not have peace until you give me some of the bell grows in the garden," she said and sighed deeply. The man thought it was a pity for her, and in the evening he climbed over the wall into the witch's garden, plucked in a hurry a handful of bell flowers and slap happy and well in to his wife again. She made a salad of it and ate it with great greed. It had tasted her so well that she was twice ditty day. "If you give me some more bell flowers, I die," she said to her husband. "I can not see that my wife dies, without having to venture anything to save her," said the man. In the evening he climbed back over the wall. But he was very dismayed when he saw the witch stand for themselves. "How dare you list yourself into my garden like a thief and steal my bell flowers," she said furiously, "it must come up expensive to face." - "Have mercy on me," said the man humble. "It is only the extreme distress that has driven me there. My wife has been so great desire bellflower are that she die if she does not get some of them." The witch was mollified and said to him .: "When it hangs this together, I will allow you to pick as many bell flowers you will. I ask only one condition and that is that you give me the child that your wife feeder. I will be a mother for it and it should get it really well. " The poor man was so scared that he said yes to everything, and as soon as the baby was born, the witch, called it Rapunzel, and took it with sig.Klokkeblomst was the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was twelve years old the witch shut her in a tower that was in the forest, and had neither steps nor door, but only a small window above. Tinkerbell had a lovely long hair that was as fine as spun gold. When the witch wanted to enter, she stood below the tower and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." The girl wrapped as one of her braids fixed on window hook, and let it out the window. The twenty ells down, and the witch climbed looked up in den.Et few years after the red king's son one day through the forest and passed by the tower. He heard someone singing so sweetly that he stood still and listened. It was Rapunzel in her loneliness trying to pass the time singing. The prince would go up to her and searched for an entrance to the tower, but there was none. He rode home, but the song had made such a deep impression on him that every day he rode into the forest and listened to it. Once, when he was out there, he saw the witch come to the tower and heard her say: "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." Rapunzel let the braids hang down, and the witch climbed up to her. "I also once try my luck on the rise," said the prince, and the next evening he went to the tower and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair." The merge immediately came out of the window, and the prince climbed op.Klokkeblomst was first very frightened when she saw a stranger, but the prince spoke kindly to her and told that her song had made such an impression on him that he had not been able have peace until he had seen her. She was quick reassurance, and when he asked her if she would marry him, and she saw how beautiful he was, she thought, "I'll probably get better with him than with the old witch," and said yes and handed him his hand. "I want to go with you," she said, "and listen, how to get out. Whenever you come, you have to take a silk cord with so I merge a ladder, and when it is ready I will get down, and you put me on your horse. " They agreed that he would come every evening, for the old woman came by day. The witch knew nothing, until once Rapunzel remembered saying to her: "Listen, how can it be that you are much heavier to pull up than the young prince. He's up here in an instant." - "You naughty girl," cried the witch, "what is this that you have. I thought I had hidden thee from all people, and thou hast deceived me." In her anger she seized Rapunzel by her beautiful hair, twisted it a few times on the hand, took a pair of scissors, and Ritsch, ratsch, was the long braids on earth. And she showed no mercy, but bring the poor Rapunzel into a desert where she lived in great nød.Da witch had chased Rapunzel away, she sat in the tower and waited for the prince, and when he came in the evening and shouted: " Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair, "she hung her hair out the window. The prince climbed up, but did not take his own Tinker Bell, but the witch who so sorry for him. "You would probably pick up your girlfriend," she said mockingly, "but the bird sits no more in the nest and sings. The cat has got her, and will scratch your eyes out. Rapunzel is lost to you, her, you'll never more see." King's son was beside himself with grief, and in his despair he jumped out the window. He escaped with life, but fell into the thorns that pierced his eyes out. He wandered blind about the forest, living off roots and berries and wept and mourned for her lost lover. After some years he came out into the desert where Rapunzel lived in great distress. She had given birth to twins, a boy and a girl. One day he heard a voice, and followed the sound, and when he got there, it was her. She fell on his neck. Two of her tears fell on his eyes, and he immediately got sight back. He led her to his kingdom where he was received with jubilation, and they lived happily together.
Knoist and his three sons	1312	1965	Danish	Between the east and the west lived a man named Knoist. He had three sons, one was blind, the other lame, and the third stark naked. They walked across the field, and there was one spot a hare. The blind one shot it, the lame one caught it, the naked one put it in his pocket. They came to a mighty big lake, on which there were three ships, one was the leak, the other sank to the bottom, and in the third there was no bottom, and they went all three aboard. They came as a huge, huge forest, which stood a huge tree, and inside it was a church. In the church stood an oak deacon and a priest beech and distributed holy water with big truncheons. "Blessed is the man who from holy water run."
Kong Thrushbeard	495	900	Danish	There was once a king who had a daughter who was as lovely as the bright sun, but she was proud and haughty withal that no suitor was good enough for her. She rejected one after the other, and mocked them even. Once the King made a great feast and invited all young men from near and far. They were lined up in order of rank and position. First came the kings, then the dukes, then the princes, the earls, the barons, and the gentry. The princess went from one to the other, but she had some objection to them all. One was too fat: "What a beer keg," she said, the other for long, "Stork, stork, Longlegs," the third was too short: "Short and thick is never quick," the fourth of pale: "He looks as death from LBC, "the fifth too red:" He looks like a turkey-cock, "the sixth was not straight enough," A green wood that is dried by the stove. " There was something wrong with all of them, but she made herself especially merry over a good king who stood at the very top, and whose chin was a little crooked. "His chin like a thrush," she cried and laughed, and by the time he got the name Thrushbeard. But when the old king saw that she had suitors for the best, he was angry and swore that she should take the first, the best begging for mand.Et few days later they heard a poor musician singing in the courtyard, and the King sent for him. Fiddler came in, in his dirty rags, sang for the king and his daughter and begged for alms. But the king said: "I think so highly of your song that I will give you my daughter to wife." The princess was horrified, but the King said in his decision: "I have sworn to bring you to the first, the best beggar, and the oath I will keep," he said. Priest was brought, and she devoted to the beggar. "It is not proper for a beggar to stay in a castle," said the King, "it's best you go out with your husband." The beggar took her hand and they walked on foot. When they came to a large forest, she asked, "To whom does the green forest that is so large and magnificent?" "It certainly is King Thrushbeard, he is a gentleman mighty, and if you had wanted to, it was probably your well. "" Oh that I had taken him. God help me, poor girl. " Shortly after they came across a meadow, and she asked: "Who does this beautiful green meadow that is so large and magnificent?" "It certainly is King Thrushbeard, he is a gentleman mighty, and if you had wanted it, it would have been yours. "" Oh that I had taken him. God help me, poor girl. " When they had gone even a little, they came through a big city, and she asked: "Who does this fine city that is so large and magnificent?" "It certainly is King Thrushbeard, he is a gentleman mighty, and if you had wanted it, it was enough yours. "" Oh, I just had taken him. God help me, poor girl. " "I really do not like that you're constantly looking for another man," said the musician, "I might not be good enough for you?" At last they came to a small house. "Where is the house however small, where the walls are inclined, after all of the poor people who live there must!" said the Princess. "This is my house and yours," said the musician, "here we stay." The door was so low that she had to stoop to get through it. "Where are the servants?" She asked. "The servants," said the musician, and shook his head, "you must yourself do what you want done. Now do immediately on fire and put water over so you can cook something for me, I'm hungry." The princess had no idea how she should behave, and the beggar had to help her, to get it to go fairly. When they had finished their scanty meal they went to bed and the next morning he woke her up quite early, so that she would get up and do the house in order. A few days they lived in this way, and ate and drank what was in the house. "Now it is not anymore," the man said then, "we eat everything up, and deserve nothing. You weave baskets." He went out and picked wicker, and she began to weave, but it hurt so bad in her fingers that she had to quit. "It will not do," the man said, "maybe you better spin." She also tried it, but the thread cut her soft fingers until they bled. "You pigeons as not to anything whatever," he said angrily, "with you I am certainly come well up and running. Now it's best to try, if we can not make a business with pots and earthenware. You must put you out on the square with them. " She sighed and thought, "God knows what people say when they recognize me and see me sitting there like another sell wife." But that did not mean she had to yield unless they die of starvation. The first time it went well. People bought her because she was so beautiful and there were many who gave her the money and left the pots with her anyway. They lived an era of what she had earned as long as it lasted, the husband bought quite a few pots and pans, and she had to sit out in the square with it. Then came a drunken soldier riding, blasted straight into the pots and shards flew in all directions. She started crying and did not know what to do. "What will my husband say, however," she wailed and ran home and told him what had happened. "There is no sensible people that sits right on the corner," he said too bad, "but you will not do to anything whatever. Now I have been up at the capitol to ask if they needed a cook . There you go up in the morning so you get when at least a living. "Now the king's daughter cook, had to go cook to hand and do the dirty work. In his pocket, she had a bowl, and it filled her with the food she made, and consequently they lived. It happened just the oldest royal son's wedding is celebrated, so the poor woman went up and stood at the door to get some of the hall to look. When the lights were turned on and the hall shone in dazzling splendor, while all the decking people gathered, she thought sadly of his sad fate and cursed the pride that had plunged her into poverty. Servants threw a few bites to her of the food they brought in, and she put it all into the jar to take home. Suddenly came the king's son out, dressed in velvet and silk, with a gold chain around his neck, and when he saw the beautiful wife, he grabbed her hand and wanted to dance with her. She knew immediately King Thrushbeard and resisted, but it did not, he pulled her into the hall. But the string that held the jar broke and the soup and kødstumperne poured out on the floor. All people laughed and mocked her and she was so desperate and ashamed that she wanted one thousand miles below ground. She ran out the door and tried to escape, but when she had gone a few steps down the stairs there was a man caught her by the arm, and when she turned around, she saw King Thrushbeard. "Do not be afraid," he said mildly, "I and the musician that you have lived with in the poor house, is one and the same. It was me who was the hussar who rode through your crockery. I've done it to punish your pride and you mocked me and bend your proud mind. " But she wept bitterly, saying: "I am not worthy to be your wife." - "Now stop crying," he said and kissed her, "now is the evil days past. Now we need to celebrate our wedding." Chamber maids wore her royal apparel, her father came with his entire court to marriage with. I wish we two also had been there.
The king of the golden mountain	875	810	Danish	There was once a merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl. They were both quite small and could not go yet. At the time he received news that his two ships were costly charged, and which constituted his entire fortune, had gone to the bottom. Now he suddenly become poor and had nothing left but a field outside the city. To distract her dark thoughts a little, he went out on the field, and as he walked back and forth there, he suddenly saw a tiny black man who stood beside him and asked why he was so sad. "If you could help me, I'd probably tell you that," said the merchant. "You can never know if I can," said the little man. Merchant told him that all he possessed had perished at sea, and that he had nothing left but this field. "Do not break you," said the little man, "if you will promise me twelve years to bring it to me, your foot first encounter when you come home, you need to get as much money as you want. " - "It can not be anything other than my dog," said the man. It occurred to him that it might be one of his children, and he said yes and wrote it on a piece of paper and put his seal under.Da he got home, his little boy was so happy to see him, he crawled towards him and grabbed his leg. The man was horrified when he remembered what he had promised, but as there was gold to find anywhere, he thought that it had been jesting. A month afterwards he went up to the attic to look for something old tin, which he could sell, and then noticed that there was a big pile of money. Now he was happy again, made purchases, became richer than ever before, and felt that right. However, the boy grew tall and sharp and clever. As his twelfth year approached, the merchant more and more distressed, and you could see on his face that there was something that tormented him. Once asked his son to him what was wrong. He would not like that, but the boy kept on pestering him so long, he said that he unwittingly had promised him to a black man and got money for it. He had written his name as proof, and when he was twelve years old, he had to hand him over. "Do not worry, Dad," the boy said, "it'll all will go well. The black man has no power over me." As the time approached, the boy went to a priest who blessed him. Then he and his father together out on the field and he made a circle about them. Then came the black man and said to the old: "If you saw it with, as you promised me." He did not answer, but the son asked, "What do you want here?" - "I talk to your father and not with you," said the black man. "You have deceived my father," the boy said, "give me the proof." - "No," the man said, "I'm not giving up my right." They talked a long time now and forth, and finally they agreed that the son who's not more belonged to the father, had to be brought on board a ship, and the old should so even dropping it loose so it sailed down the waterfall. The boy now took leave of his father and boarded. The ship was immediately swept away so the bottom came up, and the father thought his son had drowned, and went sadly hjem.Skibet did not sink, but floated quietly, and the boy sat safely inside without water penetrated to him. Finally came the land, and when the boy went out he saw that there was a beautiful castle before him. He entered it without knowing that it was bewitched. He went through a quantity of empty rooms and eventually came to a room where there was a snake and wove. It was an enchanted maiden, and when she saw him, she asked, pleased: "Are you coming to liberate me? Now I've been waiting for you for twelve years. You must save me and all the enchanted kingdom." - "How shall I carry me through that?" he asked. "In the night come twelve black men, covered with chains and asks you what you have to do here. You can not answer them, but let them do to you what they want. They will beat you and peck you, but find yourself in it all and not a single word. at twelve o'clock they disappear again. the night after going there again twelve, in the next twenty-four, and cut off thy head. when midnight is their power over, and if you have kept bravely and not said a word, I'm saved. I come then and sprinkles you with the water of life, and you will immediately live again. " - "I want to save you," he replied. And everything happened just as she had said. The black men could not get a word out of him, and on the third night the snake became a beautiful princess, who brought him the water of life. She fell on his neck and kissed him, and the whole castle resounded with cheers and joy. Their wedding was celebrated, and he was now King of the Golden bjerg.De now lived happily together, and the queen gave birth to a lovely boy. Eight years had passed, he was seized by a strong yearning for a time to see his father again. The Queen did not want of him. "It will be my misfortune," she said, but he did not settle down before he got away. At their parting she gave him a wishing ring and said, "Put this ring on your finger. It brings you instantly wherever you want. Only you must promise me not to use it to wish me home to your father." He promised her, put the ring on your finger and wanted home to the town where his father lived. The moment he was outside the city gate, but the sentry would not let him enter because he had such a strange, expensive clothes on. He went to a mountain where there lived an old shepherd, changed clothes with him, and rolled into the city. When he came home to his father, he would not acknowledge him. "I certainly had had a son," he said, "but he is dead long ago." When he saw how ragged he looked, he would give him a plate of food, but the shepherd said: "I am really your son. Is not there something strange, you know him?" - "Yes," replied the mother, "he had a brown spot under the right arm." He jerked back his shirt and showed them marked, and they doubted no longer that he was their son. He told them that he was king of the golden mountain and married to a beautiful princess, and they had a son of seven years. "Never in life you get me conned," said the father, "it's a nice king who goes about in rags." As the son angry and without thinking of his promise, he wanted his wife and child had to get there. The moment they stood there too, but the queen wept and complained and said he had made her unhappy. "I have done it thoughtlessly, and not of evil," he said, trying to reassure her. She also appeared as if she was amused again, but in her heart she had sore sinde.De went outside the city to the field where the ship had been launched. "Let me sleep a little with his head in your lap," he said, "I'm so tired." She sat down, but when he was asleep, she took the first ring of his finger and pulled so gently legs, but one of her shoes were lying. And she took the child on the arm and wanted him home to his kingdom again. When he awoke, he was alone, his wife and child and the ring was gone, only one of her shoes stood there. "I will not go home to my parents again," he thought, "they'll will think I'm a magician. It's better, I look to find homes for my kingdom." He immediately set out on the road and came after a time to a mountain, where there were three fights and arguing about how to share the legacy of their father. When they saw him go by, they called on him, that he should come and help them. The legacy consisted firstly of a sword, and when you took it in his hand and said: "Away with all heads except my" would lie on the ground, second, a cloak that made it, who put it on, invisible, and thirdly by a pair of boots, which brought a whither they wanted. "Give it to me let me try on the pigeons," he said. They gave him the cloak, and when he had put it on, he was invisible. "That's right, give me the sword," he said. "No," they replied, "then you could well rid us all of his head." Eventually they gave it to him on condition that he would do the test with a tree. This he did, and his sword broken tree as a sulfur sting. He wanted to have the boots, but they said, "No, the ones you do not. You could just wish you up the mountain, so we stood here with a long nose." - "I promise you not to do it," he said, and so got boots on. He stood there with all three things and was just thinking of his wife and his child. "I wish I was on the golden mountain," he said to himself and disappeared right in front of the giants, and thus their inheritance was settled. When he came to the castle he heard flutes and violins, and people told him that his wife was once engaged to someone else. "The faithless," he thought, "she has deceived me and left me while I slept." Then he took the mantle, and went into the palace without anyone could see him. When he came into the hall, the guests were a great table and ate and drank and laughed and talked. The Queen sat in the middle of magnificent clothes with a crown on his head. He stood behind her, and there was no one could see him. When she put a piece of meat on his plate, he took it and ate it, and when she filled his glass he drank it out. How much she took, she got nothing for it disappeared immediately. Then she was both scared and ashamed and went into his room and began to cry, but he followed her. "Is it the devil," she said, "comes my deliverer never." Then he struck her in the face and shouted: "Is he might not come. I have not deserved of you. Now is the punishment upon you, your deceitful." He took visible, went into the hall and shouted: "The wedding is over, the right king has come." All kings and princes and nobility of men who were assembled, they mocked him and laughed, but he did not many circumstances. "Will you pack you or not," he said. They pressed on him to catch him, but he drew his sword and said: "Away with all heads except mine." The moment they all lay on the floor and he sat alone as king of the golden mountain.
The prince, who was not afraid of anything	1148	590	Danish	Once there was a prince who had never been afraid of anything. He had no desire to stay home with his father, and thought, "I will go out into the wide world. There the time will not seem long to me, and I shall see wonders enough." He said goodbye to his parents and went off. He went from morning to night, straightforward. One day he came to the house of a giant, and when he was tired, he sat down outside and rested. While he sat there and looked around, he saw the giant's playthings lying in the yard. It was some mighty cones and balls, about as tall as a man. He wanted to play with them, put cones up and threw the ball at them. He was in a really good mood and screamed and cried when he met. The giant heard the noise, stuck his head out the window and saw a guy who was not taller than other men, and yet played with his cones. "Hvortørdu my balls worm," cried he, "how can you have the strength to do it." The king's son looked up, saw the giant, and said: "You think well that you are the only one who forces you blockhead. I can do anything I want." The giant came down and watched in amazement at the cones and said: "If you are one of that kind, Go and bring me an apple from the tree of life." - "What do you mean?" asked the prince. "It is not for myself," said the giant, "but I have a bride who would like to have it. I have walked around in the wide world, but I have not been able to find the tree." - "I'll find it," said the prince, "and so I do not know what is to prevent me from getting an apple." - "You think probably it's an easy matter," said the giant, "garden where the tree stands is surrounded by an iron railing. Outside are wild animals, one beside the other, they keep watch and let no man go in . " - "I'll come in." - "Yes, but if you really get into the garden, you have still not the apple," said the giant, "a ring hangs in front, it must put his hand through when you want to pick it and it is yet to were able to." - "Well I can," said prinsen.Han now said goodbye to the giant and went forth over hill and dale, through fields and woods until he came to the wondrous garden. The beasts lay round, but they had bowed his head and slept. They did not awake when he came, and he went over them, climbed the fence and escaped into the garden. There stood the tree of life, and the red apples shone between the leaves. He climbed in it and stuck without a trace of difficulty gradually through the ring and picked the apple. The ring closed tightly on his arm, and he felt that he had a prodigious strength. He got down again, but would not climb over the fence. He went to the large gate and need to shake lightly to it so that it sprang open with a bang, and then he went out. Leo, who had remained outside / was awake and jumped up when he came. But it is not furious against him, but followed him humbly as its herre.Kongesønnen brought the apple to the giant, and said: "You see, I could easily get hold of it." The giant was very pleased and hastened to bring his bride the apple, as she had wished. She was a beautiful and smart girl, and when she saw that he had the ring, she said: "I do not think that you have brought the apple, until I see the ring on thine arm." - "I can just go home and fetch it," said the giant, because he thought it would be easy to take it by force from the weak man, he would not give of his own. He demanded all the ring, but the prince said no. "Where the apple is, the ring must be also," said the giant, "and you give it to the good, we must fight for it." They fought long time, but because of the ring witchcraft giant could not harm the king's son. He thought of a cunning and said, "We have both been so warm with fighting. Let cool ourselves a bath in the river before we begin again." The prince knew nothing of falsehood, went with him to the river, took off his clothes the ring and jumped into the water. Immediately grabbed the giant ring and ran away, but the lion had seen it, jumped off and pulled the ring from him and brought it back to his master. The giant placed himself behind an oak tree, and when the prince was about to get dressed, he jumped up and ran his eyes ud.Nu the unhappy prince blind and did not know what to do. Giant came back, took his hand, as if to lead him, and led him to the top of a high mountain. There he left him standing, and thought, "If he goes a few steps to the side, he falls down and kill himself, and then I can take the ring." But the faithful lion had not deserted its master, it took hold of his clothes and drew him gradually back. When the giant came and wanted to take the dead man, he saw that his evil plans were stranded. "Can they not overcome such a miserable human being," he said furiously, and led by another route the prince of the abyss. But the lion shielded also where his master. When they came to the brink of the abyss, slap the giant blind and would let him stay here, but the lion gave the giant a jog, then he crashed and was knust.Det faithful animal again drew its master back from the precipice, and guided him to a tree, which flowed a clear brook. The prince sat down, and the lion sprinkled a few drops of water in the face. As the water moistened his eye sockets, he could make out a little bit, and he now saw a bird that flew past just next door, but stumbled against a tree. It appeared so completely into the water, and then flew into the trees without touching them, as if it had recovered its sight. The prince understood now what he should do, bent down over the water and bathed his face. And when he stood up, his eyes once more and clearer than they had ever været.Han thanked God and went on with his lion. Somewhat later he came to the enchanted castle. In the gateway stood a maiden lovely she was looking at, but she was completely black. "May you be able to solve me from the evil spell," she said to the prince, and he asked what he should do. "You have to watch three nights in the great hall of this enchanted castle," she said, "but do not for a moment be afraid. If you find yourself from being tortured, without giving a sound from you, I am saved, and they dare not kill you. " - "I have no fear," said the prince, "and with God's help I will try it." He went gaily into the castle, and when it was dark, he sat in the main hall and waited. There was quite quiet until midnight, so there was at once a great tumult began, and from every corner came little devils. They pretended they saw him, lit a fire and sat in the middle of the living room and began to play. When one of them lost, he said: "It is not right. There is one here who does not belong to us, and it is his fault that I lose." - "Wait, you over there, I'll come after you," said one of the others. They screamed louder and louder so one would think that all who heard it, had to get a proper fright. But the prince was quietly seated, without being a bit scared. Eventually jumped devils up and rushed upon him, and there were so many that he could not stand against them. Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted that he could not move a limb. At dawn the black maiden came in. In her hand she had a small bottle of water of life wherewith she washed him, and immediately all pain, and he stood up with renewed strength. "Now you happy and well over one night," she said, "but you have two more." She went away again, and when he looked at her, he noticed that her feet were white. The next night the devils came and began anew. They fell on the king's son and beat him much more severely than before, until his body was covered with wounds. But he found himself quietly in it all, and they then had to let go of him again. As the sun broke out, come the Virgin with the water of life, and to his surprise he saw that she was white at your fingertips. There was now only one night back, but it was the worst. The devils came again, "Are you still here? We'll torment the soul of life on you." They stabbed him and beat him, threw him back and forth and pulled his arms and legs, as if they would tear him, but he put up with it all without giving a sound. At last the devils vanished, but he lay helpless without moving, he could not even open his eyes when the maid came with the water of life. But then disappeared all his pain, and he was strong and healthy, as if he had awakened from a sleep. When he opened his eyes he saw the maiden standing beside him, white, and fair as day. "Rise," said she, "and swing your sword three times over the stairs, then the spell broken." When he had done that, the whole castle was saved, and the maid told him that she was a rich king's daughter. The waiter came and said that the table was covered in the large hall and they sat down to dinner, ate and drank, and in the evening the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings.
The giant and the tailor	1743	1049	Danish	A tailor who was a great braggart, but ill at doing, took it to go out and look about the world. As soon as he could, he left his workshop ogVandred away over fields and stiles, while the sun skinnedog birds singing. When he had gone for some time, he saw in the distance a steep hill, and behind it a tower that jutted up of a large, dark forest, and seemed to reach the sky. "Thunder and lightning," cried the tailor, "what it is." He could not resist his curiosity, he went boldly on it. But he yawned high of amazement when he saw that the tower had legs and was a powerful giant that with a set jumped over the mountain and stood before him. "What do you want here, you miserable tick?" cried the giant, with a voice that sounded like a thunderclap. "I just wanted to see if I can earn a bit of bread in the woods," whispered the tailor. "So you could well really take service with me," said the giant. "Yes, why not," answered the tailor, "but what do I get paid?" - "What you get in wages," said the giant, "that you should troth get to hear. Three hundred and sixty-five days a year, and when it is leap on top of that one. Are you satisfied with it?" - "Let go," said the tailor, and thought, "It is best to live within our means. I'll soon escape again." "Then go and fetch me a jug of water, you little rascal," the giant said . "Why should I not better bring the source and the well with?" said the boaster, and went with the pitcher. "What, the well and the source," growled the giant which was a little bit stupid, and he began to be afraid, "the groom, more than the Lord's Prayer. He might have on thy. Be careful, old friend, it is no serving you. " When the tailor had brought the water, the giant commanded him to chop some firewood in the forest and carry it home. "Why should not I rather take the entire forest with one blow, all the trees in the forest stand, the withered, the green, the big, the small," said the little tailor, and went to cut wood. "What," growled the credulous giant, "all the trees in the forest stand, the withered, the green, the big ones, the little ones." He became even more terrified. "The groom can be more than the Lord's Prayer," he thought, "He might have on thy. Be careful, old friend, it is no serving you." When the tailor had brought the wood, the giant commanded him to shoot two or three wild boars for supper. "Why not rather a thousand at a shot and bring them all here?" Inquired the ostentatious tailor. "What," cried the timid giant in great terror, "Let it suffice for today. Just go to bed." The giant was so scared that he could not close an eye all night, but for thinking how he was to be the sorcerer of a servant quits. Next morning the giant and the tailor to a swamp, where there was a quantity of willows. "Listen, tailor, said the giant," set you up on one of the willow. I would probably want to see if you can bend it down. "One, two, three tailor sat up there, held her breath and made himself so heavy he could, so" bough bent down. But he was unfortunately not put something pressing iron in his pocket, and when he again had to breathe, flicking the branch back and to the giant's great joy flew the little tailor as high up in the air that you could not see him. And if he has not fallen down, he soars well even around up there in the air.
Lamb and fish	1341	450	Danish	There was once a little brother and a little sister, who was very fond of each other. Their own mother was dead, and now they had a stepmother who did not like them and did them all the mischief she could. Once they played with other children in a meadow where there was a pond, which came up on one side of the house. The children ran around playing and singing: "Eneke, Beneke, let me live, then a pretty little bird I you give.Fuglen to collect grass and straw, and it must be nice, flecked get all its sweet milk I so take, and brings it to the old baker, he must be a lovely cake making, and the need that little pussy cat have.Katten death must bite the mice, and the skalså hang side by side up in the smoke, steam and smoke, so pipes they not, and makes no noise. " They stood in a circle, and to whom the word fell, to run, and the other would then catch him. While they were running about so merrily the stepmother of the window, and grew angry. But she knew about witchcraft and turned the boy into a fish and sister into a lamb. The fish swam sadly back and forth out of the pond and paralyzed walked mournfully round the meadow, without eating anything. There was now a long time, but then came one day strangers in the castle. "Here's an opportunity," said the stepmother, and said to the cook: "Go out and slaughter the lamb from the meadow, otherwise I have nothing to give the foreigners." Cook went away and got the lamb, took it into the kitchen and tied its legs together on it and it found patiently in it all. When he had taken the knife and stood and sharpened it on the threshold, he saw that down there in the gutter a little fish swimming, which was still looking up at him. It was the little boy, for he had seen that the chef walked away with the lamb, he swam along the pond to the house. Lamb shouting now: "My little brother, in the deep water, now misterdin poor sister's life. Nothing at meremig save can, hear, the chef sharpens sinskarpe knife." Fish answered: "Of pain my poor heart burst if my own little sister I lose." When the cook heard that paralyzed spoke so sad with the fish, he thought that it could be no common real lamb, the wicked woman had bewitched it. "Be easy, I will not kill you," he said, put another animal for the guests and brought the lamb to a good peasant woman, whom he told what he had heard. The wife had been the little girl's nursing and immediately thought it was her. She went to a wise woman, who said some magic words of lamb and fish, and they were as human beings again. She led them both looked out into the woods to a small house, and there they lived all alone, but excited and happy.
The lifetime	1683	173	Danish	When God had created the world and would determine how long all creatures should live, the ass came and asked, "How long will I live?" - "Thirty years," replied God, "do you think it is comfortable?" - "It is a long time, sir," replied the donkey, "think how awkward I feel. From morning to night must carry heavy loads, tow grain to the mill, that others may eat bread, to and I know of no other encouragement than life and spak. Let me get rid of some of the long time. " God had pity on him and relieved him of eighteen years. The ass went away, and the dog appeared. "How long will you live?" asked God, "donkey vote thirty years is too much, you will be happy with it?" - "Do you really want it," said the dog, "think of how much I have to run, it may be my feet not bear to. And once I lost my voice, so I can not bark, and have lost my teeth, then there is nothing else for me to do but run from one corner to another and growl. " God saw that it was right, and released him from twelve years. When it was gone, came the monkey. "You will probably live for thirty years?" asked the Lord, "you do not have to work like the donkey and the dog, and are always in a good mood." - "Yes, so it seems, sir," he answered, "but it is quite different. Even if it rains porridge I have no spoon to eat with. I shall always be merry and make faces to people laugh and when they give me an apple and I bite into it, it is so hard that I have to spit it out again. How often sadness hides itself behind mirth. no, I can not keep it out so long. " When God forgave the ten år.Til last man, happy and healthy, and asked God to determine how long it will live. "Thirty years," replied the Lord, "is it enough?" - "Where, however, is short," cried man, "when I have built my own house and my fire burns on my own hearth, and the trees I have planted, blossom and bear fruit, and am just intending to enjoy my of life, and I will die. Oh, Lord, give me but a longer life. " - "Then I put the eighteen years I took from the donkey," Lord said. "Well this is not enough," said the man. "Then you also get the twelve years I took from the dog." - "It's still not enough." - "Yes, yes, then you should get the ten years I took from the monkey, but the more you do not." So mankind had displeased go its vej.Mennesket lives seventy years. The first thirty are his own, they go quickly, and he is happy and cheerful, going merrily to his work and rejoice in life. Then comes the donkey's eighteen years. He must bear one burden after another, slip on the corn which feeds others, and blows and kicks are his only reward. Then come the dog's twelve years. As he lies in a corner and growls and has no teeth to bite with. And when the time is up, will ultimately monkey's ten years. Then man is weak, and he behaves foolishly, so the kids laugh at him.
Little Claus and Big Claus	2006	1535	Danish	There was in a city two men who had the same name, both called Claus, but one owned four horses and the other had only one; for so to distinguish them from one another, they called him, who had four horses Big Claus, and he who had only one horse, Little Claus. Now we hear what happened to them, for it is a true story! The whole week through, Little Claus had to plow for Great Claus, and lend him his one horse; Great Claus lent him all his four, but only once a week, and it was on Sunday. Hussa! where Little Claus would smack his whip over all five horses, they were of course now as good as his own one day. The sun shone brightly, and all the bells in the church tower rang the church, people were so dressed, and went with hymn book under his arm to hear the pastor preach, and they looked at Little Claus plowing with his five horses, and he was so pleased that he smacked his whip, and shouted: "Gee, all my horses!" "Do not say," he replied, "it's only one horse is yours!" But because any one passed to church, little Claus soon forgot that he did not say it, and cried out: "Gee, all my horses!" "Yes, now I ask you not to!" said Big Claus, "because you say it once, so I turn your horse on the head, so it must lie dead on the spot when it's over with!" "I promise you I will not say it anymore!" said Little Claus, but as soon as people came and they nodded good day, he was so pleased, and it seemed as though so briskly out that he had five horses plowing his field, and then cracked his whip, and shouted: "Gee, all my horses!" "I'll gee-up your horses!" said Big Claus, and took tøjrkøllen and beat Little Claus' only horse on the head, so that it fell down, and was quite dead. "Ah, now I have no horse!" said Little Claus and began to cry. Since peeled his horse, took the skin and let it dry well in the wind, put it so in a bag, which he put on his neck, and went through the city in order to sell its hestehud.Han had such a long way to go, had to go through a great dark forest, and now it was a terrible evil weather; He went quite wild, and before he came to the right path, it was evening, and too far to get to the city or back home before it was nat.Tæt the road stood a large farmhouse, shutters outside were shot for windows, but lights shone through. There I may well get permission to stay overnight, thought Little Claus, and he went and knocked på.Bondekonen closed up, but when she heard what he wanted, she told him to go away, her husband was not at home and she did not admit strangers. "Well, then, I must be outside," said little Claus, and the farmer's wife shut the door in ham.Tæt stood a large haystack, and between it and the house was a small shed with a flat thatch. "I can lie up!" said Little Claus, as he saw the roof, "it's a lovely bed, the stork will not fly down and bite my legs." For there stood a living stork on the roof, where it had its rede.Nu Little Claus climbed to the shed, where he turned himself to get comfortable. The wooden shutters on the windows did not end at the top, and he could see right into stuen.Der covered a large table with wine and rose and such a lovely fish farmer's wife and the clerk at the table and otherwise no other, and she gave him and he stuck to the fish, because it was something he loved. "Oh, if I could get some of that!" said Little Claus and handed head straight toward the window. God, what a beautiful cake he could see standing there! Yes, it was a feast! Now he heard some one riding down the road towards the house, it was the farmer who came home.That was such a good man, but he had a very strange that he could never bear to see a sexton; came a deacon before his eyes, he was quite furious. So it was that the sexton had gone to say good day to the wife, since he knew the man was not home, and the good woman therefore put all the best food she had for him; When she heard the man came, they were so frightened and begged the sexton to hide himself in a large empty chest that stood in the room; he did so because he knew that the poor man could not bear to see a sexton. The wife hid throw him all the good food and wine in her oven, for the man has had to see it, he had enough to ask what it would mean. "Ah, yes!" sighed Little Claus top of the shed, as he saw all the good things disappear. "Is anyone up there?" asked the farmer, looking up at Little Claus. "Why are you there? Come down, into the living room!" So Little Claus told how he had lost his way, and asked if he could stay overnight. "Yes!" said the farmer, "but now we must first have something to eat!" The woman took very kind to both of them, covered a long table and gave them a dish of porridge. The farmer was hungry and ate with a good appetite, but Little Claus could not help thinking of the nice roast meat, fish and pies, which he knew were in ovnen.Under table at his feet, lay the sack containing the horse's skin, for we know that it was the one he had gone home from with to get it sold in the city. Porridge would not taste him, and then he stepped on his bag, and the dry skin in the sack squeaked quite loud. "Hush!" said Little Claus to his sack, took the same at it again, till it squeaked louder than before. "No, what do you have in your bag?" asked the farmer. "Oh, it's a wizard!" said Little Claus, "he says we need not eat porridge, for he has conjured the oven full of roast meat, fish and cake." "What!" said the farmer, and closed furnace throw him up when he saw all the lovely food, his wife had hidden, but which he now thought the wizard in the sack had conjured up for them. The woman dared not say anything, so she placed the food on the table, and they both ate of the fish and roast and cake. Then Little Claus trod on his bag again so that the skin squeaked. "What does he say now?" asked the farmer. "He says," said Little Claus, "that he has conjured three bottles of wine for us, the standing in the corner by the stove!" Now had his wife take the wine out, she had hidden, and the farmer drank and were merry as such a conjuror as Little Claus had in the bag, would he dearly love to own. "Can he conjure up the evil one?" asked the farmer, "him I'd like to see, for now I'm gay!" "Yes," said Little Claus, "my conjuror can do anything I ask. you not?" he asked and stepped on the bag, it squeaked. "Can you hear he answers 'Yes?' But he fears that we are not worthy to see him!" "Oh, I am not afraid, how can he be like?" "Yes, he will prove quite lifelike as a deacon! "" Ha! " said the farmer, "it was horrid! You must know that I can not bear to see a sexton but it is the same, I know, it's hell, so I shall not mind better in it! Now I have courage! but he must not come too near me. "" I must ask my wizard, "said little Claus, stepped on the bag and held his ear." What does he say? "" he says that you must go and close the coffin up there in the corner, you will see the evil one crouching down inside, but you must hold the lid that he can not escape. "" will you help me hold it? " said the farmer, going towards the chest where his wife had hidden the sexton, who sat and bange.Bonden lifted the lid a little and peeped in: "hu" he screamed, and jumped back. "Yes, I saw him, he looked exactly like our sexton no, it was horrible!" It had to drink again, and they sat and drank late into the night. "The wizard can you sell me" said the farmer; "ask for everything you want! yes, I immediately gives you a bushel of money!" "no, I can not!" said Little Claus, "only think how much profit I could make out of this conjuror" "Oh, I would so dearly love to have him," said the farmer, and went on to ask. "Yes," said Little Claus at "since you have been so kind as to give me a night's lodging, so it may be the same, you have to get the wizard for a bushel of money, but I want bushel topfuld." "so you shall," said the farmer, " but the coffin you must take with you, I would not have it an hour in the house, one can not know whether he be still there. "Little Claus gave the farmer his sack with the dry skin, and got a bushel of money, and the egregious for it. The farmer gave him a wheelbarrow to run the chest and the gold. "Goodbye!" said Little Claus, as he went off with his money and the big chest in which even the clerk sat. On the other side of the forest was a broad, deep river, the water flowed so rapidly that you could scarcely swim against the tide; they had made a big new bridge over Little Claus stopped in the middle of it and said, loud enough for the clerk inside the coffin could hear: "No, what do I do with this stupid chest; it is as heavy as that was full of stones: I shall be tired to run it anymore, so I will throw it in the river, sailing the then home for me, it's good, and it does not do so, it may also be the same. "Now he seized the chest with one hand and lifted it up a little, as if he were going to throw it into the water. "do not!" cried the sexton from within the chest, "let me out!" "Ha!" said Little Claus, pretending he was scared. "He's still in there! I must throw him into the river and drown him!" "Oh no, oh no!" cried the clerk, "I will give you a bushel of money, you will fail!" "Yes it is another matter!" said Little Claus, opening the chest. The sexton crept out, pushed the empty chest into the water, and went to his home, where Little Claus received another bushel of money, one he had already received from the farmer, now he had a barrow full of money! "See , the horse I have been well paid! " he said to himself when he came home in his own room, and emptied all his money into a heap on the floor. "How vexed Great Claus when he gets to know how rich I have become through my one horse, but I will not just tell him exactly that!" He sent a boy to Great Claus to borrow a bushel. "What does he want with it!" thought Great Claus, and smeared tar on the bottom to be able to hang some of whatever that was measured, and so it happened; for when he got the bushel back, hung three new silver florins. "What something?" said Great Claus, and immediately ran to the little: "Where did you get so much money from?" "Oh, for my horse's skin, I sold it yesterday!" "It was certainly well paid!" said Big Claus; and he ran home, took a hatchet, and knocked all his four horses on the head, flayed off their skins, and took them to the city. "Skins, skins, who'll buy skins?" he shouted through gaderne.Alle shoemakers and tanners came running, and asked what he wanted for them. "A bushel of money for each, 'said Big Claus" Are you mad? " they all said, "do you think we have money by the bushel?" "Skins, skins, who'll buy skins," he cried again, but all those who asked what the hides cost, he replied, "a bushel of money. "" He is making fools of us, "they said all together, then the shoemakers took their straps, and the tanners their leather aprons, and began to thrash at big Claus." skins, skins! " made faces at him, "yes, we'll give you a skin to be spit red pigs! out of town with him!" they shouted, and Big Claus had to run as fast as he could, then beaten, he had never been. "Well!" he said when he came home, "Little Claus shall get paid, I will kill him for it!" But the home of the Little Claus was the old grandmother's death; She had been so ill-tempered and spiteful to him, but he was very sorry, and took the dead woman and laid her in his warm bed, she could not come to life again; that she had to lie all night, although he would sit in the corner and sleeping on a chair, he had done før.Som he sat there at night, the door opened and Big Claus came in with his ax; He knew well where Little Claus's bed was, went over to it and struck the old grandmother on the head because he thought it was Little Claus. "There!" he said, "now you can not fool me anymore!" and then he went home again. "It's a very wicked man!" said Little Claus, "that he would kill me, it was a good thing for my old grandmother that she was already dead, or he would have taken her life!" Then he dressed his old grandmother in her best clothes, borrowed a horse of his neighbor , harnessed it to the cart and put the old woman in the back seat so that she could not fall out as he drove, and rode away through the wood; When the sun rose, they were outside a large inn, where Little Claus stopped and went in to get something to eat af.Kromanden had so many, many money, he was also a very good man, but as passionate as there was pepper and snuff. "Good morning!" he said to Little Claus, "you are come betimes today!" "Yes," said Little Claus, "I'm going to town with my old grandmother, she sits back of the wagon, I can not get her into the room . Will you take her a glass of mead, but you must speak very loud, for she can not hear well. "" Yes, I will! " said the landlord, and pouring out a glass of mead, he carried it out to the dead grandmother, who sat upright in the cart. "Here is a glass of mead from your son!" said the landlord, but the dead woman did not say a word, but sat quite still "Do you not hear!" cried the landlord as loud as he could, "here is a glass of mead from your son!" Once again he shouted the same thing and so once again, but when she did not stir out of place, he was angry and threw her glass straight in the face, then struck her on the nose, and she fell backwards into the cart, for she was only seated there, not tied in. "Nåda!" cried Little Claus, rushing out the door and took the landlord by the throat! "There you have enabled my grandmother to death! Do you see, here is a great hole in her forehead!" "Oh it was an accident!" said the landlord, wringing his hands "It all comes of my fiery temper Sweet Little Claus, I will give you a bushel of money and let bury your grandmother as if it were my own; only keep silent, or else they will cut off my head, and it's so disgusting! "So little Claus received another bushel of money, and the landlord buried his old grandmother as if it could be his egen.Da little Claus reached home again with the money, he sent his boy to great Claus to ask if he could borrow a bushel. "What?" he replied; "I have not killed him! I must go and see for myself," and then he went even over the bushel to Little Claus. "No, where did you get all this money from?" he asked, opening his eyes at seeing all those who had come to. "It was my grandmother instead of me, you killed!" said Little Claus, "so I have sold a bushel of money!" "It was certainly well paid!" said Big Claus and hurried home, took an ax and killed his old grandmother to death, put her up in the car, drove into town to the apothecary, and asked if he would buy a dead body. "Who is it and where did you get it from? " asked the apothecary. "It's my grandmother!" he replied; "I have killed her for a bushel of money!" "God save us!" said the pharmacist. "In talking over you, however, no such thing, because then you lose your head!" And now he said he really know what it was for something wicked deed he had done, and what a bad person he was and that he should be punished; Great Claus got so frightened that he jumped out of the surgery in the cart, whipped up his horses, and drove home, apothecary and all the people thought him mad, and let him drive where he liked. "What you get paid ! " said Big Claus when he was out on the road! "That you shall, Little Claus!" and now he as soon as he got home, the largest sack he could find and went over to Little Claus, and said, "now you have deceived me again! First, I killed my horses, then my old grandmother! It's all your fault, but never you fool of me, "and then he took small Claus about life and put him in his bag, took him on his shoulders, shouted to him:" Now I'm going to drown you! "It was a long way to go before he reached the river, and little Claus was not so easy to carry. The road led past the church, the organ playing and the people singing beautifully; so put big Claus's bag with small Claus near the church door, and thought it could be quite good, to go in and hear a psalm first before he went on: Little Claus could not escape and all the people were in church ; so he went there. "Oh dear, oh dear!" sighing small Claus within the bag; He turned and turned, but it was impossible for him to solve the belt; this came an old cattle driver, with snowy hair and a large staff in his hand; he drove a large herd of cows and bulls in front of them, they ran to the bag as Little Claus, and turned it over. "Ah, yes!" sighed Little Claus, "I'm so young and going to heaven!" "And I, poor fellow!" said the drover, "is so old and can not get there yet!" "Open the sack!" cried Little Claus; "creep into my place there, then comes immediately to heaven!" "Yes, all my heart," said the drover up for Little Claus, who immediately jumped out. "Will you take care of the cattle," said the old man, as he crept into the bag as little Claus tied up, and then walked off with all the cows and tyrene.Lidt after big Claus came out of church, he took his sack on his back, appeared to have have become lighter, for the old drover was not half so heavy as little Claus! "Where he has been easy to wear! Yes it is probably because I have heard a hymn!" so he went to the river, which was deep and broad, threw the sack containing the old drover into the water and shouted after him, he believing it to be Little Claus: "There, now you do not fool me anymore! "Then he went home, but when he came to where two roads crossed, there was little Claus driving away with all his cattle." What! " said Big Claus, "Did I not drown you?" "Yes!" said Little Claus; "you threw me into the river about half an hour ago!" "But where did you get all these fine beasts?" asked Big Claus. "It's søkvæg!" said Little Claus, "I will tell you the whole story, and thank you also have because you drowned me, now I'm on top, is really rich, can you believe I was so scared when I was in the sack, and the wind whistled in my ears when you threw me off the bridge into the cold water. I sank straight to the bottom, but I did not hurt myself, for down there grows beautifully soft grass. it came towards me, and was immediately sack opened and the beautiful maiden in snow-white robes and with a green wreath on her wet hair, took me by the hand and said: 'are you there little Claus has you in the first place some cattle one mil up the road still stands an entire operation, which I will give you! ' Now I saw that the river formed a great highway for the sea folks. Down on the bottom left and drove straight from the sea to the country, where the river ends. There was so lovely with flowers and fresh grass and the fish, who swam past me as rapidly as the birds do here in the air. how handsome people and where there were cattle, it went on hedges and ditches! "" But why are you come up to us again, "said great Claus. "I had not done, when there were so beautiful down there!" "Yes," said Little Claus, "it's good policy on me! You hear well enough that I tell you Havpigen said that a mil up on road, and the road she meant the river, for the second place she can not come, is another whole cattle to me. But I know how the river goes in bays, now here, now there, it's quite a detour, no so do the shorter of when you can, to come here on land and drive across the river again, I shall save nearly half a mil and comes gesvindtere to my sea-cattle! "" Oh you are a happy man! " he replied; "do you think I should get any sea-cattle when I get to the bottom of the river?" "Yes, I should think," said Little Claus, "but I can not carry you in a sack, you is too heavy for me, will you go there and then creep into the bag, and I will be very pleased to throw you out. "" Thank you! " he replied; "but I do not get any sea-cattle when I come down, I'll thrash you, you can believe!" "Oh no, do not be so bad!" and so they went to the creek. When the cattle, which were thirsty, so the water ran it all that it could to come down to drink. "See what a rush!" said Little Claus; "The longing to get down again!" "Come, help me!" said Big Claus, "or you'll get a beating!" So he crept into a large sack, which had been lying across the back of one of the guides. "Put in a stone, or I'm afraid I do not sink," said Big Claus. "That is enough!" said Little Claus, but he put a big stone in the sack, tied it tightly, and gave it: Plump! there was Big Claus in the river and immediately sank to the bottom. "I'm afraid he will not find the cattle!" said Little Claus, and then drive home with what he had.
water of life	921	551	Danish	There was once a king who was so ill that everyone thought he was going to die, and his three sons went sad in the garden and wept. There they met an old man who asked what was the matter, and they told him that their father was so ill that he probably died, and they did not know how to help him. "I know what can help him," said the old man, "the water of life. When he drinks it, he will recover, but it is very difficult to get hold of." - "I'll get it," said the eldest, went up and asked the king if he could go out to fetch water of life, for it was the only one who could help. King would not have it. "It's too dangerous," he said, "let me rather die." But the prince kept nagging until he was allowed. And to himself he thought: "If I bring the water, holding my father most of me and inherit the kingdom." So he set out, and when he had ridden for some time, he met a dwarf who shouted: "Where are you going in such a hurry." - "You do not need to know your stupid midget," said the prince, haughty. Then little man angry and wanted an evil. The prince rode a little after entering on a mountain road, and the further he rode the closer was the mountains, and eventually the way was so narrow that he could not go a step further, and it was impossible to turn the horse or come down, he was completely trapped. The sick King waited long for him, but he did not. "Let me go out and search for water," said the second son and thought, "If my brother is dead, falls kingdom me." King would not know it, but finally gave way. Prince rode the same path as his brother and also met the little dwarf who asked where he was going in such a hurry. "What's it to you," said the prince, and rode off without looking round. But the dwarf bewitched him, and he got into a ravine and was also stuck without being able to go neither forward nor back. So is the hovmodige.Da the second son did not come home, asked the youngest prince if he could go out for water, and the king had to give him permission. When he met the dwarf and the latter asked where he was going so fast, he stopped and said, "I'm going out and searching for the water of life, for my father is sick unto death." - "Do you know where it is?" asked the dwarf, and the prince did not. "Because you have carried you seemly, and not haughtily like your false brothers, I will tell you how to get it," said the dwarf. "It springs from a fountain, situated in an enchanted castle, but do not you come in if I did not give you a jernris and two breads. With the rod turn three strokes on the castle's iron gate, it will spring open. Inside is two lions with gaping jaws, but if you give them bread, they become silent. Hurry so taking the water before the clock strikes twelve, as slamming the door in. " The prince thanked him, took the whip and bread and went on his way. When he came to the castle he found everything as the dwarf had said. At the third stroke jumped the gate, and as he had thrown the wand, he went into the castle. He came into a large hall where sat enchanted princes. They had rings on his fingers, and those he left, and when he saw that there was a sword and a loaf of bread, he also took it with him. He went on and came into a room where there was a lovely girl. She was very happy when she saw him, kissed him and said he should have the whole kingdom, and when he came back in a year their wedding should be celebrated. She told him where the well was, and said he had to hurry to retrieve some of it before the clock struck twelve. He came into a room where there was a delicious made bed, and he was so tired that he felt inclined to rest a little. But he fell asleep and woke up only when the clock struck three quarter to twelve. Startled, he jumped up, ran to the well and drew water in a cup that stood by, and hurried away. The moment, he ran out the clock struck twelve, and the door slammed so violently that a piece of his heel caught. He went now on the way home, glad that he had the water and met again the dwarf. "It's great treasures, you've won there, he said, when he saw the sword and the loaf," with the sword thou canst slay whole armies, and the bread will never come. "Prince would not go home without his brothers and said: "Do not tell me where my brothers are. They went out before I have to search the water of life and did not come home again. "-" They are imprisoned between two mountains, "said the dwarf," I have condemned them because they were so haughty. "The prince begged until the dwarf released them, but he warned him and said, "Take care of them, they have an evil heart." When his brothers came, he rejoiced, and told them that he had a cup full of water of life home, and had rescued a beautiful princess who would wait a year for him, so should the wedding is celebrated, and he became king of a large kingdom. They rode on together and came to a country where there was famine and war, and the king thought that the kingdom should completely perish, so great was the misery. the prince gave him the bread, and the whole people could eat his fill, the sword he was also, and beat the enemy on the run, so that there was again calm and peace in the country. the prince was so loaf and his sword, and they went on. they entered two more countries where war and hunge rsnød, and the prince rescued even those with sword and bread. They went on board a ship and sailed over the sea. Along the way, said the eldest to the next oldest, "Dad will obviously give the kingdom to our younger brother because he has taken water, and it is of course basically us." They were so envious that they agreed they would do away with him. And even when he was asleep, they poured the water of life of his cup into another and took it, and put salt in seawater hans.Da they got home, the youngest took his cup to the sick king, that he might drink water and recuperate. But when he had sunk the salty sea water, he was even more ill. He moaned and complained, and then came the two eldest sons, accused the youngest of having intended to poison him and said they brought him the true water of life. No sooner had he drank before all the pain disappeared, and he was strong and healthy as in his younger days. The two evil princes laughed at their brother and said mockingly: "You have certainly found the water of life, but now we reap the wages of your labors. You should have been smarter and having taken better care of. While you were asleep at sea, we took it from you, and about a year, receive one of us the beautiful princess. But beware to tell anyone. Far think you for the rest does not, and if you say a word, you get to to lose your life, but you are silent, you must be allowed to keep it. "the old king was angry with his youngest son, and thought he had plotted against his life. He left the court together that they will condemn him, and they agreed that he should be secretly shot. One day, when the prince was riding hunting without suspecting no evil, got the king hunter's command to go with. When they came out of the forest, so the prince how sorry hunter appeared and asked what was wrong. "I can not say it, but I must, however, make it," said the hunter. "Say only," said the prince, "I will not be angry with you." - "The king has commanded me to shoot you dead," said the hunter. The prince was very frightened. "Oh, let me live," he asked, "I give you my royal garments, so can you give me yours." - "I want," said the hunter, "I had not been able to bring over my heart to kill you." They exchanged clothes, and the huntsman went home and the prince went deeper into skoven.Nogen time came that sending three carriages with gold and precious stones for the younger prince. They were a gift of thanks from the three kings with the prince's sword had overcome their enemies and with his bread saturated the hungry people. "I wonder if my son were to be innocent," said the king and said to his people: "Just my son, however, was still alive. It makes me feel so hurt that I have caused him to kill." - "He is alive," cried he, "I could not get me to carry out your command." It dropped a stone from the king's heart, and he had it proclaimed throughout the kingdom that his son would come back, he would be received with glæde.Kongedatteren did, however, in front of his castle make a way of brilliant gold and told her people that, who came riding straight road, her right groom and him should let come in, but if someone rode beside they were not open to him. As the years about the process, would the eldest hurry to the princess and impersonate her liberator and get both her and her kingdom. Therefore he rode away and came to the castle, but when he saw the splendid golden road, he thought: "It is a sin to ride on it," and rode on the right side. When he came to the gate, said the people, that he was to go away again, he was not the right one. Shortly after the second prince set out of place, and when he came to the golden road, and his horse had put one foot on it, he thought: "It would be a shame to tread a piece," and rode on the left side. When he came to the gate, the attendants told him that he should go, he was not the right one. When the year was decided the younger prince to ride to his lover and forget her grief with her. All the time he thought of her and wished he was with her, so he did not notice the golden road. The horse trotted across the middle, the gate was opened for him, and she received him with joy and said he was her savior and lord of the kingdom, and the wedding was celebrated with great splendor. She told him that his father had forgiven him and let him call home. The prince then returned and told him how the brothers had deceived him. The old king would punish them, but they had sailed away over the sea and never came back.
The Louse and the Flea	282	2022	Danish	There was once a louse and a flea who lived together. One day, they brewed beer in an eggshell, fell jumper down and burned. Flea began to scream loud, and the little door asked, "Why are you crying, little flea?" - "Because the louse has burnt herself," replied loppen.Da door began to creak and a diet that stood in the corner said: "Why art thou creaking, little door?" - "Have I not squeak," answered the door - "The little louse has burnt herself, The little flea is weeping." When the broom began to sweep frantically, and a little cart passed by and asked: "Why art thou sweeping, little broom?" - "Have I not sweep," replied the diet - "The little louse has burnt herself, The little flea is weeping, the door creaks." Then began the trolley to run everything it could, and when it came dunghill, asked this: "Why render you so, little cart?" - "Have I not run," replied the wagon - "The little louse has burnt herself, The little flea is weeping, the door creaks, broom is sweeping." Then began the dunghill to burn in flames. Beside it stood a tree which asked: "Why are you passionate about, little midden?" - "Have I not burn," said midden - "The little louse has burnt herself, The little flea is weeping, the door creaks, broom sweeps cart is running." Then began the tree shaking, so all the leaves fell off. A girl who came by with a pitcher saw that and asked, "Why are you shaking you, little tree?" - "Have I not shake me," replied the tree - "The little louse has burnt herself, The little flea is weeping, the door creaks, broom sweeps cart is running, midden burner." And when the girl his mug broken and the well, she was standing by, asked, "Why turn your mug broken, little girl?" - "Have I not turn my mug broken," she replied - "The little louse has burnt herself, The little flea is weeping, the door creaks, broom sweeps cart is running, midden burner, wood shakes." Then began the well to rise and floated soon of all widths. And everything was drowned, the girl, wood, manure pit, cart, diet, door, flea and lice.
His happiness	790	1415	Danish	When His seven years had served his master, he said to him: "I have been here long enough, and now I would like to go home to my mother. Can I get my salary." - "You have been a faithful and honest servant," said the gentleman, "and your reward be then." Then he gave him a piece of gold that was as big as his head. His wrapped it in his handkerchief, took it on his shoulder and set out on the way home. As he trudged on, always putting one foot before the other, he saw a rider who ever so merrily by on a lively horse. "A horse is a fine thing," he said, "who sit as comfortably as in a chair, you stumble over no stones, you save your shoes off, you do not even know how." The rider, who had heard what he said, stopped and shouted: "Why are you going on your legs, Hans?" - "I am well have to," he replied, "Here I have a proper lump that I have to lug home. It is indeed gold, but I can not hold my head straight for it, and the press hurts my shoulder . " - "You know," said the rider, "Shall we exchange? You get my horse, so give me your lump." - "With the greatest pleasure," said Hans, "but I tell you, it is to crawl along." The rider rose now down, took the gold, and helped Hans up, gave him the bridle tight in his hand and said: "That should go really well, you need to click with his tongue and say, Gee, Gee." Hans was heartily delighted as he sat upon the horse and so proudly rode off. A little later it occurred to him that it ought to go faster, and he began to click with his tongue and shout Gee, Gee. The horse sat at a gallop, and before Hans had time to look around, he was lying in the ditch between the field and the road. The horse would have tumbled down, if not a countryman who was driving a cow, had taken hold of it. His total up and came back to his feet. But he was vexed, and said to the farmer: "It is a poor joke, this riding, especially when one gets hold of a mare like this, that kicks and throws one off, so you are just about to break his neck. I put myself never in life up on it more. No, when prices I your cow. it can leisurely go back, and then you get on top of that milk, butter and cheese. " - "When you think so highly of it, all my heart exchange with you," said the farmer. His was overjoyed, and countryman jumped upon the horse and rode off in a fart.Hans drive quietly away with his cow and thought over his lucky bargain. "Although I have only one piece of bread, and I hardly fail, then I can as often as I like, eat butter and cheese with it, and if I am thirsty, I can milk my cow, I have milk. What more could you ask. " When he came to an inn, he went in, ate in his great everything he had with him, dinner and supper, and with his last few farthings had half glass of beer. Then he went on with his cow to get home to his mother's village. As dinner approached, it became hotter and hotter, and Hans was in the middle of a moor which it took about out in the first hour. He was so hot and thirsty, the tongue stuck to the palate. "The grief can probably off," he thought, "now is milking my cow and drink the milk." He tied her to a withered tree, and as he had no pail he put his leather cap underneath the cow. But however much he strained, came not a single drop of milk. And because he wore so awkwardly, the animal was impatient and gave him a kick in the head with the hind leg, so he tumbled over, and time was clean from it. Fortunately, just a butcher by with a little pig in a wheelbarrow. "What ails," cried he, and helped the good Hans back on their feet. Hans told him what had happened to the butcher gave him his flask and said, "Drink, then you come to power again. The cow gives will never be that milk. It is an ancient creature that at most can be used the slaughter or draft animals. " - "Who would have believed it," said Hans and stroked his hair, "Certainly it is a nice amount of meat when you slaughter such an animal. But for the rest I do not care much for beef, it is not juicy enough. No, I just had such a small pig. It tastes quite different, and then you get even sausages. " - "Listen, Hans," said the butcher, "to add you I will exchange, then you have the pig for the cow." - "God bless you," said Hans, got the pig from the barrow, and the cord by which it was bound, in hånden.Han went on, as he thought of how everything went as desired. If he did meet with any vexation it was immediately set right. Shortly after he struck up with a guy who had a fine white goose under his arm. They said hello to each other, and Hans told how well he had fared, and how he had always spoils. The other said he was taking the goose to a christening party. "Raise a time when it's heavy," he said, taking in the wings, "but it has also been fattened for eight weeks. When you put the teeth in wipe the fat from both mouth." Yes, "said Hans, weighed it in one hand, "but my pig is no bad one." lad looked at it from all sides and shook his head. "Listen," he said, "it is not right with your pig. I come from a village where there have been stolen from the mayor. I am a little bit afraid - yes it is, I really - it's what you have there. There are people sent out after the thief, and it would be a bad business if they caught you with the pig. So you will be at the very least put in the black hole. "The good Hans was terrified." God save me, "he cried," help me out. In better known here. Take my pig and leave me your goose. "-" It's a bit dangerous, "answered the lad," but I will not be the fault of that you get into trouble. "Then he took the rope in his hand and drove away the pig down a side road, and Hans went easy on the heart of the place again. "When I really think about me, I can stand me well at the spoils," he thought, "Firstly, I have the good frying and so greasy which drips out. I can get fedtemad a quarter of a year. Then there is also the beautiful white feathers, the ones I stop in my pillow, so I sleep certainly nice. How mother will be happy! "When he came to the last village, there stood a scissors grinder with his barrow. The wheel spun, and he sang:" Scissors I grinder, so glorious they cut, cap on both shoulders I wear. "His stood and looked at him, and finally he said, "it is you probably good, since you sing so happy for your work." - "Yes, I believe," said the grinder, "the trade gives gold. A real grinder just need to put your hand in your pocket to get money. But where have you bought the lovely goose? "-" The I have not bought, I have swapped me to a pig. "-" And the pig? "-" I've got for a cow. "-" And the cow ? "-" that I got for a horse. "-" And the horse? "-" the I've got a lump of gold as big as my head. "-" And the gold? "-" It was my wages for seven years of service. "-" you have known how to deal with you, "said the grinder" if I now also be able to bring it as far as the money jingle in your pocket when you traveled you, had you made your fortune. " - "But how shall I go about it," said Hans. "I must be grinder. You do basically nothing but a grindstone, the second coming of himself. I have one here, which is certainly a little worn, but you shall not give me anything for it but your goose. Will you do it? "-" It was something to ask, "said Hans," I shall be the happiest person on earth. When I have money whenever I put my hand in my pocket, I need never make me worry. "He handed him the goose and received the grindstone in exchange. Grinder, took up an ordinary heavy stone that lay on the ground beside him and gave it to him. "Here you have one," he said, "that you can hammer and beat the old nails straight again. Wear it now gently. "He took the stone and went on with joy." I have to be born with a caul on, "he shouted," everything I want, I get as if I were a Sunday child. "He however, began to tire, he had been on his legs since daybreak. hunger also tormented him, and in his delight at the cow, he had eaten all his food. he could hardly walk and was forced to stop every minute; the stones were also so heavy to carry, he could not help thinking how nice it would be if he did not have to lug them. Very slowly crawled himself to a well to rest there and cool with it fresh water. for him not to make the stones anything when he sat down, he laid them gently on the edge of the well. Then he sat down, but he would stoop and drink, he came to encounter little to the stones so that they fell into the water. When Hans with my own eyes had seen them disappear depths, he jumped for joy, fell to his knees and thanked God with tears in his eyes for the grace he had shown him by freeing him from the heavy burden that had just been in trouble without his having any need to reproach themselves. "I am the happiest person under the sun," he shouted. With a light heart, free from any burden, he ran away to his mother.
Apprentice and master	646	325	Danish	There was once a man named Jan. He would let his son to learn a trade and went into the church and asked God to tell him what a he should choose. The clerk was however hidden behind the altar and heard it and shouted: "He must learn to witches." January went home to his son and said that God had told him to learn to witches, and they went off to find a man who knew about it. When they had gone a long time, they came into a great forest where there lived an old woman. "Can you tell us who can teach my son here to witches," said Jan. "It can learn that here quite," replied the woman, "my son is a master of it." When the son came home asked the man if he understood the right of witch fishing. "I want to take your son to learn," he replied, "Come back in a year, and if you then know him, do not pay me anything, but do you know him, you must give me two hundred dollars. "the father goes home and his son were out there to learn to witches. When the year was out, went in January on his way and went and pondered how he should behave to know his son again. There he met a little man, who asked why he was so thoughtful. "It must be all my heart tell," said Jan, "a year ago I placed my son apprenticed to a witch master, who said that if I did not know the guy again after one year, I had to give him two hundred dollars but if I knew him, I had nothing to pay. Now I go and am so afraid that I do not know him and I do not know where I need to get the money. "the man said as he should take a basket of bread with and go to the fireplace. Up on the shelf stood a small basket, and out of it looked a little bird, which was his søn.Jan went and threw some bread in front of the basket and the sparrow stuck his head out. "Good day, my son," the father said. The son was very happy to see his father again, and the wizard said: "The devil must have you, or how could you have known." - "Let's go, Dad," said the son, and then went de.Noget by the way a carriage comes driving by youth says: "I will change myself into a large greyhound, then you can earn a lot of money on me. " Lord, who sat in the car, shouted to the man: "Do you sell me the dog?" The man said yes, and when the gentleman asked what he wanted for it, he said thirty dollars. "It's a little expensive," said the gentleman, "but since it is such a very fine dog I will have it." He takes it into the carriage, but when they had gone a little farther the dog out the window and was once human and came to his father igen.De went home. The day after there was market in the nearest village and the son said to his father: "I will change myself into a beautiful horse, then you can go in and sell me, but beware, you remember taking my bridle, or I can not become human again. " The father pulled him now entering the market, and there was his mentor and bought the horse for a hundred dollars, but the father forgot to take off my bridle, and the man took it home in his barn. When the girl was walking the horse says, "Take off my bridle, take off my bridle." The girl stood still and listened to: "Oh, you can talk," she said. Then she went and took the bridle off, and the horse becomes a sparrow and flew out the door, but the wizard becomes a sparrow also, and flies after him. They come properly to blows, but the master could not stand up and turned into a fish. The boy was now a fish and they fought again, but again withdrew master the short straw. And when he turned into a hen, was the boy to a fox, and bites his head so that he fell dead, and there he lies even to this day.
The lion and the mouse	9068	75	Danish	There was once a mouse that came out of his hole and met a løve.Løven would eat it. -Be sweet not to eat me. Maybe you need me dag.Løven answered: Why would I need you, as small as you are? Leo took pity on the mouse, which was so small and let it loose. One day heard the mouse some terrible brøl.Det was løven.- When it reached the point of the lion was caught in a net. -I'm gonna save you! said musen.-Dig? You are too small for such a big arbejde.- mouse began to bite the net to pieces and the lion was frelst.- From the day of the mouse and the lion the best friends in the world.
The lion's share	9878	51	Danish	There once was a lion, a hyena, a fox, an ostrich and a hare, which together owned a herd of camels. They took turns every day to bring the animals out to pasture, except the lion, who used to stay at home because it was the animals konge.En day took the fox and ostrich together out to feed the camels. Since the animals were started with grazing, asked the fox ostrich whether it would prefer to look after the animals, or would rather find Xabag for their lunch. The ostrich chose to watch the camels, while the fox went off to collect frokost.Ræven wrapped the sticky mass around two stone. "Here you go," said the fox, "eat these two pieces delicious Xabag" .Strudsen swallowed at once the two stone that got stuck in its throat. "Call the animals together and sing for them, so we can get them home," cried the fox. "Wuu-uu-uu-mm," muttered the ostrich. "Do join us to frighten the camels" said ræven.Da they came home, told Fox lion that the ostrich had frightened the camels. "What is wrong with you?" asked the lion. "Wu-uu-uu-mm," muttered the ostrich. "See, it does it on purpose," said ræven.Løven pounced on ostrich and broken neck den.Næste today asked the fox the hare to go with out guard dyrene.Midt on the day the fox drank some milk, as lion had hidden in a secret location. Fox took a bit of cream and pretended it would play with the hare and squirted cream on hare lips. "Who drank my milk?" Asked the lion, when they came home. "I do not know, but the hare has cream on the lips "replied ræven.Løven discovered the cream of hare lips and killed den.Næste morning killed one lion hankamel and invited all the wildlife to share the meat between sig.Først asked the hyena to dele.Hyænen divided it into two halves." one half is to the lion and the other half to the rest of us, "said hyænen.Løven was not satisfied with hyena way to share, and gave it to the side of the head. Hyena one eye fell out. "Come here, fox, now you have to share it," the king ordered. "One third of the meat is to us, two thirds are for the lion ...... No, no. I'm doing a new distribution. Leo must have it all! " was the fox's conclusion. "Well, who hath warned you to share?" asked the lion amused. "Omer's hanging eye has taught me to share," said ræven.En today asked the fox if it would be allowed to make a new mat for the lion because the previous one was getting worn. Instead, the lion could then fit the camels the dag.Løven accepted fox proposals and shooed the animals out to græs.Ræven dug a big hole inside the lion's cabin, filled it with hot charcoal and covered it over with branches and græs.Da lion came home about evening led the fox to its new mat and bath lion lie down on it to test it. The lion lay down and fell into the burning charcoal, where the døde.Til finally got the one-eyed hyena and asked Fox to remove a blade of grass, which had come in this eye. "It's easy enough, come to me, and I take it out, "said ræven.Ræven took a pointed stick and stuck hyena other eye out and did the blind.Således ended the fox to be the sole owner of the camels.
The man made young again	1398	753	Danish	Once, when our Lord still walked the earth, he took an evening with St. Peter at a smith who received free. While they were there, there came a poor beggar, hardly pressed by age and infirmity, and asked for a pittance. Peter felt sorry for him and said to the Lord: "If you think, then make him well again, so he can earn his bread." Our Lord then turned to the blacksmith and said, "put on some coals, and I will rejuvenate the old man." Smith did it, Peter pulled the bellows and the fire burned clear that God set the man down in flames, and he was red-hot in there and praising God. Then he put the man in the water trough, and when he had cooled, he gave him his blessing, and immediately he jumped up, hale and hearty, as when he was twenty years. Smith, who had seen it all, invited them to supper. He had an old, half-blind crooked, mother, who went to the young man and asked if he had burned a lot in there. But he replied that he had never found themselves so well. The fire had been so refreshing as the morning dug.Disse words sounded all night for the old man's ear, and when our Lord the next morning had said goodbye and thank you to the blacksmith and had gone on, thought that he might make his old mother-young since he had seen how it all happened, and it lay within his craft. He asked her if she wanted to dance along like a girl of eighteen. She wondered what the young man had said, and said yes. Smith made a great fire, and thrust the old there. She rocked back and forth and screaming frantically. "What howl you for?" cried he, and began to tread the bellows again as the flames struck all her. When she was about to scream, he thought: "There must be something wrong with it," and took her out and threw her in the water trough. Then she screamed so loudly that the smith's wife and daughter heard it and came running down the ladder. They found the old woman lying in the trough, and her face was quite distorted and wrinkled. They were both about some time to have a baby, but at this terrible sight, they were so terrified that the same night gave birth to two boys who did not appear as people, but as monkeys. They ran out into the forest, and from them comes all monkeys.
Marie Barnet	24	710	Danish	At the edge of a great forest there lived even a woodcutter with his wife and their only child, a little girl three years. They were so poor that they no longer had daily bread, and they did not know how to get something to eat. One morning, the woodcutter sorrowful into the woods to his work. As he was cutting wood, he saw at once a lovely woman with a crown of shining stars on her head for him. "I am the Virgin Mary," she said to him, "the child Jesus mother. You are poor and in need. Bring me your child, then I will take it with me and be her mother for it." Woodcutter brought his little girl and gave her to the Virgin Mary, who took her with him into the sky. There the child fared well, ate cakes and drank sweet milk, clothes were of gold and played with the angels. When she was 14 years old, said the Virgin Mary one day to her, "I'm going on a long journey, my little girl. Here you have the keys to the thirteen doors of heaven. Twelve of these thou mayest open, and behold the glory there, but the thirteenth, to which this little key, never open. Remember it. you will be very unhappy if you are disobedient. " The girl promised to do what the Virgin Mary had said. Each day she opened one of the doors, until she had opened all the twelve. In each of them was an apostle surrounded by brilliance and splendor. She thought it was great to see, and all the angels who came with her, also welcomed by the glorious vision. She was missing Just the thirteenth door, and had a great desire to know what was hidden behind it. She said to the angels: "It would never occur to me to close the door completely and go in, but I close it just a crack, so we can look into it." - "No, I do not," the angels said, "it is sin. The Virgin Mary has forbidden it, it could easily cause thy unhappiness." She paused so quiet, but curiosity let her have no peace. And one day, when the angels were at home, she thought: "Now I look in there. I also am home alone, so no one can know that I do it." She took the little key, put it in the lock and turned on. Immediately the door sprang open, and she saw the Triune God in all his glory. She stood for a moment astonished without moving, so she held one finger up in the golden luster, and it was immediately completely plated. She was at once terrible anxiety, slammed the door and ran away. The fear would not go over, and heart pounding in her chest. The gold would not go of your finger, how much she washed sig.Kort time the Virgin Mary came home from his trip. She called the girl and asked for the keys. When she got them, looked into her eyes and said: "Have you not opened the thirteenth door?" - "No," she replied. Then she laid her hand on her heart and felt how it beat; she felt from the fact that the girl had not kept his promise. "Is it certain that you have not done it?" she asked again. "Yes," replied the girl. When she saw the golden finger and asked for the third time: "Have not you opened the door?" - "No," replied the girl. But the Virgin Mary said: "You have been disobedient and have bargain lied. You are not worthy to be in heaven." Girl fell into a deep sleep, and when she awoke she lay down on the ground in a wilderness. She wanted to shout for help, but could not get a sound out. When she jumped up and wanted to run away, but everywhere there grew hawthorn hedges, and she could not make his way through the sharp thorns. She then found an old hollow tree, which she had to stay in. At night she lay there and slept, and when it stormed and rained, she crawled in there and took shelter. It was a miserable life than playing with the angels in heaven, and every time she thought about how good she had it, she came to cry. She had nothing to live on than roots and berries, as she plucked where she could get to. When autumn came, she gathered the fallen nuts and leaves, and carried them into the wood. The nuts were her food in winter, and when it snowed and was cold, she crawled like a poor little animals under the leaves not to freeze. It was not long before her clothes were torn, and finally fell off of her to pieces. When it became hot, and the sun shone, she sat in front of the tree, and her long hair fell over her like a cloak. And one year went after the other, and she felt that the misery of the jorden.En time when trees were fresh and green, drew the country's king hunting in the woods. He pursued a deer, who fled into the thicket, and therefore increased the horse and made his path with his sword through the bushes. When he was finally penetrated them, he saw that the tree was a lovely girl, completely enveloped in her long, golden hair. He paused astonished and asked, "Who are you and why are you sitting here?" She did not answer, for she could not speak. The King continued: "Will you go with me to my castle?" She nodded King took her in her arms, put her on his horse and rode home with her. When they came to the castle, he gave her beautiful clothes and rich jewelry. And although she could not speak, she was still so beautiful and charming that he came to love her and married hende.Efter approximately one year queen gave birth to one son. At night, when she was alone, the Virgin Mary appeared to her and said: "To tell the truth and confess that you have been disobedient, I will give you your voice again, but if you are still so hidebound that you refuse your sin, I take your newborn child. " Then the queen was permitted to answer, but she said adamantly, "I have not opened the door." When the Virgin Mary took the newborn child in her arms and disappeared. The next morning the child was nowhere to be found, and people began to whisper that the Queen was a man who had eaten her own child. She heard it, but could not defend themselves, and the king would not believe it because he was so fond of hende.Et years after Queen again bore one son. At night the Virgin Mary came to her and said, "If you will confess that you have been disobedient, I will give you your first child back and untie your tongue. But you will not, I will take your newborn baby with me." The queen said again, "No, I have not done it." Then she took the child to the sky. When this child also had disappeared, people began to talk loudly that the Queen had devoured it, and councilors demanded that she should be brought to justice. But the king, who loved her and would not believe it, forbade them under pain of death to talk derom.Året the Queen gave birth to a baby girl, and the Virgin Mary for the third time and said to her: "Come with me." She took her hand and led her to heaven, and showed her there her two eldest children, who smiled at her and played with the ball. The queen rejoiced at seeing them, the Virgin Mary said: "Is your heart not yet softened? If you confess that you opened the door, I have forbidden you to touch, I'll give you your sons." The queen replied for the third time: "No, I have not done it." Then the Virgin Mary her again sink to the ground and also kept the third barn.Da the day after rumored that the child had cried loudly all the people: "Queen is a man; she must be judged," and the king could not say no . She was put on trial, and when she could not defend himself, she was condemned to die at the stake. The wood was stacked in the yard, and she was tied to a pole. As the fire began to burn up on her, melted the ice crust which pride had put on her heart, and she thought: "If I could but confess before my death that I opened the door." The moment she got her voice back and cried: "Yes, Mary, I've done it." Immediately it began to rain, so the fire was extinguished, which spread a brilliant light in the sky, and the Virgin Mary descended with the boys next door and the little girl in her arms. "He who repents his sin will be forgiven," she said gently to her, and the three children. And the queen could talk again, and the Virgin Mary gave her a long and happy life.
Mester Syl	1702	801	Danish	Old master Syl was a small, lean, lively man, who had not calm down for a moment. He had up nose, was pock-marked and very pale, his hair was gray and shaggy, his eyes small, constantly flashed left and right. He noticed everything, had nothing to say on everything, always knew best, and was always right. When he walked the streets, he beat mighty out his arms, and even as he walked past a girl who was carrying some water, he gave the bucket a nudge so that it flew up in the air, and the water ran over him. "Stupid thing," cried he, "could not you see that I came back." He was a shoemaker, and when he sat working, he pulled the thread so far that he bumped his hand right in the belly of the one who not stayed at a safe distance. No apprentice stayed with him longer than a month, because he always had something to expose their work, how good it was. So was the stitching is not just enough, it was one of the shoes longer than the other, one heel too high or the leather not beaten long enough. "Wait just," he said to teach the boy, "I'll show you how to make the skin soft." Then he gave the boy a few decent slap on the back with a strap. He scolded them all out for lazy bones. He accomplished not much though, because he could not sit still for five minutes. When his wife got up early in the morning and lighted the fire, he jumped out of bed and ran barefoot into the kitchen. "Do you want to burn my house down on us," he cried, "there's a fire, so that you could roast an ox. Or you might think to get firewood given to us?" When the girls stood washing and laughing and telling each other, he scolded them. "There stand the geese grubbing and forget to order something. And why should they have all the good soap. It is the pure extravagance," and ran away again, but managed to knock a bucket of lye, then the whole kitchen was flooded. When built a new house, he stood by the window looking at it. "Now mason the back with red sandstone," he cried, "it will never dry. The people who move in there, will become sick. Just look how journeymen down the rocks bad. The mortar pigeons either. Do gravel in and not true. I live to see that house tumble down on the people who live there. " He sat down, a couple of stitches, but jumped up again, unfastened his pelts and shouted: "I must go and talk the people." So he came to the hangover. "How is it that you behave," he shouted. "I cut off the skewed. Do you think that the beams to be straight. One wrong will put all wrong." He snatched an ax out of hand a carpenter and wanted to show him how he ought to cut. But at that moment a cart loaded with clay, and he threw the ax away, and hastened to the peasant who walked alongside. "You are probably not right in the head," he said, "who yokes young horses to a heavy wagon. The poor creature plunges after all." The farmer did not answer, and master Syl run vexed back to his workshop. When he'd put into his work, the apprentice reached him a shoe. "What's this again," he screamed, "I did not say that you ought not to cut shoes so broad. Who would buy a shoe that does not consist of anything other than sole. I need to do what I say." - "It may easily be, you are right in that the shoe is no good, master," said the apprentice, "but I have even cut it and made it. I threw it down on the floor as you went before, and so I picked it up. But even an angel from heaven can not make you believe. "One night I dreamed champion Syl that he was dead and was on his way to heaven. When he got there, he knocked loudly at the door. "It is ludicrous that this is not a bell," he thought, "you hit the hole on the fingers." Peter opened the door to see who it was that knocked so violently. "Is it you, master Syl," he said, "yes, I'll let you in, but I advise you, that habit of yours, and not denigrate what you get to see here. It could easily be uncomfortable for you. " - "The speech might have spared you," replied the master Syl, "I know enough what's right, and here's thank God everything perfect and not as down to earth." He came in, and walked back and forth in the large halls. He looked about right and left, sometimes shook his head and muttered something to himself. However, he saw two angels, who was carrying a log. It had been sitting in the eye of someone who was looking for a splinter in another's eye. They carried it along but across. "Have you ever seen such stupidity," said the champion Syl, but pray it is in itself and kept quiet. "It is basically also does not matter what part it carries a beam when one just does not hit anything," he thought, "and it is indeed really well for them." Then he saw two angels standing by a well and pour water into a basin, which was completely through the hole so the water ran out on all sides. They sent down water from the ground. "Hang it," he broke out, but he found himself happily in it and thought, "Maybe it's just pastime. When it amuses you, you can of course like to do such crazy things. Furthermore, I see well enough that you do not nothing but idle here in heaven. " He went farther and saw a cart which was stuck in a deep hole. "It's no wonder," he said to the man who stood by, "who shall also would load so unreasonably. What do you have there?" - "Good wishes," the man replied, "I could not get onto the right path, but here I was nevertheless happy and well. But I keep troth probably helped you shall see." There was now fact an angel and harnessed two horses to. "Yes, it may well be very good," he said, "but two horses is not enough. We must have at least four." Now came another angel with two horses, but they were hitched behind the wagon. It was too much for the champion Syl. "You idiot," he exclaimed, "how is it that you done? Have you ever, as long as the world began seen a cart drawn in that way. But they are here conceited arrogance that they think they understand everything. " He would have said more, but then there was someone who grabbed him and put him outside, but that he could resist. When he was in the gate, he turned his head and saw that four winged horses lifted wagon in vejret.I the moment he woke up. "That is something quite different in heaven than on earth," he thought, "that there's a lot that can be excused," but who can calmly look at the horses harnessed both front and rear. Certainly they had wings, but it can not possibly know. For the rest it is a great folly to fix a pair of wings on the horse that has four legs to walk on. But now it's probably best, I get up, otherwise they will make too much mischief here. It was fortunate that I was not really dead. "
mother Hulda	226	480	Danish	There was once a widow who had two daughters, one was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. She held, however, most of the ugly that was her real daughter, and the other had to do all the work and be Cinderella at home. The poor girl sat every day on the street by a well and spin, so the blood ran from her nails roots. One day, when the spindle was completely bloody, bent herself down to rinse it well, and she was then unlucky to lose it in the water. She ran home crying and told his stepmother, who was very angry and said, "When you have thrown it in the water, you have to go down and get it." The girl went back to the well and did not know what to do, and in her anxiety she jumped into the well to fetch a heap. When she came to herself again, she was lying in a meadow with lovely flowers, and the sun shone. She went to the meadow, and the way she came to a baker's oven full of bread. "Take me out, take me out, or I shall burn up," shouted the bread. She hastened to do so and then went on. Shortly after she came to an apple tree who called out to her: "Shake me, shake me, we apples are ripe." She went and shook the tree and apples rained down on all sides. When she had gathered them together in a heap, she went on, and soon came to a small house. In the window sat an old woman with large fangs out of his mouth. The girl was scared and wanted to run away, but the old shouted at her: "Do not be afraid, my dear, stay only with me. If you will be diligent and nice, you feel good. You just won my bed and shake the quilts so that the feathers fly up, then snapped it up on the ground. I called mother Hulda. " The girl was reassured and took service with the old woman. She did her job properly and shook the quilts, so the feathers flew. Therefore, she had it too good and got lovely food every day. When she had been for some time with Mother Hulda, she began to be in a bad mood. At first she could not understand what it was, but then she noticed that she was homesick, although she was a thousand times better here than at home. Finally she said it to Mother Hulda. "It's really nice of you that you long for your home," replied the old woman, "and since you have served me so faithfully, you'll get your wish." She went with her along under a large port, and it began to rain with gold, so the girl was plated from head to toe. "It must have, because you've been so nice," said Mother Hulda and gave her distaff, she had lost. Then they went outside the gate, and in that moment was the girl up on the ground, not far from his mother's house. She went there, and when she entered the yard the cock on the well and cried: "Kykeliky! The golden virgin has come to town." She went into the living room for her mother, and because she had all the gold in coming, was well received hende.Pigen told him what had happened to her, and when the mother heard how she had come all the wealth, she would like to try if it could not go her own daughter the same. She must now sit by the well and spin, and to her spindle bloody, she put her hand into a thorn bush. So she threw the spindle into the well and jumped in herself. She also woke up down in the meadow and began to walk along the path. When she came to the baker's oven, the bread cried, "Take me out, take me out, or I shall burn." - "It just lacked, I was going to black my hands," replied the lazy girl and went on. Soon she came to the apple tree, shouting: "Shake me, shake me, we apples are ripe." - "I had to stand there and let the apples flop down into my head," she said, "it could never occur to me." When she came to Mother Hulda's house, she was not afraid because she had already heard of fangs, and immediately took service with her. The first day she made an effort and was diligent, because she thought of all the gold that she would get the other day it went already reluctantly, and the third morning she would absolutely not stand up. It was Mother Hulda soon upset, saying her up. The lazy girl was very happy with it and thought that now came the gold well. Mother Hulda took her also to the gate, but instead of gold a whole lot beg over her. "There you pay for your service," said Mother Hulda, and shut the door in. The lazy girl come up on the ground again, but she was all covered the pitch, and the cock on the well saw her, crowed the "Kykeliky! the filthy virgin has come to town. " And beget was seated at her as long as she lived.
Other nations	1332	1940	Danish	"Where are you going?" - "Tilbyen." - "I'm going to town, you are going to the city, snip, snap, spin, come on." "Do you have a man? What is his name?" - "His." - "My husband Hans, your husband Hans, I went to town, you to the city, snip, snap, spin came." "Do you have a child? What is it?" - "Shame." - "My child Pity your child Pity my husband Hans, your husband Hans you to town, I town, snip, snap, spin came." "Do you have a pig? What's it called?" - "Tasty Pig." - "My Pig Tasty Pig, your pig Tasty Pig, my child Pity your child Pity my husband Hans, your husband Hans, I went to town, you to the city, snip, snap, spin, come on." "Do you have a farm ? What's his name?" - "Take care now." - "My fellow Pasnupå, your fellow Pasnupå, my pig Tasty Pig, your pig Tasty Pig, my child Pity your child Pity my husband Hans, your husband Hans you to town, I town, snip, snap, spin came. "
carnation	722	652	Danish	There was once a queen, whom God had denied the happiness of having children. Every morning she went out into the garden and asked if she could have a son or a daughter. And there came an angel from heaven, saying, "Rejoice, you should have a son, and he will get everything he wants." She went and told the king, and when a year had passed, she gave birth to a son, and the king was very glad.Hver morning she went with the child to the garden and bathed in a clear stream. When the child was a little older, she fell one day asleep as she sat with it on your lap. The old cook, who knew that the child had desired gift, crept thither and stole it. Then he killed a hen, sprinkled blood on the Queen's apron and dress, and carried the child away to a nursing who had to give it die. Then he hurried to the king and said that the queen had let the wildlife rob the child. When the king saw the blood on her apron, he thought that it was true and was so furious that he had built a high tower, where neither the sun or the moon's rays penetrated, and let the queen walls inside there. For seven years she had to sit there without getting any food or drink. But God sent her two angels in the guise of white doves, and twice each day they brought food for her, for the seven years omme.Kokken thought, however: "It might bring me into trouble stay here if this boy have desirable gift. " He went therefore went to the boy, who was already so large that it could speak, and said to him: "Wish you a beautiful castle with a garden." No sooner had the boy pronounced the words before the castle stood. "You are not good to be as one," said the chef some time after the "wish for you that you can get a beautiful girl to keep you company." Immediately stood the loveliest girl, more beautiful than any painter could paint her. The two played together and came to love each other very much, and the chef went hunting like a nobleman. However, he came to think that it might some day the prince into the wish to be with his father, and it would be a bad business. He said therefore secretly to the girl: "At night, when the boy is asleep, you must stick this knife in his heart, otherwise it out with you." Then he went his way, but when the day he came back, she had not done it. "Why should I shed innocent blood," she said, "I know he has not done any mother's nobody any harm." - "If you do not, it costs you your life," said the chef. When he was gone, she got hold of a small deer, let the meat and put heart and sole on a plate, and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boy: "Lie in bed and pull the blanket over you." The wicked wretch came in and asked: "Where is the boy's heart and tongue?" The girl handed him the plate, but the prince threw off the quilt and said: "Why would you kill me, you old villain. Now I pronounce your judgment. You shall become a black poodle with a gold chain around his neck and eat hot coals so that flames stands you out of the gap. " The moment the old turned into a black poodle with a gold chain around his neck, and the chef had to bring coals, he ate, until the flames broke out of the neck. The prince was some time in the castle and was still thinking about his mother still lived. "I'm going home to my homeland," he said to the girl, "Would you go with me, and I will provide for you." - "The road is so long," she replied, "and what should I do in the foreign country where I do not know the man." However, they would not be separated, and he wished that she turned into a beautiful pink, and he took with sig.Han set out, and the poodle had to follow. When he returned to his native land, he went to the tower where his mother sat, and since it was so high, he wished for a ladder which would reach up to the top. Then he mounted up and looked inside, and shouted: "Are you still living my own little mother?" - "I have just eaten, and am still satisfied," she said, because she thought it was the angels. "I am your son, who was to be eaten by wild animals," he said, "but I'm still alive, and I'll save you." And he went down and did sign with his father the king as an alien hunter who wanted to take his service. The king replied that if he was skilful and could get game for him, he could probably use him, but for the rest, there were no wild animals in the area. But the hunter promised that he would give him as much as was needed for his banquet. He got all the huntsmen with him into the woods, set them up in a large circle that was open to one side, and stood in the middle and began to desire. Immediately came Two hundred deer and hunters just fired them. They were loaded on six trucks and driven home to the King, and now could he get enough of the game to the royal table. He had had none for many år.Kongen was very happy and decided to celebrate a big party and the whole court were invited. When all were assembled, he said to the hunter: "You have to sit next to me because you are so nice." - "Do not be angry, Lord King," said the prince, "I am only a poor huntsman." But the king continued to penetrate him, and eventually he gave in. He was thinking of his mother, and wished that one of the king's men would start talking about her, and at that moment marshal said to him: "Here we are now in joy and gladness, but how will it go the queen in the tower. I wonder if she is dead or alive. " - "I will not hear a word about her," said the king, "it is her fault that my son was mauled by wild animals." When the huntsman arose and said: "She is still alive, and I'm your son. The wild animals have not robbed me, but the old chef took me when my mother was asleep, and sprinkled the blood of a hen on her apron." Then he pointed to the dog. "There are criminal," he said, and let retrieve coals as it may eat while they all looked at it, and the flames beat it out of his neck. Then he asked the king if he would see him in his true character, and at that moment he wanted it, was the chef who with his white apron and knife beside it. The king was very angry and commanded that he should be thrown into the deepest dungeon. "Will I see the girl who has been so good to me while I lived out there," said the hunter, "she would have killed me but did not, though her own life was at stake." The king said yes. "So you must see her as a beautiful flower," said the prince, took the carnation out and it was more beautiful than any other flower. "Now you see her in her form," he said, and at that moment, he wanted it, she was a woman so beautiful that no painter could paint her skønnere.Kongen now sent two maids and two attendants into tower to fetch the queen. They led her into the hall, but she would not eat. "The good God who has taken care of me in the tower, will soon call me to say," she said. Yet three days she lived, so she slept quietly go. The two angels who had brought her food to the tower, followed her in the guise of two white doves and sat on her grave. The king ordered the old chef cut into four pieces, but shortly after he died even of sadness. The prince married the lovely girl who had followed him, turned into a carnation, but they still alive, God knows.
About the chicken's death	760	2021	Danish	The hen and the rooster went for a day out on nøddebjerget, and they agreed that when they found a nut kernel, they should share it. The chicken was a mighty big one, but said nothing about it and would eat it alone. It was so large that it was stuck in the throat, and the chicken was afraid that it would suffocate, and shouted to the cock, "Hurry up and fetch me some water, or I will die." The tap ran as fast as he could to the spring and said, "Give me some water. Hen is lying on nøddebjerget and is being stifled because she has swallowed a large core." - "First run to the bride, and get me some red silk," said the well. The tap of the place to the bride: "Give me some red silk," it said, "it must well have that too must give me some water to the chicken, which is perched on nøddebjerget and is choking because it has swallowed a large nut kernel. " - "First run and bring me my little wreath which is hanging to a willow tree," said the bride. The tap ran out and picked up the ring and brought it to the bride, was the red silk and hurried over to the well and got water. But when it came up on the mountain with it, the chicken was choked and lay there without moving. The cock was so distressed that he began to cry aloud, and all the animals came running and also took care of the poor hen. Six mice built a little carriage in which the chicken should run away and buried, and when it was finished, they were harnessed and cock sat up on the box. On the way they met a fox. "Where are you going?" it asked. "I'm going to bury the chicken." - "Take me with?" "Yes, but sit back, otherwise my horses too weak." It sat up and after that the wolf, the bear and the lion, and all the animals in the forest, and they drove off until they came to a stream. "How are we to get over?" said tap. On the bank lay a straw, and it said: "I will lay myself across, so you can use me as a bridge." But when the mice came out of it, it slipped into the water and drowned all six. Then they were again equal, but then came a spark and said: "I am big enough. Now I lie here, then drive over me." It laid itself across the water, but unhappily just touched in that the hissing was extinguished and died. A stone saw that, it took pity on the cock and would help him, and laid itself over the water. Cock drew the carriage himself and came up on shore with the dead hen, but would now pull the other up, sitting back. But they were too heavy, carriage slid back and they all fell together into the water and drowned. Now tap alone with the chicken and dug a grave and laid her in it. So put it on top and there it sat, and died of grief and then they were all dead.
traveling	1360	1696	Danish	There was once a poor woman who had an only son. He so wanted out and look about the world, but the mother said, "How will you carry you along with traveling. You can not have a penny in." - "I'll be all me, my mother," he replied, "I always say: not much, not meget.Han went off while he always said," Not much, not much. "A time came he passed some fishermen and said: "Good day, not much, not much." - "What do you say jack," they said, but when they pulled their nets up, there were not many fish in. One of them took the a stick and thrashed away at the boy. "What shall I say?" he asked. "You say, many more, many more," said fiskeren.Han went on, and some time after he came to the gallows, where they were about to hang a poor guy. "Good morning," the boy said, "many more, many more." - "What do you say, you bad boy," cried the people, "do you think the world is full by evil human risk, it is not enough with one, "and then he got back on the hump." What will you want me to say? "asked the boy." You say, God have pity on the poor soul. "he went now on to say, "May God have pity on the poor soul. "Then he came to a pit, where there was a detractors and peeled the skin of a horse. "Good morning," the boy said, "May God have pity on the poor soul." - "What are you saying, you crazy kid," screamed the man and beat him on the ears with his butcher knife, that he could neither hear nor see. "What should I say?" the boy asked. "You must say: In the ditch with the carrion." So he walked on, and always said, "In the ditch with the carrion." Afterwards came a wagon full of people, and he said, "Hello, in the ditch with the carrion." In the cart pushed him into the ditch, and the driver took his whip and loose at the boy with all his strength. Then he limped home to his mother again, and never went on trips.
Pak	91	210	Danish	Cock once said to the hen: "Now the nuts are ripe. Why do not we go together out on the mountain and eat our fill before the squirrel takes them all away." Let us, "said the hen," This could be a really funny trip. "then they went away; it was broad daylight, and they stayed till the evening. if they had eaten too much or had been important, I do not know; probably it, they would not go home on foot and the cock had to build a little carriage of nut shell. When it was finished, put the chicken in it and said to the cock, "Will you harness thyself to it." - "It was just lacking," said the cock, "I would then better go home. It was certainly not the intention. I would not mind being coachman and sitting on the box, but drag, no thanks. "As they stood there and argued, came a duck waddling:" You thieves, "it said," Who gave you permission to eat my nuts ? Then it went away at the tap. But the tap was not lost behind a cart, the order in second and diced such cuts with it with spurs that she begged for mercy and punishment allowed himself harnessed to the carriage. Rooster sat on the box and was coachman, and another had to run as fast as it just might. When they had been running for some time, met the two pedestrians, a pin and a sewing needle. They asked if they could be allowed to run with, it soon became pitch dark and there was so disgusting dirty on the street. They had been somewhat delayed in an inn where they had been drinking beer. Because they were so thin and could not take up much room up, they were allowed to sit up in the wagon when they would promise not to step the tap or the chicken's toes. Late in the evening they came to an inn, and took in, as they did not like to drive at night, and the second also was so tired that it could not stand. Host at first made indvendin¬ger and said he did not have room, and also thought enough that there was nothing further to earn them. But when they continued to persuade him and promised him the eggs, the hen had laid the way, and said he had to keep another who laid eggs every day, he gave them eventually allowed to stay. So they drank together until late at night. By daybreak, when the whole house was asleep, the cock awoke the hen, brought the egg, which they ate. They threw the shell on the chimney. So they took the sewing needle which was still asleep, and put it into the host's chair, the pin put in his towel, and then they flew outside on the unit. Second, who used to sleep in the open air, and had been out in the yard, heard them flapping away, and came now to his feet. It found a stream nearby and swam away, and it was itself a little faster than the cart. A few hours after the host came out of bed, washed himself and took the towel to dry himself. So he got the pin up the face and made a red streak from one ear to the other. He went into the kitchen to light his pipe by the chimney, then flew eggshells him in the face. "I must also constantly get into trouble with my head today," he thought, and angrily threw himself on a chair. But he came up again in a hurry, the sewing needle had stuck him even worse, and it was not in the head. He was beside himself with rage and began to suspected the guests who had come so late last night, and when he had to look after them, they were gone long ago. So he swore never again to receive something pak who eats and drinks without paying and indeed makes skarnsstykker thanks.
The girl without hands	292	706	Danish	There was once a miller who over the years had been very poor and had nothing left but his mill and a large orchard behind. One day when he had gone into the forest to fetch firewood, he met an old man who said to him: "Why do you plague thyself to go and fetch firewood. I will make you rich if you will give me what is right behind the mill. " The man thought it might be one of his apple and said yes. Then hit the old man into a loud laugh and said: "In three years I come and fetch my property," and then went on his way. When the miller got home, his wife came running towards him and said: "Whence comes this sudden wealth is here. All chests and boxes are full, without one brought it in, and I can not understand how it happened. " - "It all comes from a man I met in the woods," said Miller, "He promised to make me rich if he might learn what was behind the mill, and I thought, however, enough that it could be worthwhile to trap the large apple tree. " - "All good powers stand us bi," cried the woman horrified, "has been the devil, and he has not believed the apple tree, but our daughter, who was sweeping the yard." Mills's daughter was a beautiful and pious girl, who brought a pious and good life. When the day came when the devil had to fetch her, she washed her face and hands, and drew with chalk a circle round him. The devil came quite early, but he could not get near her. Angrily, he said to the miller: "Make sure that all water away from her, so she can not wash herself, for otherwise I have no power over her." The miller was afraid and did as he had said. The next day the devil came again, but she had wept on her hands, so they were quite clean. The devil could not get near her that day, and beside himself with anger, he said to the miller, "Cut the hands of her, otherwise I can not get the better of her." - "I can not chop off the hands of my own child," said Miller praying. But when the devil said, "If you do not, I'll take you," he was afraid and promised to obey him. He went out to his daughter and said, "If I do not cut off both hands of you, the devil threatened to take me with him, and in my fear I have promised him that. Help me in my need, and forgive me the evil I do you. " - "Do with me what you will, dear father," the girl said softly, holding out his hands and let them cut off. When the devil came the next day, she had cried so much that the tears had washed the stumps quite clean. Then he had to give in, and had lost all right to her. "You have given me great wealth," the miller said to her, "and you should get it as good as possible the rest of your life." But the girl shook her head. "Here I can not stay," she said, "I will go out into the world. There are enough compassionate people who give me what I need." Then she let the mutilated arms bound to her back, and by sunrise she set out on the road and went straight for it was dark night. When she came to a lovely garden, and in the moonlight, she could see that trees covered with beautiful fruits, but she could not get in there, because there was water here and there. She had gone all day without tasting food, and hunger tormented her, and she thought, "If only I was there and could eat of the fruit, else must I die of hunger." She knelt down and prayed, God would help her, and suddenly she saw an angel stretched out his hand over the water, so it shrank and there was a dry road. She then went into the garden and the angel went with her. She saw a lovely pear tree, all the bulbs were then spoke, but she went and ate one of them while it hung on the tree. The gardener saw it all, but thought the girl was a spirit, because the Angel followed her, and did not dare speak to her. When she had eaten the pear, she lay down to sleep under some bushes. When the king, whom the garden belonged, came down the next morning, he spoke bulbs and saw that was missing one. Since it was not lying under the tree, he called the gardener and asked where it had gone. "In the night came a spirit here," he replied, "it had no hands, but ate the bulb while it hung on the tree." - "How did the water?" the king asked. "And where did it go, the deed had eaten the pear." - "There was a figure in white robes and made a path through the water," said the gardener, "and as it looked like an angel, I did not dare speak to it. But the spirit went away again, as it had eaten." - "I'll sleep here tonight," said the King, "and see if it really is as you say." When it was dark the king went into the garden with a priest, speaking to the angel. At midnight the maiden came out from the bushes and again ate a pear, and the angel stood beside her. The priest stepped forth and said, "Have you come from heaven or from earth, you are a spirit or a human being?" - "I am only a poor man who stands quite alone in the world," replied the girl. "If you're all alone, you should be with me," said the king, and she followed that up with him at the palace. He had silver hands made for her. And because she was so beautiful and good, he came to love her and married hende.Et year after the King had to go to war, but before he left, he said to his mother: "When the queen gives birth to a child , so maintain her well and write immediately to me and tell me that. " Shortly after the queen gave birth to a lovely boy and the old mother immediately sent an offer of place with a letter to the king. But the messenger rested by a brook, he fell asleep, and the devil is still seeking to injure the good Queen, exchanged the letter for another, which stated that the Queen had brought a monster. The king was very sad when he read the letter, but wrote in answer to the necessity to care for the queen well until he came home. On the way home fell commanded asleep in the same place, and the devil put back another letter in his pocket, and it was written that both the Queen and the child should be killed. The old mother was so distressed and could not believe it was true. She wrote again to the king, but the devil lay still fake letters instead of, and in the past was that even the queen's tongue and eyes had saved the king came home, he could see that his orders were obeyed .The old mother weeping for the innocent blood that would flow in, and picked the night a small deer and cut the tongue and eyes out. So she called the queen and said: "I can not obey the king and kill you, but you can not stay here anymore. Take your child and go out into the wide world, and he never came back." The young woman tied her child on her back and was crying out in the dark night. She came into a great forest, and she lay down on his knees and prayed to God. The angel then come back to her and led her to a little house on which was written: "Here all dwell free." A snow-white maiden came out and said: "Welcome, Queen," and led her into the house. Then they unbound the little child and put it to the mother's breast, that it could have something to drink. "From whence knowest thou that I was a queen?" asked the young wife. "I am an angel sent by God to help you and your child," said the white virgin. For seven years they lived in the little house, and because the queen was so pious and good, grew her hands out igen.Da king came home from the war, he demanded immediately to see his wife and his child. The old mother cried and said: "I have done as thou hast commanded, and killed two innocent souls," and she showed him the letters and tongue and eyes. The king was beside himself with despair, and the old woman took pity on him and comforted him. "They live both," she said, "I have taken the tongue and the eyes of a deer, but your wife and your child is horizontally out into the world and dare never return." - "I will go to the end of the world to find them," cried the King, "and neither eat nor drink until I have my wife and my little child again." For seven years came the King around the rocks and mountains, but found them not, and thought she had died of starvation. He neither ate nor drank, but God gave him the strength to live. He eventually came into the great forest, and found the little house that read: "Here all dwell free." The white virgin came out and led him into the house. "Welcome, Lord King," she said, and asked him where he came from. "For seven years I have searched for my wife and my child," he replied sadly, "and I have not found the slightest trace of them." The angel put food and drink before him, but he did not touch it. He just wanted to rest a little before he went on, and lay down to rest and a handkerchief over his ansigt.Englen went into the room where the queen sat with her son, whom she had called Heartbreak, and said to her "Go into the room with your child. your royal husband's in there." When she came in there slipped the handkerchief fell from his face, and she said: "Go and put the scarf over your father's face, Heartache." The boy did so, but the king, who half-asleep, had heard what she said, let the scarf fall again. But the child grew impatient and said: "I can not cover my father's face, I have no father. You yourself have taught me that God in heaven is my father, then the strange man then not also be the . " When the king heard this, he stood up and asked who she was, "I am your wife," she replied, "and it is your son, Sorrowful." He looked at her hands and said, "My wife had silver hands." - "The good God has caused my natural hands to grow again," she replied, and the angel showed him the silver hands. When he saw that it was his beloved wife and child and hugged and kissed them. "Now is a heavy stone fell from my heart," he said, and they went straight home to his old mother. There was great joy in the kingdom, and the king and queen celebrated their wedding once and lived happy ever after.
The princess and the Pea	2013	704	Danish	Once upon a time there was a prince; he wanted a princess, but it had to be a real princess. So he traveled all around the world, to find one, but everywhere there was something wrong, princesses, there was enough of, but if it were real princesses he could not quite come by, there was always something that was not so true. So he came home again and was sad, for he would like to have a really prinsesse.En evening there was a terrible storm; was thunder and lightning, rain poured down, it was horrible! Then a knock at the town gate, and the old king went to open op.Det was a princess who stood outside. But god she was with the rain and the storm! The water ran down her hair and her clothes; it ran into the toes of her shoes and out of the heel, and then she said that she was a real princess. "Yes, we will get to know!" thought the old queen, but she said nothing, went into the bedroom, took all the bedclothes, and laid a pea on the bottom of the bed, then she took twenty mattresses and laid them on the pea, and then twenty eiderdowns on top of the mattresses. there should now be the princess on natten.Om Next morning they asked her how she had slept. "Oh, very badly!" said the princess, "I have scarcely closed my eyes all night! God knows what was in the bed I was lying on something hard, so that I am black and blue all over my body! It is horrible!" then they could see that it was a real princess when she through the twenty mattresses and the twenty eider had felt the pea. Could be so delicate Nobody but a really prinsesse.Prinsen took her for his wife, for now he knew that he had a real princess and the pea was put in the museum, where it may still be seen, unless somebody has taken it. see, it's a true story!
Knapsack, hat and horn	515	569	Danish	There were once three brothers who were poorer each day that passed, and eventually their need was so great that they had no bread. "That is impossible," said the eldest, "we'd better go out into the world and seek our fortune." They went on their way and went way over fields and meadows, but luck was not. One day they came to a large forest, and in the center of it was a hill. As they came closer and saw that it was totally of silver, said the eldest, "Now I have found my happiness. More I ask not." He filled his pockets with silver and went home. "We demand more than silver," said the other two and went on. When they had gone a few days they came to a mountain which was entirely of gold. The second oldest brother stood perplexed, not knowing whether he should take care of the gold or go ahead. At length he his pockets, said goodbye to his brother and went home. The third said, "Silver and gold I do not. I will go out into the wide world, maybe I find my luck there." He went ahead and after three days, he came into a forest that was even larger than the others. He walked and walked and was finally about to die of starvation. He climbed up a tall tree, but saw nothing but forest and forest again, as far as the eye could see. He climbed down again, but hunger tormented him, he thought: "If only I but once more in my life could eat my fill." When he came down to earth, he saw to his amazement that there was a covered table. "It was just in time, my wish was fulfilled," he thought, and without asking where the food came from, he sat at the table and ate, as long as he could get a bite down. "It's a pity if the decorative tablecloth be lying," he thought, folded it up tidily and took it. In the evening, when he again was hungry, he wanted to test whether the cloth could help him, spread it out and said, "I wish you were again covered with food and drink." Hardly had he pronounced this desire, before there was the best food he could wish for. "Now I perceive how my kitchen," he said, "it's worth more than all the world silver and gold." But still it seemed as if he had gained so much that he would go home and settle down. Rather, he would once again try his luck abroad. One evening he met a dusty, black charcoal-burner in the woods. He was about to boil up some potatoes over the fire for his supper. "Good evening, my black friend," he said, "how are you here in your loneliness." - "Oh, the One day is like another," replied the charcoal-burner, "and wanders nothing but potatoes for dinner. You want something with, so here you go sit down." - "No thanks," replied the stranger, "You've since not intended that there would be guests, but if you want to settle with me, it will be my honor." - "Where do you get food from," said the charcoal-burner, "you have nothing, and there is not a man of many miles." - "However, you must get as good a meal as you have never tasted," he replied, spread the tablecloth and said, "Cover up," and immediately stood the glorious meal, just as hot as if it had just the roof of the fire. Charcoal-burner who stared and did not ask twice, but put one bite after another in his black mouth. "The dew I think really good about," he said, "it was just something for me. There in the corner I saw an old knapsack, the look no further neat, but it has a very wonderful property. I use it anyway not more so you can have it, if I may keep your tablecloth. " - "I must first know what it is for a knapsack," said the stranger. "I'll tell you," replied the charcoal-burner, "every time you turn on, there will be an officer and six soldiers with guns forward and do what you command." - "For my part," he said, gave the charcoal-burner the cloth and went on with his knapsack on his back. When he had gone a little, he wanted to try it and beat it. Immediately the seven men of war, and the officer asked, "What does my lord and ruler?" - "Go immediately to the charcoal-burner and my wishing," he said. They faced, and not many minutes after they came back with the cloth as the outside had taken it from the charcoal-burner. He let them retire, and went on, as he thought that fortune would shine yet more brightly on him. At sunset he came to another charcoal-burner, who was preparing his supper. "Do you have anything," said the sooty fellow, "but I can not offer anything other than potatoes and salt. Please, sit down." - "No," he replied, "tonight you must be my guest." Then he took out his cloth, and they ate and drank and had it themselves heartily. When they had finished, said the charcoal-burner, "there on that is an old worn-out hat which has strange properties. When you take it on and swings it around, as if fired the mightiest ointment from twelve guns, and no one can stand against it. I do not need it, so if I can keep your tablecloth, I'll give it to you. " The young man went in to loot and set off his hat, and when he had gone a little distance away, he sent his soldiers back after tablecloth. "I have a feeling that my happiness is not over yet," he thought, and it turned out he was right. The next evening he came to a third charcoal-burner, who also invited him to take care of his potatoes. He, however, took his cloth and charcoal-burner liked it so well that he gave him a horn that had the property that when you blew it crashed both fortresses and cities in ruins, to be allowed to keep the tablecloth. The man went into it, but sent his soldiers to the cloth again. Now he had both his knapsack, hat and horn. "Now I am a made man," he thought, "now and it is time that I return to my brothers." When he came home, his brothers had built a beautiful house and lived in the lap of luxury. He went in to them, but when he came in his tattered coat, with the old, worn hat on his head and his knapsack on his back, they would not acknowledge him. "Our brother would not settle for gold and silver, but would higher aloft," they said, "he'll probably even like a mighty king, not like such a beggar," and then they drove him out. But he was angry and beat on his knapsack, until there were 150 men in serried ranks. He commanded them to surround his brothers' house and two of them had to whip them through right until they knew where they were. Now there was a huge fuss. People ran to and wanted to help the brothers, but they could not stand against the soldiers. When the king heard them, he became angry, and ordered a regiment turn out to hunt troublemaker on the run, but the man with knapsack was quick so much strength that the others could not stand up, but had to go with bloody noses. "I'll get to grips with the past fellow," said the king, and left the next day even more troop against them, but they could not accomplish anything. The man called still more men forward, and for that it be done the sooner, he turned on his hat, the cannon thundered and the king's people had to flee. "Now I will not make peace until the King gives me his daughter to wife, and I govern the whole kingdom in his name," he said. When the king heard this, scratched his head and said to his daughter: "It's hard to go on. But if I want to keep my crown, I'll probably have to add him." The wedding was celebrated, but the king's daughter was vexed that her husband was a common man, who wore a shabby hat and an old worn knapsack. She wanted to be with him again and thought and thought how she should behave with it. "I wonder if there really had to be secret powers hidden in the old knapsack," she thought, and one evening she stood very loving himself and caressed and kissed him. "I wish you'd help but go with the ugly knapsack," she said, "it not suit you so terribly." - "That you have no sense of, my friend," he replied, "it is my greatest treasure, and as long as I have it, I do not fear for anything whatever." Then he told her what capacity knapsack had. She threw her arms around his neck and pretended that she wanted to kiss him, but instead she solved leniently knapsack and ran with it. As soon as she was alone, she tapped it, and commanded the warriors that they had to tie him up and take him out of the castle. They obeyed, and she sent still more men, that they should go after them and lead him out of the kingdom. It had now been out with him if he had not had the hat. As soon as he got his hands free, he swung it a few times around, so the guns thundered, and she even had to ask for mercy. When she appeared to be very contrite and promised to improve himself, he went on to join settlement. She seemed now that she loved him dearly, and during the short time she had bewitched him so that he confided to her that even if someone got the knapsack into his power, could do nothing against the man who had the hat. As soon as he was asleep, she stole away and threw the hat out the window. He had nothing but the horn back, and beside himself of anger he blew it with all his might. Immediately rushed walls, fortresses, towns and villages in ruins and killed the King and his daughter. And if he had blown just a tiny bit to the whole country collapsed, and there were not one stone upon another. Now there was no one who dared oppose him, and he made himself king over the kingdom.
The raven	884	401A	Danish	There was once a queen who had a daughter. She was still so young and had to be carried. One day she was naughty, and the mother could not quite get her to be quiet, and finally she lost patience. Around the palace a flock of ravens, and she opened the window and said angrily: "I wish you were a raven and would fly away, so I had when peace." The moment the child was turned into a raven and flew out the window and into a dark forest, where it was long, without parents heard something about it. Once when a man walked through the forest and heard the raven crying, and when he went after the sound, and came to the, said: "I am an enchanted princess. You can save me." - "What should I do?" he asked. "Go further into the forest, until you come to a house," said the raven, "who lives an old woman, and she will give you food, but you must not accept it, because if you eat or drink something, you fall in a deep sleep and can not save me. in the garden behind the house there is a large bark pile that you need to stand and wait for me. Three days I will come every day at two o'clock in a carriage that is biased first with four white so with four red and the third day with four black horses, and if you so not awake, I will not be saved. " The man promised to do as she asked, but the raven shook his head. "You save me really no," it said, "you eat something from the woman." The man once more promised that he would neither touch food or drink. When he came to the house, the old woman came to him and said, "How I look tired, poor man. Come and refresh yourself and get something to eat." - "No, thanks, I do not want anything," he said. But she kept nagging him. "Yes, yes, when you do not want to eat something, then just take at least a sip of this glass. Once is no time," and so he let himself be persuaded to drink. In the afternoon at two o'clock he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven. While he stood there, he was suddenly overwhelmed by an irresistible fatigue and lay down a little, but it was not his intention to sleep. But hardly had he put himself before he fell asleep and slept so soundly that nothing in the world could have awakened him. At two o'clock the raven came driving up with four white horses and said sadly: "I know well enough that he sleeps," and when it came into the garden, he was also on bark pile and slept. It went out of the car and shook him, but he has not awakened. The next day the old woman came back at noon with food and drink, but he did not want anything. Eventually he let himself be persuaded to take a sip from the glass. A little before two o'clock he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven, but suddenly he was so tired that he could not stand. There was nothing for it, he had to lie down, and immediately he fell into a deep sleep. Raven drove up with four brown horses, she thought sadly, "I know that he sleeps," and when it came into the garden he lay there asleep and was not going to get aroused. Next day asked the old woman if it was his sense to kill himself, since he neither ate nor drank. "I neither want or dare to take anything," he said. She placed food and wine before him, and when he noticed the smell, he could not resist, but a deep draft. At the usual time he went out into the garden to wait for the princess, but he was even more tired than usual, lay down and slept immediately as firm as a rock. At two o'clock the raven came with four black horses and the whole carriage was covered with black. She was very distressed and thought, "He sleeps and can not save me, I know it well." When she came into the garden he lay asleep, and how much she shook him and called to him, she could not get him awake. Then she laid a loaf of bread, a piece of meat and a bottle of wine next to him, and he could take as much of what he wanted, which was not less. And she took a gold ring with his name from his finger and gave it to. Finally she laid a letter beside him wherein was written what she had given him, and that it would never be eaten up. "I realize enough that you did not save me here," stood on, "but if you still want to try then, come to the golden castle of Stromberg, I know you can." When the man awoke and saw that he had slept, he was very distressed and said: "Now she's probably driven past, and I have saved her." When he saw what lay beside him, and he now read the letter, which was where it all came from. He had no idea where the golden castle was, but stood up immediately and went on his way. He wandered long in the world, and once he came into a dark forest and went fourteen days without being able to find out. One evening he was so tired that he lay down under a bush and fell asleep. The next day he went on, but when he evening again would creep down under a bush, he heard a howling and crying that he could not even fall asleep. Since it was so dark that people started turning on the light, he saw something flashing in the distance, stood up and walked in the reming. He came to a house that seemed very small, because there was a fight outside. "If I go there, and the giant sees me, it's well over with me," he thought, but eventually he went anyway courage and stepped forward. When the giant saw him, he said: "It fits well. It's so long since I have eaten anything. Now I will eat you for dinner." - "Let rather be," the man said, "I do not have much desire to be eaten. If you want something to eat, I have enough that you can be satisfied." - "If true, do not be afraid," said the giant, "I would just eat you because I had nothing else." They sat down to the table, and the man took the bread, wine, and meat that could not be eaten up. "I like that," said the giant, and ate to his heart. "Can you tell me where the golden castle of Stromberg is?" Asked the man. "Now I see on my map," said the giant, "it says all cities and villages and houses." He brought a card from inside, but the castle was not then. "It does not matter," he said, "I have a top of the cabinet, which is much larger, we will look at." But it was not. The man would now go ahead, but the giant begged him to wait a few days until his brother came home, he had gone out to fetch food. When the brother came, they asked him if he knew where the castle was. "First let me eat my fill, then I see on the map," he replied. He took them so up in his room and looked and looked at his map, but could not find it. Then he took some old maps and they kept looking until they finally found the castle, but it was many thousands of miles distant. "How will I get there?" asked the man. "I have two hours free now," said the giant, "so I have to carry you into the neighborhood, but I must return home and give our child die." He went away with the man they were about a hundred hours' walk from the castle. "The rest of the way, you can probably go alone," he said, and turned back, the man went day and night, until he came to the golden castle Strømbjerg.Det stood on a glass mountain, and he saw the enchanted princess first run around the castle and looked into it. He was very glad to see her and would rush up to her, but how he does it was done, he slipped all the time down the glass. When he realized he could not get up there, he thought sadly: "So I get down here and wait for her." He built now a hut and sat there for a whole year. Every day he saw the princess running around the castle, but he could not come up to her. One day as he sat in his cabin, he saw three robbers who fought and yelled at them: "God be with you." When they heard this, they stopped fighting, but as they saw no, they began again, and it looked quite dangerous. "God be with you," he shouted again. "It's best I get to know what's wrong," he thought, and went and asked why they were fighting. One told him that he had found a stick, and when you hit with it on a door, the door sprang open, the other had found a cloak that made him who wore it invisible, and the third had found a horse that could ride everywhere, even up the glass mountain. They now knew not whether they should be public about it, or if they should be separated. "I want to give you something for the three things," the man said, "Although I have no money, but I have other cases that are worth a lot more. But let me first try if it's true what you say. " They let him now sit on the horse, gave him the stick in his hand and hung the jacket on him, and so they could not see him anymore. He gave them some vigorous blows and cried: "There have I, what is for you, vagabonds, you are so happy." As he rode up the mountain, and when he came to the castle gate was locked, but jumped up when he beat at it with the stick. He went into the castle, up a flight of stairs and entered the hall where the princess sat with a golden cup with wine in front of her, but she could not see him because he had the jacket on. When he came up to her, he took the ring she had given him the ring and threw it into the cup so that it rang. "It's my ring," she cried, "so is my savior here too." They searched the whole castle, but could not find him. He had gone out, had sat on the horse and thrown off the mantle. When she came to the door, she saw him and was beside himself with joy. He alighted, took her in his arms, and she kissed him and said, "Now you have saved me. Tomorrow we will celebrate our wedding."
Roland's girlfriend	535	1119	Danish	There was once a woman who was a witch. She had two daughters, one ugly and wicked, whom she loved, because she was her own daughter, and one pretty and good, whom she hated because she was her stepdaughter. One day the stepdaughter a beautiful apron, which the other envied her, and she said to her mother that she wanted it. "You can be assured that you shall receive, my girl," said the old woman, "Your sister has long deserved death, and tonight when she is asleep, I cut her head. Make sure you're going to be deep, and push her far. " It would have been all over with the poor girl if she had not been standing in a corner and heard it all. She did not come outside a door that day, and when they went to bed, put the other hand the only truly correct, and she had to settle for the place that she could get. When her sister was asleep, nudged her towards the outside and slept at the wall. At night the old woman with an ax in his right hand, felt for the left, so she found the one that was highly, and struck the head of his own barn.Da she was gone, the girl stood up and walked over to his girlfriend who was called Roland, and knocked on his door. He came out, and she said to him: "We must immediately flee, my love. My stepmother wanted to kill me, but instead killed her only child. When she discovers it in the morning, it's over with us . " - "You should first look to grab her wand," Roland said, "otherwise we can not get from her if she pursues us." The girl picked up the stick and took the severed head, sprinkled three drops of blood on the ground, one by the bed, one in the kitchen and on the stairs, and hurried away with his kæreste.Da the old witch got up next morning, she called on his daughter to give her the apron, but she did not. "Where are you," she shouted. "Here, at the steps, sweeping!" Answered one of the drops. The old woman went out, and when she was not there, and cried again, "Where are you?" - "I'm sitting here in the kitchen warming myself," cried the second drop of blood. She went there, but since no one was there, she shouted: "Where art thou?" - "I lie here in bed and asleep," cried the third drop of blood, and when the mother went into, she found her own child, and there lay in his blod.Heksen was furious, ran to the window, and when she could see far into the world, she caught sight of her stepdaughter, who hurried away with her boyfriend. "Do not fail me," she cried, and took his seven leagued on. It was not long before she overtook them. When the girl saw her coming, she transformed using the wand Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck swimming in it. The witch stood on the shore, threw bread crumbs, and did it every effort to lure another there. But it did not matter, and the old had to return empty-handed. The girl and Roland was now human again and went all night, until the sun rose. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower growing in a hawthorn hedge, and Roland into a fiddler. A moment later the witch came striding up and said, "Dear musician, I have to pick the beautiful flower there." - "Please," he replied, "so I play for." She hurried to hedge, for she knew well who the flower was, but immediately began the musician to play, and whether she wanted to or not, she was obliged to dance. The faster he played the higher she had to jump. Thorns tore the clothes off her body and wounded her so blood ran, and when he did not stop playing, she had to continue to dance until she fell down dead. "Now I will go to my father and prepare everything for the wedding, "said Roland. "I will stay here," replied the girl, "and that no one should know me, I will change myself into a red stone." So away went Roland, and the girl was out on the field and waited for his girlfriend. But when he came home, he was in love with another girl and forgot his betrothed. The poor girl waited and waited, but he did not come, she was very sad and would not live longer. She changed herself into a flower and thought, "There are probably one or two me and crush me." But it happened that a shepherd drives his flock, he saw the flower, and when he thought it was so beautiful, he gathered it and took it home. From now on, everything went wonderfully well in the shepherd's house. When morning he got up, all the work was already done, the room was swept, tables and benches rubbed, fire burned in the stove and the kettle stood water and cooked. When he came home for dinner, was food on the table. He could not understand how it happened, because he never saw anyone, and it was impossible that a man could hide in the little cottage. He seemed indeed good about it, but eventually he was, however, very uneasy, and went to a wise woman and told her so. "There's magic in the game," she said, "tomorrow morning you must pay close attention to what is going on, and if you see something, no matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, the charm will be broken . " The shepherd did as she had said, and as the sun rose, he saw that the flower come out. Fast he threw a white cloth over it, and immediately there was a beautiful girl, and he was now told that it was she who had provided so well for him. She told him her story, and he liked her, he asked if she would marry him. But she shook her head. Although her boyfriend had left her, she would, however, be faithful to him as long as she lived. But she promised that she would stay with him and manage his hus.Imidlertid came when Roland's wedding celebration and for customs, it was announced that all girls in the country to come and sing in honor of the wedding couple. When the faithful girl heard about it, she was so distressed that she thought her heart would break, and would not go there, but the others came and got her. As the tour to sing came to her, she retired, all the others had sung so she could not escape. But when Roland heard her voice, he jumped up and shouted: "I know that voice, it is my bride, the only one I'll marry." He remembered now everything he had forgotten, and the love for her awoke again in his heart. Then the faithful maiden was married to her Roland, and all her distress and mourning was over.
Rumpelstiltskin	525	500	Danish	There was once a miller who was poor, but he had a beautiful daughter. Once he happened to talk to the king, and to brag a little, he said: "I have a daughter who could spin gold out of straw." - "It's an art," said the king, "Let your daughter come up to me in the morning, so I will ask her to the test." When the girl came to the palace, he led her into a room that was quite full of straw, gave her a wheel and spindle, and said: "Now set to work, but if you have not before tomorrow has spun this straw into gold, it's out with you. " Then he went and shut the door sig.Der sat the poor girl and did not know his wits. She had no notion of how it was done to spin straw into gold, and eventually she began to cry. At once the door opened and a small man entered. "Good evening, miss," he said, "what are you crying for?" - "I'm so unhappy," sobbed the girl, "I must spin this straw into gold, and I do not know how to carry me along." - "What will you give me if I help you," asked the little man. "My collar," she said, and the man took it and sat down to spin, and snip snap tingle so was a heap full, and so it went until dawn. As was roomful of pure gold. The king was already at sunrise and was very surprised and happy. However, he would not be satisfied with it, but led the girl into a room where there was even more hay, and ordered her to spin it the next day if she valued her life. The girl did not know what to do, and began to cry, but the little man came again and asked: "What do I get if I help idg?" - "My ring," she said, and the man took it and began to spin, and before the sun rose, he was finished. The king was even more greedy when he saw enough of gold, and brought miller's daughter taken into a still larger room full of hay. "If you can spin it before tomorrow morning, I will take you to my queen," he said, and thought to himself: "Although she is the daughter of a miller, I can never get a wife who is so rich." When the girl was alone, the little man appeared again and asked: "What do I get if I help you?" - "I have nothing to give you," answered the girl. "Will you promise me the first child you get when you are queen," he asked. "You can never know how it can go," thought the girl, and when she did not know how else to do, she said yes, and the man spun and spun until dawn. So the room was full of gold, and when the king came and saw it, he was very happy, and the wedding was celebrated with great pragt.Et years after the queen gave birth to a beautiful child. She had quite forgotten the little man, but suddenly he stepped into the room and said, "Give me what you promised me." The queen was alarmed, and offered him all his treasures, if he would let her keep the child, but the man said, "Flesh and blood is worth more than all the treasures." The queen began to cry, and the man took pity on her and said, "If you during the three days can guess what my name is, you must be allowed to keep your child." The queen spent the whole night to think of all the names she knew, and sent around the country to encourage even more to know. When the man came next day, she began with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar and so on, but the man said: "No, that's not my name." The next day she sent to the neighboring country to get to know what people called. When the man came, she said the løjerligste names Some Pind, Spidsben and Lace boots, but none of them was right. When the commandment came back three days, he said: "I have not been able to find a single new name, but when I came to a high mountain behind the forest, I saw a little house, which burned a fire. A strange little man jumped around fire, hopping on one leg and singing: 'today I brewer, tomorrow I bake, tomorrow the queen's child I am, how glorious that no one has slightly Haftom that my name is Rumpelstiltskin.' "the Queen was beside himself even of joy, and when the little man came she asked: "Is your name Kunz?" - "No." - "Is your name Heinz?" - "No." "So your name perhaps Rumpelstiltskin?" "The devil has told you," cried the little man furious, and stamped so hard with the left foot in the ground, the leg sank completely, and in anger he grabbed the hold of the right foot and tore himself in two.
Fox and Mrs Wolf	702	4	Danish	Once born wolf's wife a boy and invited the fox to be godfather. "It's near relative with us," she thought, "and has a good sense and is a nice guy and can teach our little son, and help him to get ahead in the world." Fox, too, very nicely and said, "Thank you for the honor you have shown me. I'll make myself worthy of it, so I have to enjoy myself." At the party he had enjoyed himself taste and was very merry, and said afterwards: "Dear Mrs. Wolf. It is our duty to provide for the child, it must have good food so it can be strong. There is a sheep over here where we can very easily grab a good bite. " The wolf was ditty, and she and the fox went to the farm. For a long distance, he showed her stall and said: "There can creep in without anyone seeing it. However, I will try my luck in another way and see if I can grab a hen." It, however, went quietly to the entrance of the forest and lay down there and rested. The wolf crept into the stable, but there was a dog such a noise that the peasants came running out, caught Gossip Wolf it through properly. Finally, let it out and dragged himself off to the fox that lay and moaned miserably. "I am indeed been badly included," it said, "farmers have attacked me and knocked me to pieces, and if you can not help me on my way, I must remain here and die scars of hunger." The wolf could just even walking with great difficulty, but was so anxious for the fox that she took it on his back, and slowly carried him perfectly safe and sound to his house. "Goodbye, my dear Mrs. Wolf," cried and laughed heartily, "Let the roast taste good unto you." Then run it his way.
The fox and the cat	712	105	Danish	When the cat once went for a walk in the forest, met the fox. "He is clever and has great influence in the world," she spoke to him kindly on it. "Good morning, Mr. Fox," it said, "how are you? Can you handle yourselves in these hard times." The haughty fox looked at the cat from head to toe and time did not know if it would answer. "Your wretched beard," said finally, "your hungry, motley fool your mouse hunter, what you think you are. How dare you ask how it goes me? What have you learned? What kind of tricks can you do? " - "I understand but one," replied the cat, modestly. "What is that?" asked the fox. "When the hounds are following me, I can save myself jumping up a tree." - "Is that all," said the fox, "I am a hundred arts, and have besides a whole bag full of cunning. But I feel sorry for you. Come with me, and I will teach you how to get rid of the dogs." The moment came a hunter with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree and sat right up at the top, completely hidden by branches and leaves. "Open your sack, Mr. Fox, open your sack," cried the cat, but the dogs had already seized him and held on to it. "I had probably not much benefit from your hundred arts," cried the cat, "if I had been able to climb like me, did not have lost your life."
The bittern and the hoopoe	1653	2075	Danish	"What is your flock best to feed?" a man asked an old shepherd. "Here, where the grass is neither too rich nor too lean," he replied, "otherwise the animals do not benefit from it." - "Why not?" he asked. "Can you hear the muffled sound from yonder meadow," replied the shepherd, "that is the bittern! It was once a shepherd, and it was the hoopoe also. Now I hear their historie.Rørdrummen tending his flocks on rich green meadows where flowers grew in abundance, so his cows became wild and unmanageable. hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren hills, where the sand drifts, and the cows were thin and feeble. When they go home at night, could bittern not get hold in his cows, they jumped wildly away. "Come, cows," he cried, but they did not at all about it. Hærfuglens cows could not stand on my feet, so feeble they were. "up with you, with you "cried, but it did not, they were lying in the sand. So it goes when you can not stick to the golden mean. Now guardian they are not cows more, but even to this day bittern cries," Come , come, "and the hoopoe," up, up. "
Røverbrudgommen	380	955	Danish	There was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter. When she was grown up, he thought it might be appropriate to get her married and thought, "If a proper suitor, I say yes." Not long after came a man, who appeared to be very rich and distinguished, and asked for her daughter. Miller said yes, but the girl was not really happy about it, because she did not like him, that must be kept by her husband. She was almost afraid of him, and could not understand why she was uneasy every time she looked at him. One day he said to her: "You are my bride and have never visited me." - "I do not know where your house is," she replied. "It is out there in the dark forest," he said. She assistance and sought to be free, but the bridegroom said, "Next Sunday you must come and visit me, and for that you should not get lost, I sprinkle ashes on the road. When the girl was leaving on Sunday, was she felt very uneasy, she did not know why. for that she could be sure to find your way back home, she filled the pockets with peas. at the entrance to the forest was strewn ash, the she was made for, and at every step threw she peas right and left. she walked all day, and deep in the woods where there was darkest, she found finally a small house. It looked gloomy and scary, and when she trembling went in, it was not the one human. there was dead silence, but suddenly she heard a voice shout: "you young bride, turn, turn back, you to evil things betide." the girl looked around and saw a bird that hung in a cage on the wall . once again it cried: "you young bride, turn, turn back, you to evil things betide." P again went from one room to the other through the entire house without finding a single person. Eventually she went down into the cellar, and there sat a very old woman, nodding her head. "Can not you tell me if this is where my groom live?" asked the girl. "Poor child," said the old woman, "you have come to a cutthroats. You do not know that the groom that awaits you is death. I had to put a large kettle of water over the fire, and the need to boil and afterwards eaten. If I had pity on you, it was all over with you. "She hid her behind a large tub where you could not see her. "Sit quietly as a mouse," she said, "if you touch you, you are lost. At night, when the robbers are asleep, we will escape. I have long been waiting for an opportunity to escape from here." A moment later the robbers came home. They dragged a young maiden with them and did not care that she cried and prayed for him. They gave her three glasses of wine to drink a glass of red, a glass of white and a glass of yellow. When burst her heart. They tore the clothes off her, put her on the table, cut her into pieces and scattered salt on. The poor girl the while shaking and trembling when she saw now, what a fate that was intended for her. One of the robbers discovered that the victim had a gold ring on the little finger, and when he could not get it loose, he took an ax and cut the finger. It flew in the air and fell straight into the lap of the bride, who sat behind the tub. The robber took a candle and began to search for it, but could not find it. "Have you looked behind the great vessels," said one of the others. "Come on just and eat," said the old woman, "Your finger do not run from you." "You're right in," shouted the robbers and sat down, but the old woman dropped some sleeping stuff into their wine, and shortly after they lay under the table and snoring. When she heard it, she came forward, but she had to step over the drowning robbers to get out and shook with fear that one of them would wake. But God kept his hand over her so that she joyfully got out of the house. The wind had blown the ash away, but the seeds had taken root, and they had no difficulty in finding their way in the bright moonlight. They walked all night, and towards morning they came to the mill, and the girl told him her father what had happened hende.Bryllupsdagen came, and the miller had invited all his friends and relatives. As they sat at the table, they agreed that they all had to tell a story. The bride sat still, and when the tour came to her bridegroom said: "Well, my little darling, can you now tell us something." - "I must tell you a dream I had," she began, "I dreamed I was walking alone in a big forest, and came to a house where there was not a single human being. On the wall hung a bird in a cage and shouted: "you young bride, turn, turn back, you to evil things betide." the shouted it twice. My darling, I dreamed only. I went through all the rooms, but there were empty and creepy. eventually I came down to the basement, where there sat a very old woman, nodding her head. "Living my groom here?" I asked. "You have come to a cutthroats, my poor child," she replied, "when robbers come home puts the you in a pot and eat you. "the old woman hid me behind a large tub, and a moment later the robbers came home with a young virgin. they gave her three kinds of wine to drink, and then broke her heart . My darling, I dreamed only. then they tore the clothes off her, cut her body to pieces and scattered salt on it. My darling, I dreamed only. One of the robbers saw that She had a gold ring on your finger and cut it off, but it jumped straight in my lap. And here is the finger with the ring. "With these words she drew and held it up over bordet.Røveren was livid and jumped up to run away, but he was caught and brought before the judge. And the whole gang was then executed .
salad donkey	1155	567	Danish	There was once a young hunter who went out into the woods to shoot something wild. He was happy and contented, and sang and whistled in a magazine, but suddenly he saw an ugly old wife. "Hello, dear hunter," she said, "you may well be happy. I am suffering from and are so hungry and thirsty, give me a dime." The huntsman took pity on her, put his hand in his pocket and gave her some money. Then he would go ahead, but the old woman stopped him and said, "I will give you anything because you have such a good heart. Go on your way, so you come in a moment to a tree, which sits nine birds and fighting over a jacket. Then load the gun and shoot into the midst of them. you hit when one of the birds and the cloak fall to the ground. the shield must you take with you, for it is a desire mantle. When you put it on, you are at the moment the place you want to be. you have to remember to cut the heart out of the bird and eat it, so there is every morning a gold piece under your pillow. "the huntsman thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself, "That's good promises, she has given. if only they strike." When he had gone about a hundred steps, he heard a screeching and squealing, and when he looked up, he saw a flock of birds with beaks and claws and tore into a cape. "It is a marvelous thing," said the hunter, "it goes to all that the old have said." Then he took his gun and shot into the midst of them, so that the feathers flew about. With loud cries they fled, but one of them was hit and fell to the ground together with the mantle. The hunter did as the old woman had said, cut the bird up, swallowed the heart and took the mantle of hjem.Da he awoke the next morning, he thought of what the woman had promised him and wanted to see if it had come true. He lifted the pillow up and saw then that there really was a shiny gold piece, and so it went on every morning. He gathered together a heap of gold, but then he thought: "I have not the slightest joy of all my money when I get home. I will go out and see me in the world." Then he took leave of his parents, took the knapsack on his back and gun, and went off. One time he came through a very large forest, and when he came out of it, he saw that there was a magnificent castle on a plain. In a window was an old wife and a lovely maiden and looked. The old, however, was a witch and said, "Can you see him coming out of the woods? He has a wonderful treasure that we have to get away from him, my darling. It is fairer to us than he. He have a bird's heart about him and therefore there is every morning a gold piece under his pillow. " She then told the girl how to behave in order to get hold of it, and eventually threatened her at her and said with evil eyes: "If you do not obey me, it's all over with you." When the hunter came closer, he saw the girl and thought, "I have traveled such a long time, now I want to rest for once and take me into the beautiful castle. I have certainly money more than enough of." But what had brought him to the idea that was probably the beautiful pige.Han went into the house, and was kindly and hospitably received. It was not long before he was so in love with the girl, he thought only of her, saw her in the eye and did everything she wanted. "Now we have the bird heart," said the old man, "he will not notice that it's gone." She prepared a drink, poured it into a cup, and the girl brought the hunter. "Drink, my love," she said. Then he took the cup, and when he had swallowed it, he threw birds heart up. The girl had for the old commandment secretly take it and eat it. From Thenceforward he found no more gold. The old train every morning the gold piece, which was below the girl's pillow, but he was so in love that he had not thought of anything other than the girl. "Now we have the magic heart," said the old woman, "Now we must also look to grab in the mantle. " - "Let him, however, to keep it," the girl said, "I know he has, however, lost all his wealth." But then the old angry. "I want that jacket," she said, "it's very rare to get hold of such an oddity." She told the girl how she should behave, and threatened her with the harshest punishments if she disobeyed. The girl did so, as the old woman had said, placed herself at the window and saw a long face beyond the region. "Why are there so sorrowfully?" asked the hunter. "Oh, my friend," she replied, "you can see Garnet Mountain, located just opposite. There grows the most beautiful gemstone, and I would like to have some of them. I will be quite sad when I think of it. But how am I grab them? only the birds can reach up there on their wings, no man. " - "Is that all," said the hunter, "the grief I'll go out." Then he struck mantle, wished himself on the Garnet Mountain, and at that moment they were there. Precious stones sparkled and glittered, so it was a joy to watch, and they took the most beautiful thing they could find. Old woman had, at the magic arts arranged such that the hunter was very tired and sleepy. "Let us rest a little," he said to the girl, "I am so tired that I can not stand." He laid his head in her lap and fell asleep. When he was asleep, she the precious gems together, put off by him, and wrapped herself in it and wanted him home igen.Da hunter awoke, he saw that his beloved had betrayed him, and left him alone on the deserted mountain. "Where there's much falsehood in the world," he said sadly, and did not know what to do. Mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous giants who roamed there, and it was not long before he saw three of them get going. He lay down and then pretended he was asleep. Giants came up to him and one kicked him and said, "What kind of a miserable menneskeorm lying there, with his head down in the stomach?" - "Beat him to death," said the second, but the third said contemptuously: "That would indeed not worth it. Just let him keep life here, he can not be, and if he climbs to the top, carries the clouds him place. " However, they went on, but the hunter had heard what they said, and as soon as they were gone, he climbed up on top. When he had been sitting up there came a cloud hovering, took him and carried him across the sky. After some time lowered it over a large vegetable garden, surrounded by high walls, and he fell quite gently down between cabbage and vegetables. "If only I had something to eat," he said, looking around, "I am so hungry and it probably will not be so easy to get on. but here neither apples or pears or other fruit, nothing but herbs. I can perhaps enjoyed eating a little of the salad. it tastes's not by much, but it refreshes However." He sought out a fine head and began to gnaw it, but when he had swallowed a couple of bites, he was so strange to fashion. He was completely transformed. Four legs, a large head and two long ears grew up, and he saw with horror that he was a donkey. But when he was still hungry and juicy leaves was something for him, he went on eating with great zest. He also took hold of a different kind, but when he had swallowed it, he again turned into a menneske.Så he lay down and slept his tiredness away. When he awoke the next morning, he took a head of every kind of salad, and thought, "That'll help me to get my own again and punish treachery." He climbed over the wall and went off to find his girlfriend's castle. Fortunately, he found it a few days later. He dyed his face brown, so that his own mother would not have known him again, went into the palace and asked if he could stay there. "I'm so tired that I can not go a step further," he said. "What are you doing otherwise for?" asked the witch. "I am a messenger from the king," he replied, "I've been out to look for the delicious salad in the world. Fortunately, I found it. I have it here with me, but I am afraid that the delicate leaves must wither. I do not know if I will go with it. "when the old heard about the lovely salad, she ditty. "Let me taste a bit of it," she speculates. "Why not?" Replied the hunter, "I have brought two heads with that you have one." Then he handed it to her, he had taken of the first kind. The witch knew nothing of falsehood, and her mouth watered so the water that she went into the kitchen to make it. When she was finished, she could not wait until they had sat down, but put immediately a few bites in the mouth. The moment she turned into an ass and ran out into the yard. The cook came now to put the salad on the table, but by habit, she wanted to taste it, and took a few bites. Instantly the magic power, and she was also turned into an ass and ran out into the yard to the old. The bowl with the lettuce fell to the floor. The hunter was sitting inside at the beautiful girl. She also had enough desire to taste the salad, and when no one came with it, she said: "I can not imagine how the salad is doing." - "It has probably already taken effect," said the hunter, and said: "Now I go to the kitchen and see how it goes." When he got there, he saw the two asses running about in the yard, and the salad was on the floor. "They've probably got their party," he said, total rest up, put it on a dish and brought it to the maiden. "I bring you even the wonderful salad, that you do not wait for it," he said. She ate of it, was turned into a donkey and ran into the gården.Da huntsman had washed his face, so that he was unrecognizable, he went out into the courtyard and said, "Now you shall receive the wages of your treachery . " Then he tied them all three in a rope and pulled them to a mill. He knocked on the window, the miller put his head out and asked what he wanted. "I have three unmanageable beasts, which I do not want anymore," he replied, "would nonetheless that it was a shame to beat her. Then he went back to the castle, and that was all he behøvede.Efter some day course came miller, and announced that the old donkey, who had three times beatings and once food was dead. "the other two are certainly not," he said, "they get three times food, but they are so sad head, they keep it shown not going very long. "then the huntsman, took pity on them and said to miller that he would bring them up. castle. then he gave them some of the other salad, so they were to the people again. the beautiful girl fell on her knees before him. "Forgive me for the evil I have done you, my love," she said, "my mother drove me to it. I did it against my will, for I love you. Your wishing-cloak hangs in the closet, and I will take an emetic, so you get birds heart back. "Then came the hunter in mind." Keep it only, "he said," it is no matter who has it, for now please be my wife. "so the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happily together until their death.
sesame mountain	1350	676	Danish	There were once two brothers. One was poor and the other rich, but he never gave his brother anything. He ran a small trade of grain, but it went so badly that he had no bread for himself and his wife and children. One day as he was driving through the forest, he saw a large bare mountain that he had never noticed before, and stopped in surprise and looked at it. Suddenly he saw twelve great, wild men coming towards him, and when he thought they were robbers he pushed his barrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree and waited for what would happen. The twelve men went to the mountain and shouted: "Open Sesame Open Sesame up." Immediately there was an opening in the mountain, the twelve men went inside and closed again after them. Then came forth carrying heavy sacks on their backs. "Sesame Open Sesame in," they said, and it was now impossible to find that there had been an opening in the rock wall. When they were so far away that no one ever saw them more, the man climbed down from the tree, very curious to see what was inside the mountain. He went to it, and when he had said: "Sesame, Sesame up," there was an opening in the wall. He came into a cave that was quite full of silver and gold, and pearls and precious stones lay in heaps like grain. In the beginning he was quite confused at the sight of all the splendor and did not know whether he could take some of it or not, but eventually he took courage and filled his pockets with gold, but the pearls and precious stones he let lie. When he came out, he said: "Open Sesame Open Sesame in," and the mountain closed itself, and he pulled his car up and drove home. Now he had no more cause for anxiety, but could buy bread and wine also for gold, gave the poor alms and did good where he could. When the gold had run out, he went to his brother and asked if he could borrow a bushel, picked up a new supply, but did not touch the great treasures. As the third time he would get something he borrowed again bushel. The rich brother had long been envious of the good fortune he had brought with him and could not understand from whence the riches came, and what he wanted with the measure. He thought of a list, and covered the bottom with pitch, and when he got it back, it was a gold piece was sticking in it. He immediately went to his brother and asked him what he had measured by the bushel. "Barley and oats," he replied, but the brother showed him the gold piece and threatened to report him to the judge, if he did not say sandheden.Han told him how it had happened, and the rich laid the buckle of the vehicle and drove into the forest to really seize the opportunity. When he had shouted: "Open Sesame Open Sesame up," and came in and saw all the treasures, he was quite dazzled and did not know what he would prefer. Eventually he gathered as many precious stones as he could possibly carry, but his whole soul was so filled with the thought of all the great treasures that he could not remember what the mountain was called. "Bangles, Bangles, close up," shouted han.Men it was not the right name, and the mountain did not move. He was beside himself with fear, and the more he thought about it, the more confused he became. It was impossible for him to think of the name, what helped now all his treasures. In the evening the mountain opened, and the twelve robbers came in. "Do we have you finally, your gallows bird," they cried laughing when they saw him, "do not you think we know that you have been here twice. This time you do not get away from us." - "It was not me, it was my brother," he cried. But without caring a bit about his prayers and assurances drew one of the robbers his sword and cut off his head.
The tailor in heaven	332	800	Danish	One day the good Lord wants to take a walk in the garden. He took all the apostles and saints with the exception of Peter, who was left alone in the sky. Lord had commanded him to let no one in during his absence, so Peter stood at the gate and kept watch. A moment later, there was no one knocked. Peter asked who it was and what he wanted. "I am a poor, honest tailor," replied a smooth voice. "I ask for permission to enter." - "Yes honest as the thief on the gallows," replied Peter. "You have done long fingers and pinched clothes from your customers. You do not come in. God has forbidden me to let anyone in while he was gone." - "Please be merciful," asked the tailor, "you can not call it theft to keep some small patches, which are of no earthly use. It's nothing to talk about. I am lame and my feet are so sore and full of blisters. I really can not go anymore. when I just have to come in, I will do the dirty work. I will carry children and wash diapers and wipe the benches of when children have poisoning them, and patching their clothes. " Peter felt sorry for him and held the door as much ajar, he could slip through with his little withered body. He had to sit quietly in a corner, to God not to be angry when he came home and saw him. The tailor did it, but when Saint Peter went outside the door, he ran away and went looking around and looked in every nook. He eventually came to a large open space where there was a whole lot of beautiful armchairs. The middle was all gold and much higher than the other, and in front of it stood a golden stool. It was our Lord's throne from which he could see everything that happened on earth. The tailor stood for some time looking at the chairs. He liked best about it in the middle, and finally he could not master his curiosity, but climbed up and sat in it. Now he could see everything that was going on down on Earth, and he noticed an ugly old woman, standing by a creek and washed laying two veils for themselves. The tailor so angry that he grabbed gold podium and threw it down to the old thief. So he could not get hold of it again, and silently he crept over and sat down in the corner, as if nothing had happened the allermindste.Da Lord came home again, he discovered admittedly not the tailor behind the door, but when he would sit on his throne, he saw that the podium was gone. He asked Peter where it had gone, but he did not know anything about it. Then he asked if there had been anyone in while he had been away. "Not other than a lame tailor, who is sitting behind the door," said Peter. Lord had the tailor and asked him if he had taken the podium. "It has all my heart thrown down to earth at an old woman who steals," replied the tailor so merrily. Lord shook his head. "If I judged you," he said, "so I had no chairs or tables, nor even one ovnrager back but did have thrown everything down at the sinners. You can not be here anymore. Go away from here. Here be none other than I punish. "Peter led the tailor out of heaven, and as he had torn shoes, and feet covered with blisters he was using a cane to Ventegodt where the good soldiers sit and make merry.
Snow-white and Rosy	1536	426	Danish	There was once a poor woman who lived in a small house. Outside there was a small garden, wherein stood two rose bushes, one with a red and one with white roses. She had two children who were like the two rose bushes, and one was called Snow-white, the other rosy. It was the best and happiest children you could imagine. Awhile was more gentle and quiet than rosy, who liked best to run out on the field and pick flowers and catch butterflies. She sat at home with his mother and helped her in the house or read to her. The children were so fond of each other that they always held hands when they went out, and when Snow-white said, "We will not leave," said Rosy: "No, never, as long as we live," and her mother nodded and said: "you must always share what I get." They often ran about the forest alone and gathered berries, but the animals never did them anything. They came very confidently up to them, and the hare ate cabbage leaves their hands, the roe grazed beside them, the stag sprang merrily past, and the birds were sitting on the branches and sang so nicely, they just might. There happened to them never evil. If they had stayed too long in the woods, and it was dark before they knew it, they lay down in the moss and slept, and the mother knew it and was not afraid of them. One morning when they woke up, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting next to them. It smiled at them and went into the woods without saying anything. When they looked around, they discovered that they had been sleeping quite close to a deep abyss, and if they had gone only a few steps further, they crash down. When they came home and told their mother, she said that it might have been the angel who watches over the good børn.Snehvid and Rosy kept the cottage so neat and clean, it was a joy to watch. In summer did Rosy able and asked every morning a bouquet with a white and a red rose outside her mother's bed. In winter did awhile on fire and put the kettle on. It was made of brass, but was plastered so polished that it shone like gold. In the evening, when it was dark, and the snow fell, the mother said, "Go and bolt the door, awhile," and so they sat by the fire, and his mother took a big book and read to the two girls who were sitting and spun. Beside them lay a lamb and perched on a bar sat a white dove with its head under vingen.En evening as they sat and had it nice and cozy, they heard that there was a knock on the door. "Hurry up shut up, Rosy," said the mother, "it must be a traveler who is seeking shelter." Rosy went and pulled the bolt from, but it was no poor man, but a bear who stuck his head in the door. Rosy gave a loud cry and back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered, and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother's bed. "Do not be afraid," said the bear, "I have only been somewhat cold and wanted to warm me a little." - "Come, you poor bear," said the mother, "and lie down by the fire, but beware that you do not burn your coat." Then she called snow-white and Rosy, who also came forward, and little by little forvandt also paralyzed and dove their fright. "Can not brush the snow a bit of me," said the bear, and when the children had taken a broom and brushed it, it stretched out by the fire and growled contentedly. They became quite familiar with their whimsical guest and began to play with it. They tugged his hair, put his feet on his back and rolled him about, or they took a hazel, and when he growled they laughed of it. Bear took it in it, but when it did, it was too wrong, cried: "You're killing me, børn.Snehvid and Rosy, In causing your friers death." When it was bedtime, the mother said to the bear, "You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will not feel the cold and the bad weather." At dawn children let him out, and he trotted across the snow. But from now on, it came every night, lay by the fire and let the kids play as much as they wanted, and they were so used to that it came that they closed the door before the black guest had come ind.Da spring came and the trees began to be green, the bear said one morning for awhile: "I can not come here all summer." - "Where are you then going?" she asked. "I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs," said he, "in the winter when the ground is frozen, they have to stay below and can not come up here, but now the sun has and melted ice and snow, and then lists themselves to steal what they can get, and then it comes not so easy to light again. " Awhile was quite distressed by to say goodbye. When the bear would run out through the door, there was a hook, which grabbed its fur and tore it a little, and for awhile thought she saw something golden shine out, but she was not really sure of his case. The bear ran away quickly, and soon disappeared between træerne.Nogen time after the mother sent her children into the forest, so that they could gather some twigs. They came to a large tree which lay felled on the ground, and seemed enough that sprang something up and down between the branches, and as they came nearer they saw that it was a dwarf with an old withered face. His long white beard was caught in a crack in the wood, and he jumped up and down like a dog tied and did not know how he should escape. He stared with his red eyes at the girls and shouted: "Why are you standing there. Can not you come and help me." - "How are you about there, little man?" asked Rosy. "You stupid, prying goose," said the dwarf, "I would split the tree to get a little wood for the kitchen. At high fire burns our little food immediately. We do not need as much as in great, greedy people. I had already gotten the wedge and thought the holy Sepulcher was going as I wished, but it damn tree was so smooth that it jumped out again, and the crack closed so quickly along that my beautiful white beard got caught, and now I can not get it out again. See where you stand and laugh with your stupid milk bread face. where are nasty. " - "I'll call on some people," said Rosy. "It was also a contrivance, your cod forehead," sneered the dwarf, "You are already two too many." - "Do not just so impatient," said Snow-white, "I will help you." Then she took her scissors from his pocket and cut the beard of. The dwarf grabbed instant her bag, which was filled with gold. "What a bunch of ill-mannered girly," he growled, "how to mistreat my beautiful beard. Confound you." He took the sack on his back and trudged away without so much as looking at pigerne.En day went awhile and Rosy down to the river to catch fish. When they came near it, they saw something that looked like a large grasshopper, rushed there and saw that it was the dwarf. "Where are you going?" asked Rosy, "you surely do not want the water?" - "No, so mad, I'm not," he shouted, "can not you see it's the pesky fish that will overtake me down." The little guy had sat with standard zoom. Unfortunately, the wind had wrapped shaped cord into his beard, and then a big fish bit the hook, he had no strength to haul it up. The fish was the strongest, and tore the dwarf with him. It did not large, he grabbed the reeds or straw, he had to follow the fish's movements and was always just about to plop in the water. The girls came just at the right moment. They grabbed him and tried to get out the line of his beard, but it was too entangled. They were then need to use scissors and cut the beard was getting even a little shorter. "Is it a way to behave on," cried the dwarf furious, "I pity scold me the hero, so I can hardly dare to show me any. I wish all accidents can hit you." He took his bag of pearls at the neck and disappeared behind a stone without saying a word mere.Kort time after the mother sent the two children to the town to buy yarn and ribbons. The road went over a moor, where here and there were huge pieces of rock. Suddenly they saw a large bird circling in the air above their heads, lower and lower, and finally flew down behind one of the rocks. Immediately afterwards they heard a pitiful cry, and when they ran to him, they saw that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to fly away with him. The children took pity on him and held so firmly to him that the eagle finally had to give slip.Da he had recovered from his first fright he cried furiously: "Can not take a little more cautious on me. I have quite ripped off my thin shirt. I am helpless clumsy creatures. " He took his bag of precious stones and dragged it into his cave under the rock. The girls were already accustomed to his ingratitude and went quietly on. When they on the way home again went over the heath, they came on the back of the dwarf, who had shaken all its gems out on the ground because he thought that there was no past so late. The evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones, and they glittered and sparkled with all colors of the rainbow, and the children stopped to look at them. "What are you standing there staring at?" cried the dwarf, and his ashen face was crimson with anger. At that moment they heard a loud hum and a black bear came trotting out of the woods. Startled dwarf sprang up, but he could not get time to slip away, the bear was right on him. "Spare my life," he shouted, beside himself with anxiety, "I must get all of my lovely gems. What do you want with such a slender little fellow. I can scarcely notice that you get something in your mouth. Take these two wicked girls, they are delicious snappy energy. " The bear did not like what he said, but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his lab, and he did so dead as a sild.Pigebørnene had run away, but the bear called after them, "Snow-white and Rosy. wait and take me with you. " They knew because their old friend again and stopped, but when the bear came up to them, fell bearskin suddenly, and there was a handsome young man in golden robes. "I am a prince," he said, "and the evil dwarf had stolen my treasures and turned me into a bear, so I had to run around in the woods. At his death j oak been solved by the spell, and he obtained his deserved punishment. "awhile married the prince and rosy with his brother, and the great treasure which the dwarf had hidden in his cave, they shared with each other. The old mother lived many years peacefully and happily with her children. The two rose bushes she took with her, and every year bore the loveliest white and red roses.
snow White	505	709	Danish	It was the middle of winter, and sneflokkene falling like feathers from the sky. The queen sat by the window and sewed in a frame of black ebony ornamented, and while she sewed and sewed and looked out at the snow, she came to poke his finger and dropped three drops of blood in the snow. And when she saw how beautiful the red color shone in the white snow, she thought: "If only I had a child who was as white as snow, as red as blood and as black as ebony ornamented." Shortly after she gave birth to a daughter, who was white and red with hair as black as ebony ornamented. The little girl was called Snow White, and when she was born, died dronningen.Et years after the king took himself another wife. She was beautiful, but proud and haughty, and could not tolerate that any more beautiful than she. She had a mirror, and when she looked in it and asked, "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of us all?" replied the mirror: "Nobody in the world is as beautiful as you." Then she was satisfied, for she knew that the mirror spoke sandhed.Snehvide grew up, and became prettier and prettier, and when she was seven years old, she was as beautiful as the bright day, and far more beautiful than the queen. So one day I asked the mirror: "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of us all?" It answered, "Queen, is your beauty shine, but Snow White is fairest tis true." The queen became yellow and green with envy, and from now on, she hated Snow White with all his heart. She had no peace day or night and one morning she called one of the hunters said, "I will not see snow for my eyes. Take her out into the woods and kill her and bring me liver and lung." The hunter went with her, but when he drew his dagger, to pierce Snow White's innocent heart, she began to cry and said, "Oh, do not kill me. I have to go into the great forest, and never come home. " The huntsman took pity on her because she was so beautiful, and said: "Go only poor child." By himself he thought: "It will certainly not be long before the wild animals to devour her." But it was as if a stone had fallen from his heart because he had not killed her. Since this came a young wild boar, he put it to death and brought liver and lung to the Queen. The cook had to salt and cook them, and she ate them and thought it was Snehvides.Nu was the poor child all alone in the great forest, and she was so afraid that she stared anxiety on every tree she passed. She did not know what to do, and finally she began to run all over the sharp stones and through thorns, and the wild beasts after her without making her something. She ran as long as her legs could carry her, and towards evening she came to a little house and went inside. Everything there was small, but so neat and clean that you can not imagine it. In the middle of the room stood a table with a white cloth, and seven little plates with spoons, knives and forks, and seven little cups. Over by the wall stood seven little beds with white sheets. Snow White was hungry and thirsty and ate a mouthful of meat and cabbage to each plate and drank a drop of wine from each cup, for she would not take it from one alone. Then she would put in one of the beds, but one was too short and the other long, the third too narrow, the fourth too broad, and so on, until finally the seventh suited her. There she saw lying, said her prayers, and fell søvn.Da it was dark came the Seven Dwarfs, whom the house belonged, home from their work in the mountains. When they got turned on the lights, so they immediately that there must have been someone while they were gone, because things were not in their usual place. "Who has been sitting on my chair?" said the first. "Who has been eating from my plate?" said the other. "Who took my bread?" The third said. "Who has been eating my porridge?" said the fourth. "Who has been using my fork?" said the fifth. "Who cut with my knife?" said the sixth. "Who has been drinking from my mug?" said the seventh. When one of them turned around, he saw that there was a depression in his bed. "There has been some up in my bed," he said, and when the others came, they all cried: "There have also been some of mine." But when the seventh came to his bed, he saw Snow White. He called on the other, and they came up with their seven little light. "Good Lord, she's lovely," they cried and was so happy for her that they did not have the heart to wake her. The seventh dwarf slept one hour in each of his comrades, and so was the night forbi.Da Snow White woke up in the morning and saw the seven dwarfs, she was very frightened, but they were so kind to her that she was soon reassured. "What's your name?" did they ask. "Snow White," she answered. "How did you come here?" She told them how her mother had tried to kill her, but the hunter who had to do it, had given her permission to run away, and then she had gone all day until she came to the little house. "To keep the house in order and cook and sew and knit for us," said the dwarfs, "then you'd be here and we'll be good to you." Snow White immediately said yes and stayed with them. In the morning the dwarfs out in the mountains to work, and when they came home again in the evening, Snow White had the food ready for them. All day she was alone, and the dwarfs warned her and said, "Beware of your step-mother, she will soon know that you are here. Let no one into the house." When the queen had eaten it, she thought was first and fairest, she went to her mirror and asked: "mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of us all?" The mirror replied, "No one in the country is lovely as you, but snow far behind the seven mountains, on the seven little good, industrious dwarves, she is a thousand times more fair." Then she was frightened, for she knew that the mirror spoke the truth, and she felt now that the huntsman had deceived her. She thought and thought about how she would get Snow White to life and finally took her advice. She painted her face and dressed herself like an old peddler woman, so she was quite unrecognizable. So she went across the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked on the door and shouted: "You cheap goods to get." Snow White looked out the window and asked: "What are you then?" - "Many good things," the woman replied, "Look, beautiful laces," and she held up a piece that was woven of variegated silk. "The good wife, I got enough shut in," thought Snow White, went and opened the door and bought the pretty lace. "But how is it that you look like a child," said the old man, "come here, let me lace you properly." Snow White was not thinking any harm thereby, but stood in front of his wife. But the old woman laced so quickly and so tightly that Snow White could not breathe and fell as if dead. "Now you can say you've been the most beautiful," she said, laughing and hurried bort.Kort after the seven dwarfs came home, and were terrified when they saw their dear Snow White lying on the floor without moving. They lifted her up, and when they saw how tightly she was laced they cut the lace. She began to draw breath, and little by little she came to herself again. When the dwarfs heard what had happened, they said: "This has certainly been the evil queen. Do you must beware of letting any one in when we are not home." When the queen came home, she went in front of the mirror and asked, "mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of us all?" And it answered as: "No country is lovely as you, but snow far behind the seven mountains in the seven small, good, industrious dwarves, she is a thousand times more fair." When she heard it, she was so horrified that all the blood left her heart. "I'll make sure that she really must get rid of life," she thought, and using all kinds of witchcraft she made a poisoned comb and dressed herself up as an old woman. So she went across the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked and shouted, "Here cheap goods to get." Snow White put her head out the window and said: "It's no use, I can not let anybody in." - "You should probably be allowed to look at it," said the old man and took the poisoned comb and showed it to her. Snow White thought so highly of it, that she was persuaded to shut up and buy the comb. "Now I want to save you," said the old man, and Snow White had no suspicion, but let her do it. At that moment, the comb was stuck in her hair, seemed poison, and snow fell as if dead. "That's enough out of you, my loveliness," said the old man scornfully and went his way. Fortunately, the seven dwarfs came home a moment later and got the poisoned comb taken out of her hair. Snow White came to herself again and told what had happened, and they warned her again to close any ind.Da the queen had come home, she asked, "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of us all?" The mirror replied: "No country is lovely as you, but snow far behind the seven mountains in the seven small, good, industrious dwarves, she is a thousand times more fair." When she heard it, she shook her from head to foot with rage. "Snow White must die, even if it costs me my life," she shouted. Then she went into a room, locked the door and made a poisonous apple. It was beautiful, with red cheeks, and anyone who saw it must long for it, but whoever ate of it must die. Queen dyed his face brown, dressed as a peasant woman and went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, and knocked. "I must not let anybody in," said Snow White and stuck his head out the window. "It is indeed even matter," answered the woman, "I'll get rid of my apples. There, I will give you one." - "No thanks," said Snow White, "I dare not take anything." - "Are you afraid that it must be toxic," the old man asked, "Now I cut it in two, so you get the red and I eat the white." The apple was in fact made such that only the red side was poisoned. Snow White longed for the beautiful apple, and when she saw the peasant woman eating, she could not resist, but reached out and took the poisoned half. No sooner had she got it in her mouth than she fell dead on the ground. The queen stood for some time and then hurt her, so she struck into a loud laugh and said, "White as snow, red as blood, black as ebony ornamented. This time the dwarfs can not save you." Then she went home and asked her mirror: "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of us all?" The mirror answered: "Nobody in the world is as beautiful as you." Now her envious heart calm, in so far as an envious heart can have ro.Da dwarfs the evening came home, they found Snow White lying dead on the ground. They lifted her up, and was looking to find something that could have hurt her, laced her life up, combing her hair and washed her with water and wine, but it did not help. She was and was dead. They laid her on a bier, and sat for three days with her and cried. Now they wanted to bury her, but she was so beautiful with fresh, red cheeks, they could not wear their hearts to put her down in the black ground. They then made a coffin of glass, laid her in it, and wrote in gold letters her name and that she was a king's daughter. Then they set the coffin out of a mountain and took turns to guard it. The animals also took care of Snow White, first an owl, then a raven, and finally a dove, and sat by the coffin and græd.Snehvide was now in a long, long time in the coffin and looked as if she were asleep, for she was still as white as snow, as red as blood and as black as ebony ornamented. Once red, however, a prince through the woods and came to the dwarfs' house and would stay there overnight. He saw the coffin in which Snow White lay and read what was written on it. "Sell her to me," he said to the dwarfs, "I can get everything I own and have." - "No," answered the dwarfs, "not for all the gold we will sell her." - "Give away me her then," asked the prince, "I can not live without her. I will hold her in high honor." The dwarfs took pity on him and gave him finally allowed to take the coffin with. But when the servants carried it through the bumpy road, stumbled one of them, and thus got the coffin a shock, so the poisonous apple flew out of her mouth. Soon she came to herself again, opened the lid and stood up and shouted: "Where am I though." King's son was beside himself with joy and told her how everything had gone. "You are the one I love most in the world," he said, "follow me to my father's castle and be my wife." Snow followed him like, and taken extensive preparations for brylluppet.Snehvides stepmother was also invited, and when she had taken her beautiful clothes, she went to her mirror and asked: "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is fairest of the land? " The mirror replied, "You are dejligst in this country, but the queen never you measure you can." The evil woman was dying of rage, but was also so strange anxiety, she did not know why. At first she would not go to the party, but her curiosity to see the young queen did not let her have peace. When she came into the hall, she knew immediately Snow White and was quite petrified. But along the fire stood a few glowing iron shoes, the ones she had to dance until she fell down dead.
The sparrow and its four cubs	1496	157	Danish	A sparrow had four young ones in a swallow's nest. When they were fledged, some naughty boys pulled out the nest, but they left happily away and flew away with the wind. The old went and anxious, because his sons were quite unstable, and it had not been given them some of his tips with out world.Upon the autumn a great many sparrows on a wheat field, and the old met his four children again and took them home with him. "Where I have suffered many things for your sake, little children," it said, "but now listen to my advice and follow them. Such small birds are exposed to great dangers." Then he asked the elder what it had ordered the summer. "I have lived in a garden and eating larvae and worms, until the cherries were ripe," it said. "Yes, it's delicious food," said the old man, "but there is great risk about them. Take especially beware of those people who goes around the garden with long green poles which are hollow inside and has a hole in the top." - "But if there is stuck a green leaf of the hole," said the youngster. "Where have you seen it?" asked the old man. "At a grocery store," replied the son. "It's some clever guys, the merchants," said the father, "if you have been with such people, you have been given flexibility enough to twist your way through the world. Now use only what you have learned and do not be too too sure of yourself. "" Where have you been? " he asked, then the other. "At court, father." - "Such a place not fit for silly little birds like sparrows," said the old man, "there is so much gold and silk and steel, hawks, owls and cats. Stick to the horses' stable where they winnow oats are threshed, so you can peacefully consume your daily grain. " - "Yes, father, the son said," but when the stable-boys make limes and laying traps and spin the straw, there are many who lingers. "-" Where have you seen it, my boy? "Asked the old man." By the court, "he replied." there are some bad guys there, "said the old man," and once you got away from them, you can probably get by in life, but look around. The wolves devour the clever dogs. "Then he turned to the third." Where have you been trying your luck? "He said." I have been struck down on the road, which I found occasionally some grain and seed " replied the son. "It's wonderful food," said the father, "but good note of that, if there are any who bends down and picking up stones, so do not give you the time." - "well, if he already has it in his pocket, then what? "asked the son." Where have you seen it? "-" When the mountain they go out, they always have stones in your pocket, "said the sparrow." mountain Men are wise guys, "said the old, "those you can probably learn something from, but do you still beware. They have caused many a sparrow. "Now came the turn of the youngest son." You have always been the silliest and weakest; put, "the father said." Out in the world there are many big, bad birds with curved beaks and sharp claws who sits in wait to catch the poor little birds. Stick to your own and take the caterpillars and spiders crawling on trees and houses and it will move you enough good. "-" Yes, you feel good when you do not do any harm, "said the little sparrow" then there is no hawk or eagle or kite, which makes a thing. Simply every morning to pray to the God who created us all and belongs raven pup cries, and without whose will not a sparrow falls to the ground. "Where did you learn that?" asked the old man. "When the storm took me away from you, I came into a church. There I caught flies and spiders in the window and heard the pastor preach. And all spurves father has been over me in the summer and kept me from all evil." " it was rather my son, "the father said," hold you fast by the churches and help to keep the spiders and the buzzing flies away. Shout to God that raven kids and put your fate in his hand, then it will go well with you even if the world was full of wild malicious fugle.For he who puts his trust in God, and silent and waiting and unremarkable and suffering, and believe in him with a humble mind, has won a friend for eternity. "
The star	1457	779	Danish	There was once a little girl whose father and mother were dead. She was so poor that she had a living room, she could be, and not even a small bed, she could sleep in. In the end she had nothing left but the clothes on the body and a small piece of bread, as a compassionate soul had given her. But she was good and pious, and when she was so alone in the world, she went out on the field and asked to Gud.Der she met an old man who said: "Give me something to eat, I am so hungry." She handed him her piece of bread and said, "God bless you," and went on. Then came a child who moaned and said: "I head is so cold, give me something I can take." She took off her hood and gave it to him. Then came again a little girl who froze because she had no bodice on. She took as her own and gave her, then she also gave her skirt away. Eventually she came into a deep, dark forest, and there she met someone who asked her chemise. "There is no one who can see me in the dark," thought the little girl and took her shift and gave her den.Nu she stood there and did not have a bit more back, but suddenly fell the stars fall from the sky, and they were sheer bright dollars. And although she had given her shirt away, she had one on, and it was of the very finest linen. She gathered together the money up, and there were so many that she had enough for his entire life.
The nail	1753	2039	Danish	A merchant had done good business at the market and sold all his goods and filled his pockets with gold and silver. Now he would go home to reach his home before the night broke. He tied so his traveling bag with money stuck on the horse and rode off. At noon he kept resting in a city, and when he would ride on, led the youth horse forward. "Out of a nail the shoe on the left hind leg," he said. "Yes, so it must be missing," said the merchant, "the shoe holds arguably the six hours I have left. I'm busy." In the afternoon, he stepped back from his horse and was led in to get something to eat. Then came the servant into the room and said: "Out of a horseshoe on the left hind leg. Should I bring the animal to the blacksmith?" - "No, it will be," said the merchant, "the few hours that are left, keeps the horse enough out. I'm busy." He rode off, but soon began horse to hopscotch. It was not long before it stumbled and fell and broke his leg. The merchant had to leave it, hitched the bag of, took it on his shoulder and had to proceed on foot, and it was late at night when he reached home. "It condemned nails are to blame for the entire incident," he thought. One makes mistakes when being too hasty.
Thumbling traveling	429	700	Danish	There was once a tailor who had a son who was not bigger than an inch, and therefore was called Thumbling. But against the chest he had, and one day he said to his father: "I will go and see me in the world." - "That's right, my son," said the old man, took a long darning needle, put a dollop of paint on the end and said, "There is a sword on the road." The little guy would eat at home once again, before he went off and ran into the kitchen to see what they should have for dinner. The pot was already on the stove. "What do we have to eat today?" asked Thumbling. "See for yourself," replied the mother. Thumbling up on the stove and looked down into the pan, but craned his neck to allow steam from the pan lifted him up and carried him out through the chimney. For some time he hovered in the air, but at last he sank to the ground. Now the little out in the wide world, and when he had wandered about for some time, he took service with a tailor, but he seemed not at all about the food he got there. "If we do not get something better to eat," he said to the woman, "I write in the morning with chalk on the door: 'Too many potatoes, too little meat. Goodbye, potato king. "-" What are you talking about, your slip of a thing, "said the woman angrily, took a lap and beat him, but he slipped under a thimble, and sat there and looked out and stuck his tongue out of her. She took thimble, and wanted seize him, but he hopped into the cloth, and when she took them away, he jumped into the table slot. "E carrier," he shouted and poked his head up, and when she would hit him, he crept into drawer. at long last, however, she caught him and drove him to porten.Den little tailor journeyed on and came into a great forest, where he met a group of robbers who were on their way to the king's treasury. when they saw tailor, they thought: "the little guy can be very useful for us, he can climb through the keyhole. Hollo, "cried one of them," thou giant Goliath, wilt thou go to the treasure chest? You can throw in there and throw the gold to us. "Thumbling thought for a moment, but then said yes and went with them. When they came to the treasury, he examined the door to find a crack, he could slip through, and eventually found he who was wide enough. But one of the sentries at the door saw him and said to the other: "What a nasty spider. I shall come to death. "-" Let the poor creature alone, "said the other," it has not done anything. "Thumbling escaped joyfully into the room, opened the window and threw one thaler after another addition to the robbers. but best of all he was carrying it, he heard the king coming and hid in haste into a corner. king could probably see that lacked some gold, but could not make out who had stolen it , for locks and bolts were all. When he walked away, he said to the guard: "Take care of. There have been some layer with the gold. "When Thumbling again took hold of his work, heard the money in there rattling, but before they got the door closed up, was tailor slipped into a corner. It was them can not be found someone and Thumbling sat in his hiding place and teased them and shouted: "Here I am," as they flew by the sound. But he was a long time ago in a completely different area, and thus he made, for they were so tired, they gave up searching. then he threw the rest of the money out the window, the last dollars he flung all their might and then jumped himself up on it and got off on the way out the window. the robbers could not tire of praising him and asked him at last, he would be their captain. Thumbling thanked for the honor, but said he would first look at the world. Then they divided the spoils, but the tailor took only a tiny piece of gold with him. That was all he could bære.Da he once more buckled on his sword, he said goodbye to the robbers and pitch av on the way. He went to work with some masters, but it was not in his head, and finally he took service as a laborer in an inn. But the girls did not like that he could so easily get behind them without their noticing it, and could fit in everything they did and tell the family if they sometimes put a little for themselves. "We'll get him for life," they said, and agreed that they would play a trick on him. One day, when the girl was mowing in the garden, and Thumbling jumped back and forth in front of her, she got hold of him when she collected the grass together and tied in a hurry it all into a scarf. Then she laid it out for the cows, and a large black one ate Thumbling without doing him the least harm. But he did not seem to be in the cow's stomach, when there were no air or light. When the girl came to the milking, he shouted: "Malk now in a hurry, then you are done soon," but there was no one who heard it. A little later the man came into the stable and said that the cow shall be killed. Thumbling was afraid and cried out: "Let me get out." The man heard it, but did not know where the voice came from. "Where are you?" he asked. "I'm sitting inside the black," yelled Thumbling, but the man could not understand what it meant, and went his vej.Den next morning the cow was killed. But luckily met none of the cuts Thumbling. By contrast, he got among the meat to be cooked sausages. When the butcher came to and began to chop, he screamed frantically: "Not so deep, not so deep, I lie down here after all." But chopping knife made such a noise that nobody heard him. The trick now for the poor Thumbling to rescue him, but he escaped unscathed from it. Either he or piped screaming, he was then placed in a blood sausage. There was very little room to move, and then he was the bargain hung by the chimney to dry. The first winter he was taken down to eat, and now it was important to take heed of the knife. But just in time, he jumped out of the sausage and immediately ran its vej.I the house where he had suffered so much, he would not stay longer. His freedom did not last long. Out in the field there was a fox who snapped him. "Rare, little fox," he yelled as loud as he could, "do you know me? Let me go free again." - "It could be something in," said the fox, "you are so small that I can not have further joy of you. But do I get all your father's chickens?" - "I promise you," shouted Thumbling, "you have to get them all together." The fox took him now even home to his parents' house, and when his father saw him, he was so happy that he willingly gave the fox all the fowls. "I also have something good for you," said Thumbling and gave him a small piece of gold he had taken in the treasury. "But why did the fox get the poor chickens?" he asked after a while. "You little fool," replied the father and kissed him, "you would surely understand that you are worth more to me than the fowls in the yard."
Tom Thumb	350	700	Danish	There was once a poor farmer. One evening, as he sat and towered into the fire, while his wife spun, he said: "How dull it is that we have no children. It is so quiet and not merrily as in other people." - "Yes, you are certainly right," said his wife and sighed, "even if it was not bigger than a thumb, we would however keep it and be happy about it." Shortly after the wife was ill, and seven months after she gave birth to a boy who was very shapely, but no bigger than a thumb, and they called him off Tom Thumb. They gave him everything good to eat, but he was not a bit more for it. Yet he was a very wise and intelligent little guy, and everything he tackled, managed ham.En day his father go into the forest to cut wood, he said: "Just now was one that came out with the cart for me. " - "That I do," cried Tom Thumb, "I'll be there in time." The man laughed and said: "How could you, however, carry you along with it. You're too small to hold the reins." - "It does nothing at all," he replied, "whose mother just will buckle, I sit in the horse's ear and tell him which way to go." - "Let us try it in the name of God," said the man and went into the woods. Some post-tensioned mother horses and put Tom Thumb in the horse's ear. "Gee Gee," cried the little and said the horse which way it should go. It went at a brisk canter out to the forest. On the way they passed two men. "What's the deal," cried one, "running a vehicle without driver, but you may hear him shouting for the horses." - "It is not natural," said another, "we will follow the cart and see where it runs across." Tom Thumb ran way and came indeed to the place where his father chopping wood. "Here I am," he shouted, "take me looked." The father took his son out of the ear and put him into the grass. As the two men as Tom Thumb, they did not know what to say with wonder. "You know," whispered one to the other, "if we showed him rather than money, we could serve well. Let's buy him." They went to the farmer and asked him if he would sell the little guy. "No," replied the father, "he gives me not from me for all sorts of treasures." Tom Thumb was, however, climbed up on his father's shoulder and whispered to him: "Only do this, I'll come back home," and his father sold him for a large gold piece. "Put me up on the hat, so I can see me in the world," said Tom Thumb, and when he had said goodbye to his father, the men went away with him. Toward evening said the father: "Now let me get down, I need it." - "Do you just up there," the man said, "That is indeed nothing to do fuss. I'm so used to the birds drop something down on me." - "No, I do know enough what suits themselves," said Tom Thumb, "take me now just down." The man took off his hat and put the little guy in a field near the road. He crept back and forth between the straw, but suddenly he slipped into a mousehole. "Pleasant journey," he cried, "I'll probably go on without me." They stuck needles into the hole, but it was no use, Tom Thumb crept just farther in, and as it soon became quite dark, they had to proceed with and their vexation and their empty pung.Da Tom Thumb found they were gone, crept he emerges from his underground hideout. "It is dangerous to walk on such a field, when it's dark," he thought, "you can break my arms and legs." Fortunately, he found an empty snail shell. "Thank God," he said, "who can I be safe and well." When he was just about to fall asleep, he heard a man who passed by, say to another: "Just now we know how we should conduct ourselves in getting hold of the rich pastor's gold and silver." - "I'll tell you," cried Tom Thumb. "What," said the thief frightened, "there was someone who spoke." They stood and listened, and Tom Thumb said, "Take me, then I will help you." - "Where are you?" did they ask. "Notice where the voice comes from and look so down to earth," he replied. At last they found him and lifted him up. "What can your small svirrevip however do," they said, when they saw him. "I'll tell you," he replied, "I can creep between the iron bars of the window and number of you what you want." - "It's good," they said and carried him to the parsonage. When they got there, Tom Thumb crept into the room, but at once began to shout with all his might, "Do I have everything here?" - "Speak softly but for the devil," whispered the thief, but Tom Thumb pretended he did not understand it and yelled again: "What then, you will have it all?" The cook, who slept in the next room, heard this and sat up in bed and listened. The thieves had run a little way away, but took courage and crept back there. "The little guy want to do is fool us," they thought. They whispered now softly to him, "Reach us something here." - "Yes," cried Tom Thumb as loud as he could, "team just hands here. The girl heard now quite clearly what he said, and stood up and stomped to the door, and the thieves ran as if the devil were at their heels. the girl lit a candle and went in, but when she had searched every nook and found nothing, she thought she had dreamed and crept into bed igen.Tommeliden however, was slipped out in the barn and climbed to the hayloft. There he would lie for it was morning and then go home to his parents again. But he was certainly not allowed to escape so easily. at dawn girl got up to fetch hay for the cattle, and she had just grab it, where Tom Thumb was. But he slept so soundly that he did not wake up until the cow had gotten him into the mouth along with the hay. "but God, I'm come in a mill grinder," he cried, but soon he realized where he was. It was now to take care that he was not crushed between the teeth, yet he came down into the stomach. "They h Scars were forgotten when windows in this room, "he thought," here comes probably neither sun nor moon. "He seemed in general not to be there, and the worst was that there still came new hay, so there was less and less space. In his anxiety he shouted finally, as loud as he could: "I do not need more food." The maid was then milking the cow, and when she heard the voice but could not see anyone, she was so frightened that she fell off the chair and spilled milk. As fast as she can, she ran home and said: "Sir. Reverend, sir. Pastor, the cow has started to speak." - "You are mad," said the priest, but went himself to the barn to see what was going on. Just as he got there, he heard Tom Thumb cried out: "I do not need more food." The priest was frightened and thought that the cow was possessed by evil spirits. It was immediately killed and the stomach, where Tom Thumb was, was thrown on the dunghill. Tom Thumb and fought to escape, and he managed to finally get his head stuck out. At that moment a hungry wolf ran up and swallowed the stomach at one gulp. But he did not lose courage. "It can, however, maybe talk to," he thought, and cried aloud: "Dear wolf, I know a place where there is the best food." - "Where is it?" Asked the wolf. Tom Thumb described now carefully where his father's house was. "When you creep into it through the end," he said, "so you will find both cakes and bacon and sausage." The wolf did not require to be told twice, but crept into the pantry and ate all his might. When he was satisfied, it would run away again, but it had become so thick that it could not come back the same way. The Tom Thumb had reckoned upon, and began making noise and screaming, everything he could into the wolf's stomach. "Will you be quiet," said the wolf, "you will wake the folks." - "I do not care," said the little guy, "now you have eaten your fill, now I also enjoy myself a little." Then he screamed again with all their might. Finally woke his father and mother and ran and looked through the crack of the door. When they saw that there was a wolf in there, they brought in a hurry an ax and a laugh. "Stay behind," the man said, "when I gave him a blow, slit you belly up on it." Tom Thumb heard it and shouted as loud as he could: "I siddder here in wolf's stomach, little father." - "Thank God," said his father happy, "finally we have our own little child again." Then he gave the wolf such a blow, so it died, and cut carefully its belly up and got the little guy liberated. "How we have been afraid of you," he said. "Yes, I have indeed also been extraordinarily around," said Tom Thumb, "but fortunately, can I now get fresh air again." - "Where have you been all this time?" asked the mother. "Oh, I've been in a mouse hole and in a cow's stomach and now finally the wolf. But now I am with you." - "And we will not for all the gold," said the parents, and embraced and kissed their dear little Tom Thumb. They made sure now that he got something to eat and gave him new clothes for his old ones were destroyed on the journey.
Sleeping Beauty	475	410	Danish	For many, many years ago there lived a king and queen, who said every day: "If we had a child," but they got none. One day, when the queen was bathing, there came a frog creeping up to her and said, "Your wish shall be fulfilled. Within a year, you give birth to a daughter." It went as the frog had said. The queen gave birth to a daughter who was so beautiful that the king was beside himself with joy and decided to celebrate a big party. He invited not only his friends and relatives, but also the wise women, that they should hold their hand over the child. There were thirteen, but as he had only twelve gold plates, had one at home. The feast was celebrated with great pomp, and the Fairies gave the baby cradle gifts. One gave her virtue, another beauty, a third riches, and the other all sorts of other good qualities. When the eleven had given their gifts, entered suddenly the thirteenth into the hall. She wanted revenge because she had not been invited, and without looking right or left, she went straight to the cradle and said: "When the princess was fifteen, she will stab on a spindle and die." Then she turned and walked away. Everyone was terrified, but when the twelfth came forward. Remove the evil fortune she could not, but she said: "The princess shall not die. She falls into a deep sleep, and it will last a hundred years." The king, who wanted to save his child, gave commandment that all the spindles throughout the country should be burned. The girl grew up, and was beautiful and good and wise, as they show the fairies had said, and everyone who saw her was to love her. The day she was fifteen years old, were the king and queen did not happen at home. She went quite alone around the castle and looked around, and eventually came up in an old tower. She walked up the narrow spiral staircase, and as high as she found a small door with a rusty key. She turned it on and got into a small room where there sat an old woman spinning. "Good day, mother," the girl said, "what are you ordering?" - "I am spinning," said the old woman, nodding her head. "It looks funny," said the girl, took the spindle and wanted to spin too. But immediately went prophecy come true and she stuck in fingeren.I same now she sank down on a bed that stood beside her and fell asleep. Sleep fell upon the whole castle. The king and queen who had just come home, and the whole court was asleep instantly. The horses in the stable, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, the flies on the wall, even the fire that was burning on the hearth, was quite quiet and slept. The chef, who had just addressed the chefs boy to give him a slap in the face, slap him, and fell asleep. The wind ceased, and there was not a leaf that touched sig.Rundt the castle began a hawthorn hedge to shoot up, and for every year that went by, the bigger and bigger. Eventually it became so high that you could not see anything of the palace, not even tab weighing from the tower. But out in the country went the legend of the beautiful sleeping Sleeping Beauty by word of mouth. From time to time came the king's sons, trying to penetrate the hedge, but the thorns grabbed them, so they could not get loose again. Many, many years later a prince from a foreign country travelers there, and an old man told him about the enchanted princess who slept behind the thorn hedge with his father and mother and the whole court. The old woman had been told by his grandfather that many had sought to break through the hedge, but had lost their lives thereby. The prince did not do so. "I'm going into the lovely Sleeping Beauty," said han.Denne day was just a hundred years past, and when the prince came to the hedge, there were no thorns, but large fragrant flowers that leaned to one side of him, and then closed behind him. In the courtyard was the horses and dogs and slept, and on the roof sat the pigeons with their heads under the wing. Inside, the flies on the wall and slept, the chef stood with uplifted hand to give the boy a box on the ear, and the girl sat with a black hen to pluck. In the great hall sat the king and queen of the whole court, but all they slept, and there was so quiet that he could hear his own breathing. Eventually he came to the tower, where Sleeping Beauty was sleeping. She was so lovely that he had to bend down and kiss her, and in that moment she opened her eyes. They now took each other's hands and walked down the hall. When woke up the king and queen and the whole court, rubbed his eyes and looked around puzzled about. The horses in the yard neighing, the dogs barked, pigeons stuck his head back and flew off, flies crawling on the wall, the fire flared up again, the roast in the pan began to sizzle, cook gave the boy a box on the ear, so he screamed, and the girl plucked chicken ready . And of the Prince and Sleeping Beauty wedding was celebrated with great splendor, and they lived happily together until their death.
Allerleirauh	620	510B	Danish	There was once a king who had a wife with golden hair, and she was so beautiful that her equal did not exist in the world. Once she became ill, and when she felt that she was dying, she called the King and said, "If you marry again after my death, you must promise me that you choose must be as beautiful as I and having just such golden hair. " When the king had promised her this she closed her eyes and døde.Kongen mourned deeply and did not think of taking another wife. But councilors said: "It is not acceptable, the king must marry again, that we may have a queen." There now messengers were sent far and wide to find a bride who was as beautiful as the late Queen. But there was no one in the world and there was no one who had such golden hair. Messengers therefore had to return empty-handed sag.Kongen had a daughter who was just as beautiful as her dead mother, and had the same golden hair. When she was grown up, so the king suddenly one day how much she looked like her mother, and was immediately in love with her. He said to his councilors, "I will marry my daughter, she is my late wife and I can find no bride who resembles her." Rulers became very frightened and said, "God has forbidden a father to marry his daughter. It is a great sin, and it will certainly overthrow the kingdom of the accident." The daughter was even more horrified when she heard it, but hoped to turn him to abandon his project and said to him: "Before I fulfill your wish, I must have three dresses, one as golden as the sun, a flashing silver as the moon and a beaming like stars. Finally, I have a cloak of a thousand kinds of fur, each animal in your kingdom must give a piece of his skin there. " She thought it was impossible, and believed that her father, however, would probably have second thoughts. But the king had the most skilled maidens in the land weave the three dresses that shone like the sun and moon and stars, and the hunters had to catch all the animals in the entire kingdom and take a piece of skin of each. When it was all finished, the king spread it out before her and said: "Tomorrow wedding shall be." When the king's daughter saw that there was no hope, she decided to escape. At night, when everyone was asleep, she got up, took three of her treasures, a golden ring, one golden spinning-wheel and a reel. The three dresses she put in a nutshell, took the mantle of all kinds of fur, and blackened her face and hands black. So she prayed and walked and walked all night until she came to a large forest. And when she was tired, she sat in a hollow tree and fell søvn.Solen stood up and she slept and slept well into the day. The king, who owned the forest belonged, was hunting in it and when the dogs came to the tree, they ran around it and sniffed. "However, see what kind of wild beast has hidden itself in there," the King said to the huntsmen. They obeyed and they came back and said: "There is a wondrous beast inside the hollow tree and sleep. It is covered with thousand kinds of skins." - "See if you can catch it alive, and tie it on the bandwagon," King said. When the huntsmen laid hold of the maiden, she awoke full of terror and shouted: "I am a poor child, deserted by father or mother. Can I follow you?" - "There may be good use for you in the kitchen, Allerleirauh," they said, "come with us, you can sweep up the ashes." They put her in the carriage, and drove home to the castle. There they pointed out to her a closet under the stairs, where no daylight entered, and said, "Can you stay, small predators." Then she was sent into the kitchen and had to carry water and firewood, make the fires, picking poultry, raked the ashes, and did all the dirty arbejde.Hun were now in a long time a miserable life here, the poor, beautiful princess. Once, when there was celebration at the castle, she asked the chef if she could be allowed to go up and stand outside the door and take a look at all the glory. "Yes, but you must be back in half an hour to sweep the hearth," he said. She took a lamp and went into her little room, put off, washed the soot off her face and hands, so you saw how beautiful she was. And she opened the nut, and took the dress that shone like the sun. Then she went into the hall and everyone made way for her. No one knew her, and thought all along that it had to be a princess. The king came and danced with her, and thought that he had never seen so beautiful a woman. When the dance was over she curtsied, and when the king turned around, she was gone and no one knew where she had gone. Was sent for the guards who stood outside the castle, but they could not give any oplysning.Prinsessen was however, run into her little den, had quickly taken his dress, face and hands and cast mantle, and was again Allerleirauh. When she came into the kitchen and would go and sweep up the ashes, the cook said, "Leave that alone and go and cook the king's soup. I'll have an eye with you. But beware that there does not fall a single hair down therein, because then you have nothing to eat. " Then he went and Allerleirauh made soup as best she could, and when she was finished, she fetched her gold ring and put it in the bowl in the soup was served. When the dance was over, the king had food put up, and he never seemed, he had tasted so lovely a soup. When the tureen was empty, he saw the gold ring on the bottom and could not understand where it had come from. He sent for the chef, who was very frightened and said to Allerleirauh: "You have certainly let a hair in the soup, you need to get your ears warm." He went up to the king who asked who had made the soup. "I have," said the chef. "It's not true," said the king, "it is made quite differently than usual and tastes much better." - "Yes, when I have to be honest, I must confess that Allerleirauh have made it," he replied, and the king commanded that she should hentes.Da Allerleirauh come upstairs king asked who she was. "I am a poor child, deserted by father or mother," she replied. "What do you do here in the castle?" he asked. "I'm good for nothing but to have boots thrown at my head," she replied. "What then is the ring which was in the soup?" - "I do not know," she replied, and the king could not get more out of her and had let her go igen.Nogen afterwards was another festival, and Allerleirauh asked the chef if she could be allowed to go up and look on. "Yes, but come back in half an hour and cook the soup, king love so much," he replied. Allerleirauh run in a hurry down and washed himself and took the dress that shone like moonlight. She looked quite like a princess, and when she came in, the king went her happy in meeting and danced with her. When it was ended, she again disappeared so quickly that he could not see where she went. She slipped in a hurry into his little room and went a little hairy animal up in the kitchen to make soup. While the chef was upstairs, she fetched gold spinning wheel and put it in the tureen as the soup was served. It was then brought to the king and tasted him as good as last time, and he sent for the cook, who had to admit that Allerleirauh had made the. She came back up there, but she answered that she did nothing but to have boots thrown at my head, and that she knew nothing about guldrokken.Da king for the third time celebrated a feast, it went as before. The cook said, "You're a witch, hairy animal, and do something about the soup, so it tastes king better than my food," but when she asked so much about it, she was however allowed to go up at. Then she took her third dress that shone like stars, and entered the hall. The king danced again with her and thought that she never had been so beautiful. While dancing, he, without her noticing it, a gold ring on her finger, and had commanded that the dance should last a very long time. When it was over, he would hold her, but she broke loose and disappeared in the crowd. She hurried into her little chamber, but she had been away so long that she did not have time to put on the dress, but only threw a cloak over him and in her haste she did not quite black, but one finger were white. Then she ran into the kitchen, making soup, and as the cook was away she put guldtenen therein. When the king found it, he Allerleirauh call, and then when the white finger and the ring he had given her. He grabbed her hand and held her fast, and when she would break loose her mantle up a bit, so the star-dress shone forth. The king seized him by the jacket and pulled it off, and she stood there in all its glory and with the golden hair down over her shoulders, and when she had wiped the soot from his face, she was the most beautiful, one could imagine. "You must be my bride," said the king, "nothing in the world can alter that." Then the wedding was celebrated, and they lived long and happily together.
The owl	1663	1281	Danish	Two or three hundred years ago when people were not nearly as clever and cunning as they now day, an extraordinary event took place in a small town. Coincidentally, one of the great owls from the forest, called horned owls, had come into the barn, and when the day dawned, dared not venture out for fear of the other birds, who cries so disastrous appearance when they see the . Since the youth the morning came out to the barn to fetch hay, he was so startled by seeing the owl, who sat in a corner, he rushed in and told his master that out there in the barn sat the ugliest monster he had ever seen. It rolled his eyes and looked as if it was able to get away at one and swallow. "Oh, I know you well," said the man, "you are brave enough to chase a blackbird out on the field, but when you spot a dead rooster, download only a stick before you dare go to the . Let me just even come down and see what kind of a monster. " Then he went quite boldly into the barn and looked around. But when he discovered the terrible beast, he was just as scared as the servant. Long set he jumped out and ran to the neighbors to ask them for help against an unknown and dangerous animals. The whole town might be at risk if it came out of the barn. There was great noise and fuss. Citizens came armed with spears, pitchforks, scythes and axes, as if they were going to war. Eventually even the rulers with the mayor in the lead. When they had stood in the market- place, they marched to the barn, and surrounded it. One of the bravest came near and went with felled spear, but a moment later, he cried with a loud voice and came out, pale as death, without being able to say a word. Two others ventured in there now, but missed them a bit better. Finally came a big, strong man forward. He was famous for his bravery in the war. "We do not hunt the monster away by merely looking at it," he said, "we must take serious hold, but I see well enough that I have been to women all together, and no one dares his coat." He got some armor, swords and spears, and everyone praised him for his courage, though many feared for his life. Barn doors were opened, and they saw the owl sitting on one of the great cross-beams. He posed as a ladder up there and was about to climb it. All cried out to him that he should be of good courage, and asked St. George, who killed the dragon, help him. The owl had become quite upset by all the many people cry, and knew neither in or out, so when he came almost right up the ladder, it began rolling terrible eyes, bristling with feathers, lifted wings, snapped his hoarse voice: "Uhu, uhu." - "Shock now," cried the people to the brave hero. "It would not cry if I stood up here," he said. He ventured another step higher, but then he began to shake all over, and half-fainting, he began to climb down igen.Nu was no one dared go in there. "The monster has only by his wheezing and breath discouraged the strongest man and wounded him mortally," they said, "why should we risk our lives?" They took counsel as to what they should do, lest the whole city should perish. They could only do not invent anything, but finally the mayor said: "I think that the city fund to pay for this barn and everything that is in there, grains and hay and straw, and thus indemnify. So we tuck our fire at all, and the terrible beast burner. however, there is no sense that anyone should lay down his life. this is no time to lose, and it would be ill applied thrift pinch on the money here. " They all thought that he was right. So they set fire to the barn at all four corners, and the owl was miserably burnt. And he who will not believe it, just can even go and ask ad.
The wolf and the seven little goats	41	123	Danish	Once there was an old goat who had seven little ones, and it was as fond of as only a mother can love her children. One day, when it would go into the forest to fetch food, so she called them all seven and said, "Now I'm out in the woods, small children. Can I now take good care that the wolf does not come in here while I'm away, otherwise eat you up, skin and hair. the bad guy disguises himself often, but you can always recognize it by its coarse voice and black feet. " Kiddene promised to take heed, and the old went quiet his vej.Kort later someone who knocked on the door and shouted: "Shut up, dear children, here comes your mother home with something really good for you." But the kids of the goats could hear the rough voice that it was the wolf. "We will not shut up," they cried, "you are not our mother. She has a gentle voice and your voice is so gross. You are the wolf." The wolf went to a shop and bought a large piece of chalk, which was eating, and then his voice soft. The he came back and knocked and shouted: "Shut up, dear children, here is your mother with something good for all of you." But kiddene so the black paws, the wolf had put up in the window, and shouted: "No, we will not shut up. Our mother has no black paws. You are the wolf." The wolf then ran to a baker and said, "I am hurt foot, you will not probably spread some dough on it." The baker did it, and then ran to the miller and asked him to sprinkle white flour then. Miller, who thought that the wolf would fool someone first said no, but when the wolf threatened him that it would eat him, he was afraid and did as asked for. How is menneskene.Nu went the wicked wolf for the third time to the kids of the goats and knocked. "Shut up, little children," it said, "Here is your mother with food for you all seven." - "First show us your paws, so we can see if it's true," shouted kiddene. Wolf put paw up in the window, and when they saw that it was white, was one of them ran and opened the door. And then came the wolf in. They were terrified and tried to hide. One ran under the table, the second got into the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth under the sink, the seventh into the clock case. But the wolf found them and did not many circumstances, but swallowed one after the other. Only the youngest, who was inside the watch, did not find it. When it had finished hunger asked, shuffled it off and lay down to sleep under a tree out on engen.Kort time afterwards the old goat home. The door was wide open, chairs, tables and benches were overturned between each other, shards of the basin lay strewn on the floor and sheets and pillows were torn out of bed. She began to search for her children, but they were nowhere to be found. She called them one after the other, but no one answered. When she came to the last, there was finally a thin little voice that said: "I am sitting here in the clock, little mother." She helped him out, and heard how the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. The poor mother began to cry because she had lost her six small børn.Lidt after she went outside, and the youngest kid with her. When they came to the meadow, they saw the wolf, who was snoring so that the branches shook. She looked at it from all sides and could see that there was something that stirred inside the belly of it. "Good God," she thought, "would my children be alive yet." In a hurry, she got the little kids sent home to pick up a pair of scissors and needle and thread. Then she cut the monster's belly up, and she had hardly begun before one kid stuck his head forward. She clipped on and eventually jumped all six games turn out. They had not taken the slightest damage, the wolf had been so greedy that it had swallowed them whole. How delightful! They hugged their mother and jumped around her, but she said to them: "Go and find some boulders. Those, we saw in the stomach of the bad wolf while it is sleeping." Kids of the goats hurried to haul stones there and put as many as they could fit into the wolf's stomach. Then made the old together in a hurry, and the wolf felt it did not, did not move once the pletten.Da it had finally rested, it rose up, and when it was thirsty would go to a well to get something to drink. But when it began to move, came the stones in the stomach against each other and rattled. The cried out: "Ow, my stomach is clean of make it rumbles and tumlersom was full of stones, and then it's only goat's legs." When it came to the well and stooped over the water-laden stones such that the lost balance and crashed upside down into the water and drowned. The seven kids came running and cried out: "The wolf is dead, the wolf is dead!" Then they took each other by the hand and danced with their mother all about the place.
The wolf and man	683	157	Danish	There once was a fox who told a wolf that man was so strong that no animal could withstand him, but had to use cunning to survive. "If I once took on a human being, however, I would go away at him," said the wolf. Come to me tomorrow morning, "said the fox," I will show you such a guy. "The wolf came quite early and the fox took him out on a road hunter went daily. First came an old discharged soldier. "is it a man?" asked the wolf. "No," answered the fox, "he has been." afterwards came a little boy who was going to school. "is it a man?" asked the wolf. "He gets it first," said the fox. Finally the hunter with a gun on his back and knife beside it. "See, there comes a man," said the fox, "go away at him. I run into my cave. "The wolf then rushed on the man." It is a pity that I no bullets have, "he thought, aimed and fired his small shot in his face. It cut some ugly faces, but let himself be frightened, and went up to the hunter who gave the second barrel. the wolf swallowed his pain, and rushed on the huntsman, but he drew his knife and gave him a few cuts left and right, so that, bleeding he ran howling back to the fox. "Well, brother wolf," it asked, "how did you come out of it with man." - "so strong, I never imagined he was," said the wolf, "first he took a stick from his shoulder and blew into it, so that flew me something in my face which tickled me terribly, and he blew a second time, it was as it thundered and rained. When I came right up to him, he took a white rib out of the body and gave her such cuts on me that I was just being on the spot. "-" There you can see what you are for a braggart, "said fox, "you tighten the arch so high that it bursts."
The wolf and the fox	692	41	Danish	A fox was once moved in with a wolf, but as it was the weakest, had to do all the wolf would have, so it would like to be rid of his master. One day as they walked through the forest, the wolf said, "Give me something to eat, or I will eat you." - "I know where there is a farm with a few little lambs," said the fox, "if you feel like it, we will fetch one of them." The wolf was very pleased with the proposal, and the fox stole the little lamb, took it to the wolf, and went his way. The wolf devoured it, but had not had enough, and went in to get the second. But the bar so awkwardly that sheep discovered it and began to scream and bleat, so the peasants came running and found the wolf. They beat away at it with all his strength and limping, he ran howling back to the fox. "You have misled me a nice snare," he said, "I would pick the second lamb, and so did the peasants hold of me and started beating me, so I'm quite tender." - "Why are you so greedy," said ræven.Næste day they went out again and the wolf said, "Give me something to eat, or I will eat you." - "I know a farm where the wife is baking pancakes tonight," said the fox, "we will get some of them." They went there and the fox slipped round the house and sniffed and looked so long, he discovered where the dish was. Then drew down six pancakes and carried them to the wolf. "There is nothing to eat," it said and walked away. The wolf swallowed them in an instant. "They taste for more," he thought, and went and tore the whole dish down so it went broke. It made a tremendous racket, the wife came running, and when she saw the wolf, she called people who thrashed away at it with all their might and howling dragged it out into the woods to the fox. "Where you have fooled me mean," he cried, "the peasants caught me, and tanned my skin." - "Why are you such a glutton," said ræven.Dagen after they went back together, and the wolf only with difficulty could drag himself away, said the dog, "Give me something to eat, or I will eat you. " - "There's a man over there who just slaughtered," said the fox, "salted meat is located in the basement. Should we get some of it?" - "Yes, let us," said the wolf, "but I go immediately, so you can help me to get away." - "Most willingly," said the fox, and the paths and ways at length they reached the cellar. There were dishes of meat and wolf began immediately in the process of it and thought, "That is plenty of time before I stop." Fox also took care of the dishes, but kept looking around them and often ran to the hole they had come through, to see if it was still thin enough to slip through. "Why render you all the time over there and jump back and forth?" asked the wolf. "I have to see if there will be no," replied the crafty, "Do not eat own." - "Jeggårikke before the barrel is empty," said the wolf. However, came the peasant who had heard the fox jump back and forth. The fox was with a leap out of the hole, the wolf wanted to follow him, but had eaten so thick that it could not get through, but stuck fast, and the farmer took a cudgel and beat it to death. But the fox jumped into the woods and was glad that it had been with the old, greedy guy.
