Snow White	509	709	French	That was in the middle of winter and snow flakes falling from the sky like a light down. A queen sat at her window framed in ebony and sewed. While pulling the needle, she watched the white flakes fly. She pricked her finger, and three drops of blood fell on the snow. The red on the white was so beautiful effect it says: If only I had a child as white as snow, as rosy as blood, as black as the wood of my window! Shortly after, a daughter born to him; it was white as snow, red as blood and her hair was as black as ebony. It was called Snow White. But the queen died giving him birth. After a year the king married another woman. She was very beautiful; but she was proud and vain, and could not bear anyone to surpass in beauty. She had a magic mirror. When she looked at it and said: Mirror, mirror pretty, Who is the fairest of the mirror replied: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful in the country. And she was happy. She knew that the mirror spoke the truth. Snow White, however, grew and became more and more beautiful. When she was seven years old she was already pretty as the day and more beautiful than the queen herself. One day when it asked the mirror: Mirror, mirror pretty, Who is the fairest of He replied: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful here, but Snow White is a thousand times more beautiful. The queen was terrified. She became yellow and green jealousy. From then on, whenever she saw Snow White, her heart turned in her chest as she felt hatred toward him. Jealousy and pride grew in her like weed. She had no peace day and night. She sent a fighter and said: - Take the child in the forest! I want to see her. Kill her and bring me proof of his death his lungs and liver. The huntsman obeyed and took Snow White into the woods. But when he drew his dagger to pierce her innocent heart, she began to cry and said, - 0, dear huntsman, let me live! I will fasten me deep into the forest and never go home. And because she was beautiful, the hunter took pity on her and said: - Save yourself, poor child! The beasts of the forest will quickly devour you! he thought. And yet, he felt relieved not having to kill her. A boar just happening. He killed him with his dagger, took his lungs and liver and brought to the queen as proof of the death of Snow White. The cook was ordered to prepare them and the wicked woman ate them, thinking they belonged to Snow White. The poor girl, she was in the woods, alone. Her fear was so great she looked at all the leaves of the forest without knowing what it would become. She ran over sharp stones and through the thorns. The wild beasts leaping around her, but did her no harm. She ran to night, as long as his legs could carry her. She saw a little house and went inside to rest. In the house, everything was tiny, graceful and clean. It showed a small table covered with a white cloth, with seven small plates and seven spoons, forks and seven small seven small knives, and also seven little cups. Against the wall there were seven little beds next to each other and covered with sheets all white. Snow White was so hungry and so thirsty she took on each plate a few vegetables and bread and drank a drop of wine into each cup, because she would not eat the entire portion of any one of the guests. Tired, she wanted then to bed. But none of the lily not suit him; one was too long, another too short. She tried them all. Seventh, finally, was its size. She lay there, entrusted himself to God and the endormit.Quand was quite dark, the owners of the house arrived. It was seven dwarfs who, in the mountains, working at the mine. They lit their seven candles, and when the light illuminated the room, they saw that someone had been there, for everything was not as they had left. - The first said, Who sat on my little chair? - The second: Who ate my little plate? - Third: Who took my bread? - Fourth: Who ate my vegetables? - Fifth: Who has used my fork? - Sixth: Who cut with my knife? - Seventh: Who drank my cup? The first, turning, saw that her bed had been disturbed. - Who touched my bed? he said. The others came running and everyone cried: - In mine too someone is lying! But the seventh when he looked at his bed saw Snow White asleep. He called the others, who came quickly and cried out surprised. They took their seven candles and lit up the face of Snow White. - Lord God! Lord God! they cried; this child is beautiful! They had so much joy that they will not awakened and let her sleep in the small bed The seventh dwarf slept with his companions, one hour with each, and the night went well. In the morning, Snow White awoke. When she saw the seven dwarfs she was frightened. But they looked at her with friendship and already asking questions: - How is your name? - My name is Snow White, she replied. - How did you come to us? She told them that her stepmother had wanted to kill, but the hunter had left him alive and that she then ran all day until she found this little house. The dwarfs said: - If you want to take care of our household, make room, make the beds, wash, sew and knit, if you want everything in order and cleanliness, you can stay with us and you will lack nothing. - Okay, okay, with all my heart, said Snow White. And she stayed with them. She took care of the house. in the morning the dwarfs went to the mountain where they tore the iron and gold; at night they were returning and it was necessary that their meal was ready. All day, the girl was alone; the little dwarf had good warning: - Beware of your stepmother! She will soon know that you are here; not let anyone in! The queen, however, after eating the lungs and liver of Snow White, imagined that she had become the most beautiful of all. She stood before the mirror and asked: Mirror, mirror pretty, Who is the fairest of the mirror replied: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful here, But, beyond the brass Mountains Beside the kind dwarfs, Snow White is a thousand times more beautiful. The queen was upset; she knew that the mirror could not lie. She realized that the huntsman had deceived her and that Snow White was still alive. She racked her brains to find a new way to kill her because as long as it would not be the most beautiful in the country, she knew that jealousy would leave him no rest. Having finally found a ploy, she painted her face and dressed like an old street vendor. It was unrecognizable. Thus disguised, she crossed the seven mountains behind which lived the Seven Dwarfs. She knocked on the door and said: - I have beautiful, good to sell, sell Snow White looked out the window and said: - Hello, dear Madam, what have you to sell? - From the beautiful, good commodity, she replied, corselets all couleurs.Elle showed him in a braided silk multicolored. "I can well let this honest woman!" Says Snow White. She unlocked the door and bought the pretty bodice. - Child! said the old woman. As you go about taking! Come, I will you adjust it right! Snow White was unsuspecting. She let out the new bodice. But the old and quickly shook so hard that the girl lost breath and fell down as dead. - And now you're done being the most beautiful, said the old woman fleeing. In the evening, soon after, the seven dwarfs came home. What was the fear them when they saw their dear Snow White lying on the ground, motionless and lifeless! They lifted and saw that her corset squeezed her too. They cut the cord. The girl began to breathe gently and gradually she recovered. When the dwarfs heard what had happened, they said: - The old market was no other than the wicked queen. Beware and leaves one come when we will not be there! The wicked woman, she, on her return to the castle, had placed in front of her mirror and asked: Mirror, Mirror pretty, Who is the fairest of Once again, the mirror replied: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful here. But, beyond the brazen mountains seven little men of Beside, Snow White is a thousand times more beautiful. When she heard that, she was so upset that she felt her heart suffocate. She realized that Snow White had recovered life. - Well! she said, I'll think of something that will make you disappear forever! For a sorcery trick she knew, she poisoned comb. She disguised herself again and took on the appearance of another old woman. She and across the seven mountains towards the house of the seven dwarfs, knocked on the door and shouted: - Good goods for sale Snow White looked out the window and said: - Go away! I have the right to open to anyone. - But you can look good, said the old woman showing her the poisoned comb. I'll comb you nicely. Poor Snow White not suspected nothing and let do the old; hardly had he touched comb her hair that the poison is and the girl fell unconscious. - And There you go! said the wicked woman, it is all of you, prodigy of beauty! And she went. Fortunately, the evening came quickly and the seven dwarfs came home. When they saw Snow White extent as dead on the floor, they thought once the stepmother, sought and found the poisoned comb. As soon as they were removed from her hair, Snow White came back to her and she told them what had happened. They asked him once again to be on guard and not to open to anyone. Back home, the Queen had placed before her mirror and asked: Mirror, mirror pretty, Who is the fairest in the land As before, the mirror replied: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful here. But, beyond the brazen mountains seven little men of Beside, Snow White is a thousand times more beautiful. When she heard this, she began to shake with anger. - must Snow White die! if she cried, though I perish myself! She went in a dark, secluded room where nobody ever went there and prepared a poisoned apple. Outwardly, she seemed nice, white and red, so she did want anyone saw her; but it was enough to eat a small piece for mourir.Quand all was ready, she painted her face and disguised himself as a peasant. Thus transformed, she crossed the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs. She knocked on the door. Snow White leaned in the window and said: - I have the right to let anyone here; the seven dwarfs me banned. - Okay! replied the peasant. I get much of my apples elsewhere; but I will offer you. - No, said Snow White, I do not have the right to accept anything. - Are you afraid of being poisoned? asked the old woman. Look, I cut the apple in half; you will eat half is red, I, which is white. The apple was so artfully that only half was poisoned. Snow White looked with envy and the fruit when she saw that the peasant woman was eating, she could not resist any longer. She reached out and took the poisoned part of the apple. Scarcely had she put teeth she fell dead on the floor. The queen looked at her with evil eyes, chuckled and said: - White as snow, red as blood, black as ebony! This time, the dwarves will not wake up! And when she was back home, and asked the mirror: Mirror, mirror pretty, Who is the fairest of It finally answered: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful in the country. And his jealous heart found rest, provided a jealous heart can find it. When, in the evening, the dwarfs came home, they found Snow White lying on the ground, breathless. They lifted, sought if there was something poisonous, undid her bodice, combed her hair, washed with water and wine. But nothing helped: the dear child was dead, and remained dead. They placed her on a stretcher, sat every seven around her and cried for three days. Then they prepared to bury him. But she remained fresh as a living being and pretty cheeks were pink as before. They said: - We can put it in the black earth. They fabricated a transparent glass coffin where one could see all sides, the above is settled and wrote his name in golden letters, adding that she was the daughter of the king. They carried the coffin to the top of the mountain and one of them, ever, stood guard with him. Long Snow White and remained in his coffin still pretty. It happened one day a prince rode through the forest stopped at home dwarfs to spend the night. He saw the coffin on top of the mountain, and the beautiful Snow White. He said to dwarfs: - Leave me the coffin; I will give you what you want. But the dwarves answered: - We do not give for anything in the world. He said: - So give it to me for nothing; because I can no longer live without seeing Snow White; I want to honor and respect him as my beloved. When they heard these words, the good little dwarves were seized with compassion and they gave him the coffin. The prince did take on the shoulders of his servants. As they went along, one of them stumbled over a stump. The tremor slid out of the groove of Snow White the poisoned piece of apple she had eaten. Soon after, she opened her eyes, lifted the coffin lid and stood. She was alive again - Lord, where am I? asked she. - unto me, said the prince, full of joy. He told her what had happened, adding: - I love you more than anything in the world; come with me, you will become my wife. Snow White agreed. She accompanied him and their wedding was celebrated with magnificence and splendor. The wicked queen, stepmother of Snow White, was also invited to the wedding. After donning her finery, she sat before the mirror and asked: Mirror, mirror pretty, Who is the fairest of the mirror replied: Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful here, but the young sovereign's a thousand times more beautiful. The wicked woman uttered a terrible curse and she was so afraid, so afraid that she lost her head.
White Rose and Rose Red	1540	426	French	A widow lived in a nice house with her two daughters she had prenamed White Rose and Rose Red, because they were like the buttons on both wild roses, one white, the other red, which grew in his garden .Blanche Rose and Rose-Red were good children, wise, hardworking and brave; they loved each other with all their heart. When White Rose murmured: "We love each other," Rose Red answered: "Our whole life" and their mother added: "What an aura, she will share it with the other." Together they went to the small wood pick strawberries; the forest animals knew them well. The hare had ball rolling at their feet and munch the carrot that had brought him. Deer clocks in their majestic leaps and birds at the height of the trees, chirping and singing out loud. When they lingered in the forest and the night's surprise, they lay against each other on the fragrant foam, and slept until morning. Their mother was not done worry because she knew they risked rien.Blanche Rose and Rose Red as their home they loved the day long nursed. In the summer season, Rose Red was cleaning and filed every morning before her mother awoke, a bouquet of white roses and red roses. In the winter season, it was White Rose who kept the fire which shone copper pot hanging from the crémaillère.Or, a winter evening - White Rose, will put the lock, says mom .Then they sat by the fireplace, put on his glasses and began a tale. The girls listened spinning. At their feet, a sheep's head between the legs, warming himself, and doves cooed their perch on a little longer before putting his head under aile.Tout Suddenly, someone knocked at the porte.- Go quickly open Rose Red, said the mother; a man, perhaps, wants to abriter.Rose Red drew the bolt, and a big brown bear peeked through the crack of the door. Rose Red distraught, threw himself behind the chair of his mother and White Rose hid behind the bed The sheep was paralyzed with terror, and doves fluttered all côtés.- What are you afraid? I do not want to hurt anyone, I especially so cold ...- Come, my poor bear, said the mother. Come to bed by the fire. White Rose and Red Rose, get out of your hiding places, small peureuses.Les two girls, tranquillisées, approached. The sheep and doves also ...- Dear children, I remove the snow from my fourrure.Avec brush, they smoothed the thick coat of big brown bear, which went before the fire, growling with pleasure. Having lost all fear and timidity, they amused themselves at will with their new friend. It was heavy and clumsy. They pulled his hair, dug their little hands in warm fur like a nest, or, with a rod, teased him. Occasionally, when they went a bit too hard and went a great laugh, he grumbled: - White Rose, Rose Red, do not kill your fiancé.L'heure bedtime rang the old clock; the two children went to bed quietly. The man said to the bear: - Stay here if you want, by the fire. It's too cold dehors.A dawn, he went back into the woods where he had come. The days that followed, occasionally, the bear came home. The girls do not close the door before it was returned to bed before the hearth where he played with them for hours durant.Quand spring green again every plant, every tree, the bear said goodbye to her friends for to live all summer in forêt.- But why? wondered White Rose.- To prevent the wicked dwarfs steal my treasure. In winter, the ground is frozen, the dwarves can not get out of the depths of their caves. In the spring, the sun warms and thaws the ground. They go out, come rob me, they steal, we do not find the jamais.Blanche Rose and Rose Red resigned themselves to their grief. Going into the opening of the door, the bear clutched to catch a piece of his coat. White Rose fancied shine under the skin the radiance of gold, but the bear runs away ... A few weeks later, while the girls were going to pick up the small wood in the forest, they met on a tree shot, a wrinkled dwarf whose long white beard was caught in a slot. He jumped right and left without being able to pull this bad pas.- Why look at me like that? you'd better help me, he threw the fillettes.- What are you doing here? Rose replied Rouge.- Fool that you are! Curious! Cutting wood into small pieces, I stuck my beautiful beard. Here I am well taken! I can not go away! It makes you laugh, wax faces! For shame! As you're ugly! - I run for help, exclaimed Rose-Rouge.- Head Linnet! growled the dwarf. Are you not large enough to pull me away? - Have patience, said Blanche-Rose rummaging through his poches.Elle exhibited a pair of scissors and began to cut down the barbe.A barely released, the dwarf took the bag hidden between the roots of the tree and grumbled: - That they are stupid! Having cut my beautiful beard! He threw the bag on his shoulders and walked away without another word remerciement.A Some time later, the two girls wanted to catch fish. They were moving near the stream, when, on the shore, they saw, leaping in all directions, a kind of big grasshopper. Approaching, they recognized the dwarf. Rose Red astonished questioned: - Do you want to jump in the creek - Fool, I'm not so stupid?. But see this misfortune fish ... The dwarf fishing took his beard in the line; a huge fish took the bait would cause small creature that lacked sufficient strength to get by. He clung to all the stems at all strands of wicker, but he could not fight. Beard and wire were so intermingled that the only solution was to cut a little more beautiful white beard. Freed, the dwarf cried: - My poor girls, you're still as stupid and ugly; I'm in a beautiful state! Then, picking up a bag of pearls hidden in the reeds, he disappeared behind a pierre.Quelques days passed. Mom had need of thread, needles, laces and ribbons; she sent her daughters to the city to the haberdasher. The way they were going to take a clearing strewn with rocks. As they reached the girls saw in the sky a large bird circling slowly in a long glide. Suddenly he fell on the ground. They heard a cry of douleur.S'étant approached, they recognized with dread their old encounter the dwarf, an eagle had entered in its talons and would win. Courageously, the two children seized a stick and rushed to her rescue. They fought so many to snatch the little man with the claws of the bird at the end, they vainquirent.Tout just recovered from his fear, the dwarf screamed: - You ripped my beautiful dress. You are always so stupid and clumsy, and just as ugly, good just to go to the devil while Charging on his back a gemstone bag that was behind a large rock, he slipped an open fissure in the ground. the girls, accustomed to this ingratitude, do not yearned beyond measure, and continued on their way until the city.The evening, returning, they took the same path that morning; they surprised the dwarf in contemplation before the precious stones he had emptied his bag bursting with thousands of lights by the light of sunset. Amazed, they stopped: -You know gaping, really! threw the dwarf red. ! Get out of here And as he shouted his anger a large brown bear came out heavily dwarf buissons.Le, mad with terror, made a jump back screaming: - Mr. Bear, let me life ; I give you all these gems. I was small, so puny. See those two girls, fat like geese. They will better your affaire.D'un single swipe without further ado, the suppressed bear the wicked dwarf forever. The two sisters were terrified escape when the bear whispered - White Rose, Rose Red, I'm your ami.Au sound of that known and loved voice, the girls turned. What a strange sight! The skin of the bear and slowly fell on the coat that was a carpet, stood a handsome man all of gold-vêtu. I am the son of the king, he explained. This dwarf cursed me cast a spell flying my treasures. I was condemned to run the forest as a savage bear until her death would deliver me. He received the punishment he deserved ... White Rose married Prince and Rose Red, the brother of the prince. They shared the immense treasure the dwarf had amassed and so lived in opulence. Their mom became old, was invited to come alive in his children and grandchildren. We transplanted into the palace garden Royal two roses that had seen the girls grow up and they gave the most beautiful roses every year.
Straw, coal, and bean	175	295	French	In a small village there lived a poor old woman, who had picked up a dish of beans and wanted to cook them. She drew her fire in the fireplace and lit it with a handful of straw to make it burn faster. When she was pouring the beans into the pot, there was one who escaped him by mistake and came just fall on the floor next to a straw; the next moment, it was a piece of glowing coal jumped out of the fireplace and landed next to the other. The last straw opened the conversation: "Dear friends, where do you get like this?" - "The chance allowed me to jump out of the fire," said the embers without the strength of this momentum, "it was death to me certain: I would now reduced to ashes." - "I dodged too," answered the bean in turn, "because if the old woman had thrown me into the pot, irremissibly it was all me and I was done with the other." - "Do you think perhaps that I would have had a milder fate?" said the end of the straw. "All my brothers, the old passaged into fire and smoke: sixty of a sudden, she had taken, which it has taken the life of me, fortunately I spun his fingers!". - "And now what do we do?" asked the coals. "I think," said Bean, "because we have all three sites miraculously escaped death, we should unite in good comrades and from all of here to win another country, in order to prevent some new misfortune . "The proposal pleased the other two, and together they went on the way. They soon came to a rivulet that had not the slightest bridge nor a walkway there, and they did not know how to pass on the other side. The straw then had a good idea and said, "I'm going to bed across, and you can spend on me as on a bridge." The straw, therefore, is suspended between one bank and another, and on this improvised bridge embers, burning with natural, advanced boldly, but in small steps not to overthrow the fragile edifice. Arriving in the middle, however, hearing the noise made by the stream beneath it, fear took it and she stopped, not daring to venture further; as the tip of straw he began to catch fire, rupturing net in the middle and falling into the water, resulting in its destruction embers, which hissed by touching the water and went immediately to mind. Beans, remained cautious on the bank, set such a crazy laugh at this story, and in twisted so uncontrollably, that finally burst. This would have been the end of him similarly, if happily tailor a companion who was his turn to Germany had stopped at the edge of the creek to rest. For he had a good heart and soul helping the tailor took the needle and thread and immediately began to sew it. The bean him warm thanks and chosen as one would imagine; but as he had used black thread, that is why, since that time, all beans have a black seam.
What the Father does is well done	2530	1415	French	This story I heard in my childhood. Every time I think, I find it more interesting. It is stories like many people: with age, they attract more and more attention. You probably already have in the country, and have seen old houses paysans.Sur of the thatched roof, there are weeds, moss and a stork's nest. These are especially storks that should not be missed. The leaning walls, windows are low and one can open. The furnace resembles a round stomach, the branches of an elder fall on a hedge, and the elder is a pond where ducks swim. There are still there a dog tied up, barking at everyone, without distinction.Dans one of these peasant houses lived two old people, a farmer and his wife. They had almost nothing, and yet they were having something too, a horse, they graze left in the ditch near the highway. The peasant rode to go to the city, and occasionally lent it to neighbors who, in turn, made him some services. But old thought it would be better for them to sell the horse or exchange it against a more useful purpose. But against what? - Do for the better, old man, said the woman. There is a fair in the city. Go ahead and sell the horse or make a trade; what you do will be well above fait.Là, she gave him a beautiful knot in handkerchief around his neck, much better than himself would have been able to do. Then she straightened her hat with hand to dust hanged about it less and kissed him. He was off on his horse to sell or échanger.- Yes, the old hears it murmured the old mère.Le sun shone in a cloudless sky. There was a lot of dust on the road, because he spent a lot of people going to the market by car, on horseback or on foot. No shade on the way. Among those who walked on foot, there was a man who was pushing before him a cow. The old thought: - It must give good milk! Horse against cow, it would be a good exchange. Look, the man with the cow. I want to offer you something. A horse is harder than a cow, is not it? But that does not bother me, because a cow would be more useful to me. Do you want us troquions - With pleasure, said the man with the vache.Et they made the exchange. When this was done, the farmer could have come back, since he had got what he wanted. But as he left to go to the market, he wanted to get there, even if only to take a look. So he pushed the cow before him. He walked very fast. Shortly after he saw a man holding a sheep by a rope. It was a good sheep gras.- It would roughly my case, thought our man. We would have enough food to him on the edge of the moat, and in winter we could keep our room. Basically, a sheep would be better for us than a cow. Do you want to barter with me? he asked, il.- Perfectly said the autre.On bartered and therefore our peasant continued his road with his sheep. Suddenly he saw a little path, a man carrying a large goose under the Devil bras.-! here is a famous goose! Cried he. She has a lot of feathers and fat is good. It would do the trick mother! She could give him our leftovers, as she often says, "Well if we had a goose to eat this!" Do you want to change your goose for my sheep Another asked nothing better?. Our farmer then took his oie.Il was so close to the city. There was a crowd on the highway. The fairground was full of people and animals; is pressed so that people passed through the potato fields côté.Il there was a hen tied by the legs. He missed being crushed at any moment. It was a beautiful pool, with very short tail feathers. She blinked and did: Glouk! glouk! I can not tell you what she meant by that, but the peasant cried - I have never seen so beautiful hen. She is even more beautiful than the hen pharmacist! I would be happy to have him. A hen still in feed without being looked after her. It would be a good échange.- Want to change your hen for my goose? asked he to the grant recipient, who owned the poule.- What! said the other. The farmer took the goose, and the recipient took the goose. Our man had used his time well. He was hot and felt tired. A glass of water spirits and some bread were well due. Precisely it was before an inn. It entra.Mais at the same time came a boy carrying a bag full on dos.- What have you there? asked our paysan.- Some bad apples, 'said the other; a whole bag for a cochons.- all full of apples bag? What wealth! That's what I'd like to bring my wife. Last year we had an apple on our old apple tree; we left on our dresser until it rots. "This proves that we are at ease," said the mother. But this time, I could show him something mieux.- Let me give you? Donne says garçon.- said the farmer. I change my chicken for your sac.L'échange fact, they entered the inn. Here our man put his bag near the furnace was burning. The hostess took are not garde.Dans the room there were many people: horse dealers, cattle dealers, a lot of country people, some workers who were playing them in a corner and finally to an end of the table, two English half tourists, half merchants, who came to the city to see if some occasion would not run to find a bargain. Having encountered nothing, they were sitting and watching with indifference the rest of the room. We know that the English are almost always so rich that their pockets are crammed with gold. Also they like to bet about anything, just to create a fleeting emotion that changes a moment of their continuelle.Or coldness, here's what happened: - PSIII, PSIII! They heard near the four.- What? asked ils.Le-farmer told them the story of the horse exchanged against a cow and so on to pommes.- You will be beaten when you get back, 'said the Englishman. You can attendre.- Beaten you there? No no! I have a kiss and we will say, "What the father does is always well done." - We parierions well a golden bushel you're wrong; hundred pounds, if you veux.- A bushel is enough, said the peasant. But I can not bet a bushel of apples, and I will fill it up bord.- Come Topons one! hundred pounds against a bushel of pommes.Et the bet was fait.La sleigh innkeeper was commissioned, and all three went up the bag of apples. Here they arrivés.- Good evening, mother - God keep you, buddy - The exchange is fait.- Ah! you hear you there, said the peasant while her husband embrassait.- Yes, I swapped our horse against a vache.- God be praised! said the mother. I can now make dairy products, butter, cheese. Excellent exchange - Yes, but then I swapped the cow against a brebis.- It's even better. We have just enough food for sheep. We have milk, cheese, wool stockings and vests. A cow does not give wool. As you think of any - I then swapped the sheep against a oie.- Is this true? Then we can eat roast goose at Christmas! You think of anything that can make me happy, my old. It's good for you. We can attach our goose out with a string so that it has time to engraisser.- Yes, but I swapped my goose against a poule.- A hen! Oh! The good business. It will give us eggs. We will fester and we will have chicks. I always dreamed of avoir.- Yes, but I exchanged the hen against a bag of apples pourries.- This time I have to kiss you, says the peasant delighted. I thank you, my dear man. And I must tell you something right away. After you've been out this morning, I wondered what I could do you good to get back. ham eggs naturally. I had eggs but it was necessary as civet. So I would go to the schoolmaster in front. I knew he had. But his wife is very rich, without seeming to. I asked him to lend me some civet. "Pay, she said. There is nothing in our garden, not even a rotten apple!" Now it is I who could lend him, and a whole bag, even. You think if I'm happy, my little father - Congratulations! English said the two at a time. The slump has not removed his gaiety him. This is well worth the argent.Ils counted the peasant gold on table.C'est proving that the woman should always find that her husband is the wisest of all men, and that he does is parfait.Voilà always my story. I heard in my childhood. You know your turn. I say always that: WHAT MAKES FATHER IS WELL DONE.
Cinderella or The Little Glass Slipper	1994	510A	French	There was once a gentleman who married a second woman, the most haughty and most proud that we had ever seen. She had two daughters of her mood, and who resembled him in all things. The husband had on his side a young girl, but a sweetness and kindness unexampled she took from her mother, who was the best person wedding world.The were not made earlier, that the beautiful -mother gave vent his bad temper; she could not bear the good qualities of this young child, which made her daughters more hateful. She charged more vile occupation of the house: it was she who cleaned the dishes and mounted, which rubbed the lady's room, and those of her daughters Misses; she slept at the very top of the house, years attic, on a bad mattress, while his sisters were in rooms with parquet floor, where they had the most fashionable beds and mirrors where they were seen from the feet up 'in the head. The poor girl bore all patiently, and dared not complain to his father, who would have scolded her, because his wife had governed the entièrement.Lorsqu'elle her work, she was going to the corner of the fireplace, and sit in ashes, making it commonly called the Cucendron home; the youngest, who was not so dishonest as its predecessor, called Cinderella; However, Cinderella, with her clothes wicked, did not fail to be a hundred times more beautiful than her sisters, though dressed very magnifiquement.Il happened that the king's son gave a ball, and he prayed all quality people: our two young ladies were also invited in, because they were great figure in the country. Here they are well pleased and well occupied to choose the clothes and hairstyles that siéraient them best; eine new Cinderella, for it was she who ironed the clothes of her sisters and their godronnait headlines. We only talked about how we habillerait.- I, said the elder, I will put my red velvet suit and my topping of England-I, said the youngest, I'll have my usual skirt ; but in return, I will put my coat with gold flowers and my diamond barrier, which is not more indifférentes.On sent for good hairdresser, to draw the cornets in two rows, and we did buy flies good maker: they called Cinderella to ask her opinion because she had good taste. Cinderella advised the best in the world, and even offered to the hair; they wanted bien.En the styling, they said to him - Cinderella, would you be glad to go to the ball - Alas, ladies, you're kidding me, this is not it? faut.- me You're right, we would laugh if they saw a Cucendron go bal.Une another Cinderella would have capped through; but it was good, and she donned them perfectly. They were almost two days without eating, they were so elated. We broke more than a dozen laces tighten force to make their more slender waist, and they were still at their miroir.Enfin the happy day arrived, we departed, and Cinderella followed them as long as she could Eye ; when she saw more she began to cry. Her godmother, who saw her all in tears, asked her what she avait.- I wish ... I would like ... She was crying so hard she could not finish. Her godmother, who was a fairy, said: - You would like to go to the ball, is not it - Alas yes, says Cinderella soupirant.- Well! will you be a good girl? said his godmother; I will make you there aller.Elle led her into his room and said: - V in the garden and bring me a citrouille.Cendrillon immediately went to pick the best she could find and brought it to her godmother , unable to guess how this pumpkin could go to the ball. His godmother dug, and having left the bark, struck his wand, and the pumpkin was instantly turned into a fine coach doré.Ensuite while she went to look in his mousetrap, where she found six mice all alive ; she told Cinderella to lift slightly the hatch of the trap, and each mouse that came out, it gave him a shot of his wand, and the mouse was immediately turned into a fine horse; which made a great team of six horses, a beautiful gray mouse pommelé.Comme she was hardly what she would do a check - I'll see, Cinderella said, if there is any point in rats dobby, we will make a cocher.- You're right, said her godmother, will voir.Cendrillon brought him the dobby, where there were three large rats. The fairy took one of the three, because of his beard mistress, and Hit, he was turned into a fat coachman, who had one of the best mustaches that ever vues.Ensuite she said - Go into the garden, you will find six lizards behind the watering can, bring the moi.Elle-do had no sooner made the godmother changed them into six footmen, who went up immediately behind the coach with their richly colored clothes and held there attached, as if they had not done anything else all their lives. The fairy then said to Cinderella: - Well! that's what going to the ball, do not you glad? - Yes, but is it as I go with my clothes naughty Her godmother made only touched her with her wand, and at the same time her? clothes were changed into gold cloth coats and silver decked out with jewels; Then she gave her a pair of glass slippers, the prettiest in the world. When she was well dressed, she climbed into the carriage; but her godmother recommended him all things not to spend midnight, warning her that if she remained at the ball a moment more, her coach would again become pumpkin, her horses mice, lizards its lackeys, and his old clothes resume their first form. She promised her godmother she would not fail to leave the ball before midnight. She goes, do not feeling joy. The king's son, who went to warn it just happened that a great princess did not know, ran out to receive; he gave her hand alighted from the coach, and led her into the room where was the company. He then made a great silence; we stopped dancing, and the violins played no more, as we were careful to contemplate the great beauties of this unknown. Could not hear a confused noise: - Ha, she's beautiful even the king, old as he was, did not fail to watch and whisper to the queen that there was long since he had seen so beautiful and kind person. All the ladies were careful to consider her hairstyle and clothes to be from the same tomorrow, provided he might be quite beautiful fabrics, and pretty habiles.Le king's son the workers put in place the most Honorable, and then took her out dancing. She danced so gracefully, we admired even more. They brought a very good snack, the young prince ate no, as he was busy considering it. She sat down with her sisters and made them happy holidays thousand; she imparted their oranges and lemons that the Prince had given him; which surprised the strong, for they knew and talked point.Lorsqu'elles, Cinderella heard strike eleven three quarters: she immediately made a deep bow to the company, and went as fast as she could. When she arrived, she went to her godmother, and after having thanked her, she said she would go much the next day at the ball, because the son of the king had requested. As she was busy telling her godmother all that had happened at the ball, the sisters ran into the door; Cinderella went their ouvrir.- Whether you're a long time to come back! they said she, yawning, rubbing eyes, and extending as if she had done that to wake up; She had however not been sleepy since they were quittées.- If you had come to the ball, said one of her sisters, do you there would not be bored: there came the most beautiful Princess, the best we can ever see; She made us a thousand civilities, she gave us oranges and citrons.Cendrillon did not feel joy: she asked them the name of the princess; but they replied they did not know, that the son of the king was greatly troubled, and he would give everything in the world to know who she was. Cinderella smiled and said: - It was so much beautiful? My God, what ou are happy, could I not see it? Alas! Javotte miss, lend me your yellow dress that you put all jours.- really miss Javotte said, I agree with that! Lend your coat with a naughty Cucendron like this, I must be well folle.Cendrillon fully expected this refusal, and she was glad, because it would have been greatly embarrassed if her sister had kindly lent him his coat .The next day the two sisters were at the ball, and Cinderella, too, but more adorned than the first time. The King's son was always with her, and continued to tell him sweets; the young lady did spot bored and forgot what her godmother had recommended; so she heard the sound first stroke of midnight, when she did not believe he was still eleven o'clock: she got up and ran away as lightly as a deer would have. The Prince followed, but could not catch him; she dropped one of her glass slippers, which the Prince picked oigneusement well. Cinderella arrived home well out of breath, without coach, without lackeys, and with his clothes wicked, nothing is left to him all its magnificence one of the little slippers, the favor of the one she had dropped. They asked the guards to the door of the palace they had not seen a princess go out; They said they had seen out person, a strong young girl dressed badly, and looked more like a peasant than a demoiselle.Quand two sisters returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them if they were still entertained, and if the fine lady had been there; they told him yes, but she had run away when midnight had struck, and so quickly she dropped one of her little glass slippers, the prettiest in the world; the son of the king had gathered, and he had that look for the rest of the ball, and certainly he was deeply in love with the beautiful person who owned the small pantoufle.Elles said true because a few days later, the king's son was published by sound of trumpet that he would marry her whose foot would be just the slipper. They began to try the princesses, then the duchesses and all the Court, but in vain. It was brought to the two sisters, who did their best to get their foot in the slipper, but they could not deal with them. Cinderella watched them, and who recognized her slipper, said laughing: - Let me see if it does me no good would his sisters laughed and making fun of it!. The gentleman who was testing the slipper looked earnestly at Cinderella, and very beautiful located, said it was fair, and that he had orders to try to all the girls. He seated Cinderella slipper and approaching her little foot, he saw that she entered it without difficulty, and that she was just like wax. The astonishment of the two sisters was great, but greater still when Cinderella drew from his pocket the other little slipper she put her foot. Thereupon came the godmother, who had kicked his wand over Cinderella's clothes, had become even more agnifiques all autres.Alors two sisters recognized her for the beautiful person they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at his feet to beg pardon for all the bad treatment they had made her suffer. Cinderella rose and said to them, kissing them, she forgave them with all my heart, and begged them to love her always. We took her to the young prince, dressed as she was, he found it more beautiful than ever, and few days later, he married her. . Cinderella, which was as good as beautiful, made house his two sisters to the palace, and married that very day to two great lords of the court * MoralitéLa beauty for sex is a rare treasure; From the ever admire one never tires; But what we call good grâceEst priceless and better encor. It is this that Cinderella was having her godmother, in the drawing up, by instructing, so much so that she was a queen. (For so this tale we will moralizing.) Beautiful, this gift is better than being well-coiffed; To engage a heart, to overcome, Good grace is the true gift of the fairies; Without it we can do nothing with it can be everything. * Other moralitéC'est probably a big advantage To have the spirit, courage, From birth, good sense, and similar talents, we receive from heaven share; But you will have the beautiful, for your advancement that will vain things, If you have to enforce them, or godfathers or godmothers.
Cat and mouse in partnership	18	15	French	The cat made the acquaintance of a mouse. He assured so that his feelings for her were friendly and warm that the mouse was persuaded and finally agreed to live with the cat under one roof. "We will make our food reserves for the winter," said the Cat, "or we risk starving. You, my little mouse, you can not go anywhere, you could get caught in a trap. " It was a good idea. They then bought a little lard pot but did not know where to hide. They thought long and ultimately decided the cat?!. "Do you know what we'll do We hide in the church, we can not imagine better hiding Nobody would take something of a church We will ask the pot under the altar and we do will begin only if absolutely necessary. " So they carried the pot in a safe place, but soon the cat felt like lard. He said to the mouse, "I wanted to tell you, my little mouse, my cousin asked me to be godfather to their youngest They had a small, white with brown spots and I have to hold it for him. baptism. Let me go, and take care of the house alone now, will you? " - "Sure, no problem," nodded the mouse, "come on, if you want, and think of me when you eat of the good things I wish I, too, enjoy this good sweet wine that. it gives young moms. " But it was all false; the cat had no cousin and no one had asked him to be godfather. He hastened to the church, crawled to the little pot of lard and licked up eating all the fat from the top. Then he started walking on the roofs to see what was going on in the world, and above all to find something good to eat. Then he lay down in the sun. And every time he remembered the little lard pot, he licked his lips and stroked his mustache. He came home in the evening. "You are finally back!" greeted the little mouse. "Have you had fun? You laugh dù." - "Yes, it was not bad," said the Cat. "What name did you give this kitten?" asked the mouse. "Sanledessu," dryly replied the cat. "Sanledessu?" cried the mouse, "what a funny name! Quite rare, I would say. Is it common in your family?" - "You can say what you want," retorted the cat, "but it's not worse than Volemiettes, the name of your referrals." Shortly after, the cat again felt water coming to the mouth. "Be nice," he pleaded, "takes up again the house alone, 'Do this for me, little mouse;. We still asked me to be godfather The kitten has a white collar. neck I can not refuse. " The mouse nice agreed. And the cat slipped through the city wall, crept into the church and emptied half the lard pot. "Nothing doing," he said, "it's much better when you eat alone." And he congratulated his feat. When he arrived home, the little mouse asked: "How did you name the baby?" - "Miparti," said the Cat. "Miparti? No way! I have never heard such a name. I bet he's not even in the calendar." The cat soon began to feel again the mouth water thinking of the lard pot. "Never two without three," he said to the mouse. "I am asked again to be godfather. The child is black, only the legs are white, they set apart, he has not a single white hair. A child like that is born only once by century! You will let me go, is not it? " - "Sanledessu Miparti!" answered the mouse, "they are such strange names. This has never seen. They trot in my head all the time." - "That's because you stay here all the time, with your ugly dark gray dress with long braid, you spend all your days locked up here, no wonder all blurs into your head, says the cat what happens. when one spends his life in his slippers. " The cat's away, the little mouse was cleaning throughout the house. During that time, the greedy cat entirely emptied the pot of lard. "Here," thought he, "now that I have eaten everything, I will not be tempted." If sated he was out of breath when walking, he came home that night, but serene. The little mouse immediately asked the name of the third kitten. "I'm sure you will not like," said the Cat. "His name Toufini." - "Toufini" cried the mouse. "It seems suspicious, that name does nothing worthwhile. I've never seen printed somewhere. Toufini! What does that mean, actually?" She nodded, curled and endormit.Depuis date, no one invited the cat to a baptism. Winter came, and outside, there was nothing to eat. The little mouse remembered they had something in reserve. "Come, my cat will get our pot of lard that we have hidden for hard times. It will taste good." - "Do you régaleras, thou régaleras," muttered the cat, "it will be as if you were dating your little thin tongue out the window." So they went and when they arrived in the church, the pot was still in place but empty. "That's it," said the mouse, "I understand everything, I see clearly now Talk about a friend You ate everything when you were going to the godfather.! Sanledessu to first, then Miparti and Finally ... "-" Shut up, "cut the cat," one word and I eat you "But the little mouse had the" Toufini "on the tongue, and hardly had she uttered the cat it! jumped over, caught and devoured. Yes, so goes the world.
tale Riddle	1530	407	French	Three women were changed into flowers and so shone in the countryside. However the charm allowed that one of them should return each night in his home. There was a time she was undergoing this metamorphosis, when she said to her husband: "Aurora is gone forth, and I have to leave you again to join my companions and become like them flower of the field; but if you arrive before noon today, and carry me harvests, enchantment cease, and I will leave anymore. " You now ask me how her husband will be able to recognize it, because all the flowers were the same I will answer: Her husband knew it, because she had spent the night at home and not in the fields, and thus the dew that fell on the other, was not found on it.
From a raven and a fox	8307	57	French	He arrived, and may well be, What in front a window Who was a reserve, Vola a crow. He saw The cheeses that were there and they lay on a rack. He took one and went. A fox came. The met. Cheese, he had a great desire to eat his part in leisure. By trickery, he wanted to try the Raven If he can deceive. "Oh Lord, said the fox, as this bird is nice! The world is no bird What my eyes saw so beautiful! If her singing is like her body is more precious than gold!" the raven means praised, say it is not equaled. He thinks he will sing. To sing, his property will lose. its beak opened and began. the cheese escaped him. on land, the dropped and the fox was able to catch it. Then did not care more singing because cheese was his talent. Morality This is the example of the proud who are eager for great prices. by deception and lie, can at will the serve. Their property foolishly spending by false praise people.
Mother Hulda (Frau Holle)	230	480	French	A widow had two daughters, a beautiful and courageous, the other ugly and lazy. It was the second she gave preference, because that ugly girl and lazy was his own daughter and the other had all the work to do in the house she was Cinderella. She had to go every day on the highway to sit by the well and spin, spin so much that her fingers bled. So one day, her distaff was all sticky and stained with blood, the unfortunate bent over the sink to wash but the distaff fell from his hands and fell at the well. Weeping she ran to tell his misfortune to the stepmother, who shouted at him. She was ruthless enough to say: "Since you have dropped the distaff, you have only yourself to go get it!" Poor back at the well, was tortured, wondering how and finally, in his panic, jumped herself into the well to bring the distaff. In falling she fainted; and when she woke up and regained her senses, she was in a beautiful meadow, under the bright sun, and there were around it thousands and thousands of flowers. She walked into this meadow and came to a bread oven that baked the batch, and now breads, interior began to call: "Deliver me out me out If I burn, I already cooked and more than cooked! " She went there, seized the long shovel oven and went out one by one all the breads to the last. Then she continued on and came to a tree laden with apples in huge quantities, and again it was called: "!!! Shake me Shake me, we apples, we are all mature" So she shook the tree and the apples fell like rain, and she shook until there remained more on a tree, then put them carefully in a heap before returning in road. Finally she came to a little house where an old looked out the window, but she had such long teeth, that old the girl in her fear, wanted to flee for his life. "Why are you frightened you my dear?" said the old woman. "Stay with me, and if you do your work well if you hold me the house in order, everything did not go well with you. Above all, you must take care to make my bed and carefully shake the quilt to make flying feathers, because then it snows on the world. I am Mother Hulda. " The tone friendly and good words of the old comforted his heart and gave him courage: she accepted his offer and entered his service, performing his duties to the satisfaction of Lady Winter, beating and shaking her quilt up feathers to fly from all sides, light and dance as snowflakes. In return, she had a good life with her, never a bad word and every day boiled and roasted. But when she had remained a long time with Mother Hulda, she became sad gradually, without knowing why when it began or what it weighed so heavy on the heart; Finally she realized that she homesick. She knew, though, it was a thousand times better treated here than at home, but she languished as many see his house. "I miss my home," she finally said to Lady Winter, "and although I am much better here, I would go up there and find my own. I feel that I could not stay longer . " - "I like for you to want to go inside your house," said Lady Winter, "and since you have served me so faithfully, I will bring you back myself up there." She took her by the hand and led her to a large gate, a monumental door whose doors were open; when the girl was about to pass, a golden rain fell on it, dense and thick, and all the gold that remained fell on it, covering it and covering it completely. "That's what I give to you for being so diligent and thorough in your work," said Lady Winter, in increasingly tending him, his distaff which had fallen into the well. The largest holder is then closed and the girl found herself on the world, not far from his mother. And when she entered the yard the rooster perched on the well, sang: "Cocorico Cocorico The golden girl is here again!". Then she came to her mother, and there, because it was covered with so much gold, it received good reception both his mother than his half-sœur.La girl told them all that he was happened, and when the mother heard how she had come to this immense wealth, his only idea was to give his daughter, the ugly and lazy, even happiness. It was so like her to go her sister, sit next to the well to spin; and that for the stopper rod was tacky blood, it had to prick the finger and scratch the hand in the spines; Then she threw her spinning into the well and jumped herself as did her sister. It happened the same thing to her: she found herself in the same meadow and borrowed the same path, arrived at the same oven, where it similarly bread heard shouting, "Get me out I Otherwise I! 'm burning, I'm already cooked more than cooked! " But the lazy merely replied: "More often, like I'll get dirty!" And she went on. When she arrived a little later near the apple tree, he called and shouted: "Shake me, shake me, we apples are all ripe us!" But the ugly did not even turn around and replied: "Famous idea, yes To me it falls on a head." And she went her way. When she arrived in front of the home of Lady Holle, as she had heard of his long teeth she had no fear, and immediately began to serve. The first day everything went well, she zeal, obeyed with alacrity and vivacity, as she thought of all the gold that it would soon be her; but the second day already, she began to laze and hanging out, and many more on the third day, as it does not even want to get up that morning. It was not the Winter Lady of bed as she had to, neglected to shake the comforter and flying feathers. Lady Winter soon began to tire of such negligence and gave him leave. The lazy girl showed himself delighted, thinking that was the time of the golden rain; but if Mother Hulda led itself as the largest holder, instead of gold, it was a big pitch ton which fell on him. "This is the reward you have earned your service!" said Lady Winter, who immediately closed the main door. The lazy went home, but indoor pitch of the feet to the head; and the cock on the well, when he saw her, sang: "!. Cocorico Cocorico The dirty girl is here again" The pitch that covered so stuck to it that all her life she never could remove.
Meline lady, Princess	1877	870	French	There was once a king. He had a son who had asked the hand of the daughter of a powerful king. Her name was Meline and was very beautiful. But his father had refused the request of the prince, because he had already decided to give his daughter to another prince. But the two young people loved each other with a tender love. "I want him," said Meline, "and I will marry no other." The father got angry and built a tower in which not a single ray of sunlight or the moonlight should enter. And he said: - You will be locked in this tower for seven years; Then I will come to see if your stubbornness and your stubbornness were brisés.On brought the tower to eat and drink for seven years and then she and her maid were taken there and walled. Cut off from the earth and sky, they had to stay there in total darkness. The prince often came near the tower and called Meline by name, but the thick wall would not let her go voix.Et time passed and with the amount of food and water was left, then she and her maid guessed that the seven years were coming to an end. They thought that their release was already close, but no noise from the outside they succeeded. They did not hear the hammer, not the smallest stone of the wall fell. They no longer had very little food and a terrible death awaited them. Meline said: - There is no other way: we must try to unravel the mur.Elle took the bread knife and began to scrape at the mortar to try to clear a stone; when she was tired, her maid replaced it. They worked so long, until they succeeded in getting out one stone, then a second, then a third, and after three days they could receive the first ray of sunshine. Finally, the gap was large enough that they can see out. The sky was a beautiful blue and a cool breeze greeted them. But what a sight presented itself to their eyes! The palace itself there were only ruins, the town and the villages around it were burned and fields lay fallow. And we did not see a soul! When were enlarged the gap in the wall, enough to slip through, they jumped out. But now what? The enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom, and massacred the entire population. They started walking at random, to find another country. But they found neither a roof to take refuge or a single person to hold out a piece of bread. Everything was so bad they finally pluck nettles to feed. After a long walk, they arrived in another kingdom. They offered their services everywhere but where they struck, no one wanted and no pity on them. Finally, they arrived in a large city and went to the royal palace. But here too they made chase. One day, all the same, a cook had compassion for them and allowed them to stay to help the cuisine.Il happened that the son of the King of this kingdom was precisely the prince who once asked the hand of Meline. His father chose him an ugly bride and hard of heart. The wedding was fixed, the bride was already there, but because of her ugliness she had never shown. She had locked herself in her room and Meline bore him to eat directly from the kitchen.The wedding day came and the bride was to accompany her future husband at church. Aware of its ugliness, she was ashamed to appear in public she said to Meline: - It's your lucky day! I twisted my foot and I can not walk well; you shall put my dress and you remplaceras me when mariage.Mais Meline refused - I will not be honored by what is not due me good droit.La married even offered him gold, but there is nothing to made there. Seeing that the girl did not give in, she began to threaten: - If you do not obey me, you will pay for your vie.Méline was forced to obey. She had to wear their beautiful wedding dress and adorn themselves with jewelry. When she entered the royal hall, everyone was struck by its beauty. The king said to his son: - This is the bride I have chosen you and that you will lead to the altar. The groom was struck with étonnement.- This is the same portrait of Meline, he thought. If I did not know that my beloved is locked for years in a tower and is perhaps already dead, I believe, well, I have to moi.Il offered his arm to the bride and led her to church. Nettles growing near the road, and then she said, Nettle, gracious, small plant, you make me look good anxious Do not worry, I have not forgotten the time of the repressed grief, the time when you! was my only sustenance, little sweet and raw, but in abundance. - What are you saying? asked the prince.- Nothing, she replied, I thought only to married Méline.Le princess was surprised that she knew about her, but he tut.Ils passed near the cemetery and when they arrived at the stairs the church, Meline said: suffer me, steps, allow me you borrows from the bride who is not one, listen to the lament. - What did you say? asked the prince.- Nothing, I just thought of the princess The Méline.- do you know? - No, she replied, how could I know? But I have heard of elle.Ils stopped at the door of the church and Meline said: O thou the front door! I spend, stand! From the bride who is not one, hear the tiny request. - And now, what you just said? wondered the prince.- Oh, I was only thinking of Meline princess married-elle.Le replied took a necklace of great value and passed him cou.Ils entered the church before the altar and the priest tied their hands and married. On the way back, she did not speak a word. Back at the palace, she immediately ran to the room of the bride, took off the robe, put away the jewels and put his gray shirt. She only kept the necklace that the groom had passed him around the neck before the église.La night fell and the bride was to be led into the chamber prince.Elle veiled his face so that the prince might not observe the deception. When all were gone, the prince asked: - What did you say to the winds near the road - Which nettles? wondered the bride. I do not mean to orties.- If you do not have them talking, you are not the true bride, said the prince.Mais bride found the parade.- Wait! if she cried: My wife chamber, I call as my mind reads it. She left the room and took to Meline - Servant! What did you say to the winds near the road - I did not say it?! Nettle, small graceful plant, You made me look good anxious Do not worry, I have not forgotten the time of the repressed grief, the time that you were my only sustenance, and sweet little raw, but in abundance. The bride returned to the chamber prince.- That's it, she cried, I now remember what I said to the winds. And she repeated the words she had just entendre.- And what did you say to the church steps bridge when we went? asked again the prince.- In the church steps? wondered the bride. I never talk to marches.- Do not you're the real mariée.Et the bride said quickly: My wife chamber, I call as my mind reads it. She went out the current door and took back to Meline - Servant! What did you say to the church steps before - I told them simply: Support me, steps, allow me you borrows from the bride who is not one, listen to the lament. - It will cost you your life, warns the bride, but she turned quickly to the Prince to explain: - That's it, I know what I said to the stairs and she repeated what the girl! had him dit.- And what did you say to the church door - at the door of the church? panicked the bride. I do not mean to portes.- So you're not the real mariée.Elle ran out and harassed Meline again - Servant! ? What did you have to tell the church door - I have told him nothing, I said only: O thou the front door! I spend, stand! From the bride who is not one, hear the tiny request. - You'll pay, get his head cut off, said the bride, furious; but she hurried back to the prince and said: - Now I remember what I had told the porte.Et she repeated the words of Méline.- And where is the necklace I gave you before the church door - What necklace? she says. You did not give me collier.- Like I myself around his neck. If you do not know, you're not real mariée.Il snatched her veil and saw his incredibly ugly face. Alarmed, he leaped arrière.- How did you get here? Who are you? - I'm your fiancée promised, but I was afraid that people laugh at me when they saw me in the street. That is why I ordered the little slut to my dress and go to church with my place.- Where is that girl? asked the prince. I want to see her. Go get it! The bride left the room and told the servants that her maid was a forger, and had to immediately bring in the yard and cut off his head. The servants caught Meline and wanted to take him. But Meline started screaming and calling for help so loudly that the prince heard his voice and came running. He ordered them to set the girl on the spot. They brought light and then he saw that the young girl had around his neck the gold necklace that he had donné.- You're the true bride, he says, it's you that I brought at the altar. Come into my chambre.Et only once, the prince asked: - On the way to church, you spoke of the Meline princess in which I was engaged. If I could expect this to be possible, I think she is before me; you look like him so And the girl replied: - I am Meline, which, for love of you, was imprisoned for seven years in a dark cell, which has suffered from hunger and thirst and who lived so long in misery and distress. But today the sun finally shone again for me. We were married in church and I'm your wife legitimate. They embraced and lived happily until the end of their days.
The fisherman and his wife	185	555	French	There was once a fisherman and his wife who lived together in a hovel by the sea, the fisherman went every day to throw his hook, and he angled and angled. One day he was sitting near his line on the shore, eyes turned towards the clear water, and he sat still sitting; suddenly he saw the hook and dive down deep, and when he retired, he took after a big catfish. Brill said, "I beg you to let me live, I am not a real fish I am an enchanted prince What use you to kill me I would not be for you a great treat, rejects me.? in the water and let me nager.- Really, said the man, you do not need to say so long, I do not ask better than to let swim at ease a bearded who can talk. " he rejected it in water, and brill it plunged to the bottom, leaving behind it a long trail of sang.L'homme went to find his wife in the hut. "My man, she told him, have you taken anything today? - No, said the man, I took a catfish who told me she was an enchanted prince, and I 'I left to swim as auparavant.- did you wish for nothing says femme.- No, says the man, and what would I have asked - Oh, said the woman, yet it is sad?! always live in a filthy hovel like this: you could have yet to ask for a little cottage Returns and calls brill: tell him that we would have a little cottage; it will make it certainement.- Ah.! said the man, why would I go back - Really, said the woman, you took and you have let him go again, she will;? c'mon on the spot "man. does dot cared; But he went to the sea, and when he was there he saw all yellow and all green; he approached the water and said: ondin Tarare Tarare merfolk, Little fish, nice fry, My screams and Isabeau storm; He must do his head.The bearded approached him and said " What does she want - Ah, said the man, I took earlier thee? my wife says I should have asked you something she is bored to stay in a hut; she wants!. well have a chaumière.- Return on your steps, said the fish, she already has "the man turned back, and his wife was no longer in his hut. but in its place was a small cottage, and his wife was sitting at the door on a bench. She took him by the hand and said, "Come in and look; it is nevertheless much better" They entered, and the cottage was a nice little room, a room that had placed their bed, kitchen and dining room with copper battery and very bright tin, and all the trappings of full service. Behind was a small yard with chickens and ducks, and a little garden with vegetables and fruits. "See, said the woman, is not it nice? - Yes, said the man, remain like this, we will truly live heureux.- We will think," the woman said. Thereupon they ate and began to bed This went well for a week or two, and then the woman said, "Listen, man, this cottage is too narrow, and the courtyard and garden are so small Flounder might well have indeed give us a house more . I would like to live large a big stone castle: go to your fish, it must give us a château.- Oh wife, said the man, this cottage is really well; what good would serve as! inhabit a castle - Ah, said the woman, goes, brill may very well faire.- no, wife, said the man, the bearded everything has just given us the cottage, I will not return to it; I fear the importuner.- go, said the woman; she can do, she will willingly go, I tell you "the man felt this approach weigh on his heart, and. cared point of the make; he said to himself: "This is not good." Yet he obéit.Quand he arrived near the sea, the water was purple and dark blue, gray and ready to rise; she was no longer green and yellow as before; yet it was rough spot. The fisherman came and said: ondin Tarare Tarare merfolk, Little fish, nice fry, My screams and Isabeau storm; He must be headed "And what does she want barbue.- said Oh.! said the man, half confused, she wants to live in a big castle Pierre.- Go, said the fish, you will find it on the door "the man went away, and believed find his house. But as he approached, he saw a large stone castle, and his wife stood on the steps; she was about to enter inside. She took him by the hand and said. "Between me" He followed her, and in the castle was a great hall with walls clad in marble; there was a crowd of servants who noisily opened the doors in front of them; the walls were shiny and covered with beautiful hangings; apartments in the seats and tables were made of gold, crystal chandeliers hanging from the ceiling and everywhere as foot mats in the rooms and halls; of food and best wine for the tables to believe they were going to break. Behind the castle was a large courtyard containing stables for cows and stables for horses, beautiful carriages; over a large, beautiful garden full of beautiful flowers, fruit trees; and finally a fleet of at least a mile long, where we saw deer, deer, hares, all that can be desired. "Well said the woman, this is not it beautiful - Ah yes, said the man, let us leave it at that,? We will live this beautiful castle, and live contents.- We will reflect, said the woman, sleep on it first. "and our people couchèrent.Le next day the woman awoke as it was broad daylight, and from her bed she saw the beautiful countryside that was offered to her. The man stretched out his arms on awakening She nudged him and said, "My man, get up and look out the window and see, could we not become kings of all countries Go to your fish,? we will rois.- Oh wife, said the man, why should we be king? I do not feel in me anywhere envie.- Good said the woman, if you do not want to be king, I want to be queen. ? Go find your fish I want to be reine.- Oh wife, said the man, why do you want to be queen I do not care to say cela.- why not tell the wife? come on in now, I must be king. "the man went, but he was dismayed that his wife wanted to be queen. "This is not good, this is really not good, he thought. I do not want to go." There was pourtant.Quand he approached the sea, it was dark gray, the boiling water from the bottom to the surface and spreading a foul smell. He stepped forward and said, merfolk Tarare Tarare merfolk, Little fish, nice fry, My screams and Isabeau storm; He must be headed "And what does she want barbue.- said Oh said.? man, she wants to become reine.- Returns, it already is, "said the barbue.L man went, and when he approached the palace, he saw that the castle was significantly enlarged and carried a high tower decorated with beautiful ornaments. Guards were on guard at the door, and there were soldiers in the crowd with trumpets and timpani. As he entered the building, he saw everywhere the purest marble enriched with gold, velvet carpets and large boxes of solid gold. the room doors opened; the whole court had gathered there, and his wife was sitting on a high throne, all of gold and diamonds; she wore on her head a large gold crown, she was holding a pure gold scepter topped with precious stones; and by his side were placed on a double row, six girls, smaller head than the other one. He stepped forward and said, "Oh woman, so there you are queen - Yes, she said, I am a queen!. "He stood before her and looked, and, when he had contemplated for a moment, he said:" Ah! woman, what a great thing you're Queen! Now we have nothing more to désirer.- Not at all, my man, she said while agitated; time lasts me much of all this, I would then take over. Go to your fish; I am queen, I must now become impératrice.- Ah! woman said the man, why do you want to become Empress - My man, she said, will find the fish I want to be impératrice.- Ah! woman said the man, it can not make you empress, I dare not say that the bearded; there is an emperor in the empire: the fish can not be an emperor; she really can pas.- I am queen, said the woman, and you are my husband. Will you go at once? Go, if she could make us kings, it can make us emperors. Go, I tell you. ". It was necessary for him to walk away But he was troubled and said to himself:" This does not go well; emperor! this is too much, the catfish will tire. "Thinking of all this, he saw that the water was black and bubbly; scum rising to the surface, and the wind blowing violent raised: he shuddered He came and said: Tarare merfolk,. Tarare merfolk, Little fish, nice fry, My screams and Isabeau storm, He must be headed. " And what does she want? said barbue.-Oh! bearded, he said, my wife wants to become impératrice.- Returns, said the fish: it is now. "The man turned back, and when he returned, the whole castle was polished marble, enriched with figures of alabaster and decorated with gold soldiers were in number to the door. They sounded the trumpets, beat the drums and beat the drum, in the palace, the barons, earls and dukes came and went as mere servants, and he opened the doors, which were of solid gold and. when he came, he saw his wife sitting on a throne that was gold in one piece, and high-thousand feet she wore a huge gold crown three cubits, with brilliants and carbuncles: with one hand she held the scepter, and the other the globe; his side were placed in two rows guard, all smaller than the other one, from the most enormous giant of two miles high down to the smallest dwarf, which was no bigger than my little doigt.Devant she were standing a fool the princes and dukes. The man walked in their midst, and said, "Woman, so now you are emperor - Yes, she said, I am empress!". Then he stood before her and gazed; then when he had considered for a moment: "Oh woman, he said, what a beautiful thing to see you Empress -My man, she said, what are you doing here planted I am Empress, I want now? be pope will find barbue. Ah-woman said the man, what are you asking where you can not become pope? there is only one pope in Christendom, and the fish can not toi.- do this for my man, she said, I want to become pope goes fast, I must be pope today même.- no, wife, said the man, I can not say that; this can be, is too much, the fish can not make you pape.- what words, my man said the woman!. she could make me empress, she may as well make me Pope on, I am Empress, and you're my man. quickly, put yourself on the way "He was afraid and went; but the heart was missing, he was shaking, had the thrill, and his legs and his knees trembled under him. The wind was blowing in the countryside, the clouds were running, and the horizon was dark westward; the leaves are agitated with noise on the shafts; water rose and roared as if she bubbled, it broke noisily on the shore, and from afar he saw ships which were firing the alarm gun and leapt and danced on the waves. The sky was still blue hardly a point of its extent, but all around the clouds threatening a red announcing a terrible storm. He approached all appalled and said ondin Tarare Tarare merfolk, Little fish, nice fry, My screams and Isabeau storm; He must do has its head "And what does she want barbue.- said Oh.? ! said the man, she wants to become pape.- Returns, said the fish, it is at this time. "he came back, and when he arrived, he saw a huge church while surrounded by palaces. He pierced the crowd of people to enter. Within, all was lit a thousand lights; his wife was gold coated head to toe; she was sitting on a throne much higher than the other, and bore three huge gold crowns; she was surrounded by a crowd of priests. At his side were placed two rows of candles, whose greatest was thick and tall as the tallest and the smallest like the smaller kitchen torch; all the emperors and kings were kneeling before her and kissed her mule "Woman, said the man, contemplating, it is true that here you are Pope -. Yes, she said, I am the Pope." Then he stepped in front of her and began to consider, and it seemed he watched the sun. When he had thus contemplated a moment: "Oh woman, he said, what a beautiful thing to see you pope!" But she remained stiff as a strain and bougeait.Il said, "Woman, thou shalt happy now, here you are Pope: you can not wish to be something plus.- I'll think, "the woman said. Thereupon they went to bed. But she was not happy; ambition prevented him from sleeping, and she always thought she would devenir.L'homme slept very well, and deeply he had walked a lot all day. But the woman could relax a while; she turned from one side to the other throughout the night, still thinking that it could become, and finding nothing to imagine. However the sun rose, and when she saw the dawn, she sat up and looked towards the light. When she saw that the sunlight came through the window? "Oh, she thought, am I also ordered to stand up to the sun and the moon ... My man, she said, the nudging, wake up, go to your fish: I want to become, like the good God "the man was still asleep, but he was so frightened that he fell out of bed. He thought he had heard wrong; He rubbed his eyes and said:? "Oh woman, what do you say - My man, she said, if I can not order the sun and moon to stand up, and I have the way stand up without my command, I could stand there, and I will not have an hour good time;. I always will think that I can make them up myself "and saying this, she looked to a look so scary that he felt a chill run through his whole body "March to now, i want to become like the good God." - Ah! woman said the man was falling on his knees, the fish can not do that. It may well make you empress and Pope; I beg you, returns to yourself, and content yourself to be Pope. "Then she began in fury, her hair flew in disarray around her head, she tore her blouse and gave her husband an instep shouting" I can not stand, I can not do more than hold ! Do you want to walk on the instant "Then he dressed quickly and ran like a insensé.Mais unleashed the storm was, and growled so furious he could barely stand on his feet? Houses and the trees were shaken, rocks chips rolled into the sea, and the sky was black as pitch, he thundered, it shone, the sea raised black waves as high as church towers and mountains, and their peak they all wore white with foam crown he cried (just himself-he could hear his own words): ondin Tarare Tarare merfolk, Little fish, nice fry, My screams and Isabeau storm. it must be at its head. " And what does she want? said barbue.- Ah he said, she wants to be like the good God.- Returns, you will find it housed in the hut. "And they still are today housed in the now.
Loyal and Fernand Fernand Foul	1198	531	French	Once upon a time a husband and wife who had never had children, from the time they were rich, but had a little boy when they had fallen into poverty. As they failed to find a sponsor in their village, because of their poverty, the husband said that he would also look for one. He went on the road and met a poor, who asked him where he allait.- I am going to try to find a sponsor to baptize my son, because I am so poor that nobody wants to accept among the people I know ! - poor you, poor I am, the man said. I'll be the godfather. But I'm too poor to give any gift to the child. Go therefore and tell the midwife that she is carrying the child to église.Lorsqu'ils came to church for baptism beggar was there already, waiting for them, and gave to child the name of Fernand-Loyal. After the ceremony, on leaving the church, the beggar said: - Go home now. As I can give you nothing, you do not give me anything plus.Mais midwife approached him and handed him a key, telling him to give it to the father, once at home, for that it custody until his son is fourteen years old. Then, the child should go on the moor, where there would be a castle which the key would open the door, all he would have inside the castle would be his. It was thus for the baptism of the enfant.Le boy had grown and reached seven years, when one day, playing with other children, he heard the boast gifts, each more beautiful than the other , they had received from their sponsors. But he, who had nothing, burst into tears and returned home, where he told his father: - Do I really have nothing from my sponsor, I - But if, answered? his father, he gave you a key; and when there will be a castle on the heath, just enter your clef.L'enfant ran with it, but the moor was only the moor and there saw no shadow of any semblance of the castle. But when he returned seven years later, at the age of fourteen, he saw indeed a castle. His key in the door opened and he visited without finding anything except a horse, a young white horse. Overjoyed to own a horse, the young boy went up and galloped to his père.- Now that I have a white horse, he said, I also want to travel! Nothing could remember, and he departed. Along the way, he saw on the ground, a goose feather cut to write; and his first idea was to pick it up. But he said: "! Well you might as well leave it where it is Wherever you go, you will always find a pen to write, if you demands an" As it pulled away, a voice called him behind: "Fernand Loyal, take me with you" He turned around and saw no one; then it turns back down and pick up the pen. A little further on, he had to ford a river, and as he reached the edge, there was a small fish in the dry, which opened a wide mouth choking. "Wait, my little fish, I'm going back in the water!" He said. He jumps down, takes the little fish by the tail, and presto! it rejects the water. The fish put its head out of the water, saying: - You rescued me in need, then I will give thee a flute; and if you're ever in need, you have only to blow it and I will come to your aid; and if you should ever lose something in the water, breath in your pipe and I will pay thee what thou shalt perdu.Sa small flute in hand, he rides away and saw coming to meet a young fellow who engaged in conversation and asked him about his destination.- Oh! I will at the next town Another asked him how he appelait.- Fernand Loyal, replied il.- Why, said the other, but then we have almost the same name: my name Fernand Déloyal.Et they both went down together in the next inn. The grave was that it Fernand Foul knew everything the other Fernand thought and wanted, and this because he practiced various kinds of witchcraft and other evil spells. But in this hostel, there was a very pretty young maid, pure lines and graceful body, which had fallen in love Fernand Loyal: she had loved him right away because he was very handsome boy , him too. So she worried about where he intended to go, and he replied that he wanted to see only a few countries without a specific purpose. Why would not it be a little there? him she asked. There would surely be his job in the royal court, that would be happy to have such servant or an outrider. It should well try to get hired. His answer was that he could not go himself come forward to offer his services.- Oh! but this, I can do it well! exclaimed the girl, who immediately went to the king to tell him she knew someone very well, a charming boy he could take his king service.The showed himself satisfied and had him come, saying he would like the valet; but Fernand Loyal preferred to be biting for not leaving his horse, and the king engaged him as piqueur.Lorsqu'il heard this thing, Fernand Foul complained to the maid: - So, you take care of him and you do not do anything for me - Oh! She answered quickly, I will gladly do the same for you, but it was only to avoid the upset against her because she thought: "This one, it is better to conciliate and have as a friend because you never know; it does not inspire trust me "She went back the urge to King as a servant, and the king hired him as a servant!. Every morning when the valet had dressed master, His Majesty began again the same complaint: "! Ah, if I could finally have my love with me What is it here that I like" And as Fernand -Déloyal that would hurt the other Fernand one morning, after having heard again the king's complaints, he took the opportunity to say, 'But you have a huntsman, Majesty Just! send it to look, and if it does not bring you back, his head rolls to his feet "King found him sound advice, sent Fernand Loyal and told him that there was, and so! as part of the world, a princess he loved. "You will go to remove it, otherwise you will die!" Ordered Does il.Fernand Loyal won him the stable where his horse, and he wept and lamented: - Poor me! Unhappy that I am! What fate - Fernand Loyal, what have you crying? said a voice behind lui.Il turns around and sees no one laments more than ever: - Oh! dear white horse, what a misfortune! Must we part now, because I'm going to die! Farewell ...- Fernand Loyal, why are you crying? reiterates the voix.Et only then he realizes that it is his white horse, and none other than him who asks the Question.- How? It was you who said that, my dear little horse? You know how to speak? exclaimed he of abord.Puis he added: - I have to go here and there, that am to bring the bride. But how do you want me to do this - Returns to the king, said the white horse, and tell him that if he wants to give you what you want from him, you will bring back to him his beloved. But it takes you a fully loaded ship meat, and another ship full of bread to achieve this; because you have to deal with terrible giants of the sea, and if you have no meat to give them, it's you they devour; and there will be fierce animals to scratch your eyes out with their beaks, if you have no bread to their donner.Le king put all the kingdom butchers slaughter of meat and all bakers the kingdom to baking bread to fully charge each ship. When they were ready, the white horse said to Ferdinand Loyal - Now up in the saddle and lead me on the boat. When the giants come, you say: My dear gentle giants, very soft, very soft I really thought I vousEt aboard vous.Lorsque something for the birds come, you say again: My dear little birds, soft, fluffy! I really thought I vousEt on board something for you.> So they do not do you any harm, and even the giants you help when you will reach the castle. And when you will enter there, thou shalt accompanied by a few giants, for the princess will be lying down and sleep; you, you must not wake her, but the giants prevail in bed to return the deposit on the boat (Everything happened exactly as told the white horse. Fernand gave the giants and the birds that he had for them, and tamed giant he lent a helping hand, carried the sleeping princess of his castle on the boat, and from there to the king.) But when she came before the king, she said she could not live home, because she needed his writings, stayed there in his castle. On the instigation of Fernand Unfaithful, Ferdinand Loyal had to return to the king, which meant her to leave again in search of those papers, otherwise mort.Désespéré, he returned to the stable with the white horse: "0 my little white horse, now I am to repeat the trip to this How will I achieve?" the white horse told him we had to do it again the loading of ships, and all went as good as the first time when the giants and the birds were force fed. Approaching the castle, the white horse told him to go and he would find the writings on the table, in the bedroom of the princess. He went there, found them without difficulty and carried them away. But when they were left off, Fernand Loyal let out his pen fall into the water, and his horse had to admit that he could do nothing for him on such occasions. Fernand Loyal his flute and began to play it; Then the fish came, holding in his mouth a quill pen, he restored to him. So he took the writings to the castle, where the wedding was celebrated during his voyage.La queen, who did not like at all the king because he had no nose, would have liked, for cons, have Fernand Loyal as a husband; and one day, when all the lords of the court, she announced she knew magic tricks and could, for example, decapitate someone and hand him his head up, as if nothing had happened . Does anyone want to try? He needed a volunteer. But there was one who would be the first; once again, at the suggestion of Fernand-Foul, it was Fernand Loyal who was appointed and had to submit. The queen cut off his head, replaced it on her neck, she was instantly healed and rewelded, with only a small mark like a red thread on the skin of cou.- How did you learn these things, my child? wondered the roi.- Yes, said the queen, I know the secrets of this art. Do you want me to do with you? - Of course! said roi.Alors it decapitated; but when the head had fallen, she did not put him up and pretended not to do so, as if it was the head that would not be related and stand in his place. And when the king had been buried, she married Fernand Loyal.Devenu King Fernand Loyal would not mount other than his beloved white horse, and one day he was riding in the countryside, the horse he said to go in a meadow, he told him, and make three times around the gallop. And when they did, the white horse stood up on its hind legs and ceased to be a horse to become a king's son.
finette Cendron	3987	327B	French	There was once a king and queen who had hurt their business. We drove them out of their kingdom. They sold their crowns to live, and their clothes, their cloths, their lace and all their furniture, piece by piece. The second-hand clothes were tired of buying, because every day they sold new. When the king and queen were very poor, the king said to his wife: "Here we are outside our realm, we have nothing, you have to earn our lives and our children's poor notify a little what we have to do, because until now I did not know that the king of business, which is strong sweet "the Queen had a lot of spirit. she asked him eight days to dream. After this time, she said to him. "Sire, you must not grieve; simply make nets you take birds to hunt and fish for fishing While the cords s 'wear out, I filerai to make other in regard to our three daughters, they are lazy frank, who believe they are great ladies. they want to make the girls must conduct so far, so far. they never come back, because it is impossible that we can provide them with enough clothes in their discretion "The king began crying when he saw the need to separate from her children.. He was a good father but the queen was mistress. It therefore remained agree to whatever she wanted; he said, "Get up tomorrow morning, and take your three daughters to carry them where you think best." While they were plotting this case the Finette princess who was the smallest of the girls, by listening the key hole ; and when she found out the purpose of his dad and his mom, she went as fast as she could to a large cave very far from home, where lived the fairy Hake, who was his marraine.Finette had two pounds of fresh butter, eggs, milk and flour to make a great cake to her godmother, in order to be well received. She began merrily travel; but she was, the more tired. His shoes are usèrent until the last sole; and her cute little feet flayed so strong that it was a great pity; she was tired. She sat on the grass, there pleurant.Par spent a beautiful Spanish horse, saddled, bridled; there were more diamonds in its case, it would take to buy three cities; and when he saw the princess, he began to graze gently to her; bending the hock, it seemed to do him reverence; once she took him by the bridle, "Gentil Dada, she said, would you would bring me to my fairy godmother You will make me great pleasure, because I am so tired that I will die, but if you've been using? on this occasion, I will give you good oats and good hay, get fresh straw to bed for "the horse bent almost to the ground before her, and the young Finette pounced. he ran so lightly that it seemed that it was a bird. He stopped at the entrance of the cave, as if he knew the way; and he knew it too, as it was Hake who, having guessed that his goddaughter's wanted to come see, had sent her this beautiful cheval.Quand she had entered, she made three bows to her godmother, and took him down she kissed his robe; and then she said, "Hello, my godmother, how do you do this butter, milk, flour and eggs that I will bring to you a good cake fashionable in our country - Be?. coming well Finette, said the fairy; I just kiss you "She kissed him twice, including Finette remained very joyful because Mrs. Hake was not a fairy dozen.. She said: "That, my goddaughter, I want you to be my little maid; hair down me and paint me." The princess décoiffa and most skillfully combed the world. "I know, Hake said, why you come here;. You listened to the king and queen who want to lead you lose, and you want to avoid this misfortune Here, you only have to take this squad, the wire n 'never break;.. you will attach the tip to the door of your house, and you will hold your hand when the queen you will have left, it will be easy to return following the thread "the princess thanked her godmother, who fills a bag beautiful clothes, all gold and silver. She kissed him; she had her back on the pretty horse, and two or three times, he went to the door of the house of their majesties. Finette said to the horse: "My little friend, you are beautiful and very wise, you go faster than the sun, thank you for your trouble, go back where you come from." She walked slowly into the house, hiding his bag under his pillow; she lay without pretending anything. As soon as day broke, the king woke his wife: "Come, come, madame, he said, get ready for the trip." Immediately she got up, took his big shoes, a short skirt, a white camisole and a stick. She sent her eldest daughters named Fleur d'Amour, the second Belle de Nuit and third-Ear Fine: this is why it's usually called Finette. "I dreamed last night, said the queen, that we must go and see my sister, she will treat us well, we eat and we will laugh all we want." Flower of Love, who despaired of being in a desert, told her mother: "Come, madame, where you please, as long as I walk, it matters to me." The two others said the same. They take leave of the king, and here all four on the road. They went so far, so far, that Fine-Ear had great fear of not having enough thread, because there were almost a thousand leagues. She always walked behind her sisters, deftly passing the wire in buissons.Quand Queen thought that her daughters could not find the way, she entered a large wood, and said, "My little sheep, sleep, and I will like the shepherdess who watches around his herd, fear that the wolf will eat. "They lay down on the grass and slept. The queen left them, believing them not see her again. Finette closed his eyes and did not sleep. "If I was a bad girl, she said, I'd go just now, and I let my sister die here because they beat me and I scratch until they bleed. Despite all their tricks, I do not want to abandon "She wakes up, and tells the whole story. they start crying, and praying to carry them with it, they give it their beautiful dolls, their little money cleaning their other toys and candy. "I know enough that you do not do anything, says Finette, but I'm not as good sister"; and rising, she followed his lead, and princesses too; so that they arrived almost as soon as the reine.En stopping at the door, they heard that the king said: "My heart just before to see you return seule.- Good, said the queen, we were too embarrassed of our girls -. Again, said the king, if you had brought my Finette, I console myself from others, because they love nothing "they knocked, knock, knock.. The king said, "Who goes there?" They said: "These are your three daughters, Fleur d'Amour, Belle de Nuit, and Fine-Ear." The queen trembled: "Do not open, she said, it must be . of spirits, for it is impossible that they should be returned "The king was as cowardly as his wife, and he said." you deceived me, you are not my daughters' But Fine-Ear, which was clever, said: "My dad, I'll bend down, look at me through the cat's hole, and if I'm not Finette, I consent to have the whip." The king looked as she had said, and as soon as he recognized, he opened them. The queen pretended to be glad to see them again; she told them that she had forgotten something, she was looking for; but assuredly it would have been found. They pretended to believe it, and got into a nice little loft where they slept "It says Finette, sisters, you promised me a doll, give it to me -.. Really you have only t 'await, little naughty, they said, because you're the king do not regret us. "Thereupon taking their cattails, they beat her to a pulp. When they had the well beaten, she lay; and as she had so many wounds and bumps, she could not sleep, and she heard the queen said to the king: "I will lead the other hand, even further, and I'm sure they will never return . "When Finette heard this plot, she rose slowly to go even see his godmother. She entered the henhouse, she took two chickens and a rooster master, whom she twisted her neck, then two little rabbits that the Queen ate cabbage, to enjoy them in time; she put all in a basket and left. But she did not have a league groping, dying of fear that the Spanish horse came galloping, snorting and neighing; she thought it was made of it, which some people the weapons were going to take. When she saw the pretty horse alone, she went on, delighted to go so at ease: she arrived promptly at its marraine.Après ordinary ceremonies, she presented her chickens, rooster and rabbit, and prayed help of his good opinion, because the queen had sworn she would lead them to the end of the world. Hake told his goddaughter not grieve; she gave him a whole bag full of ashes, "You wear the bag in front of you, she told him, you shake off, you will walk on the ashes, and when you come back, you only have to look at printing your not, but do not bring your sisters, they are too malicious, and if you bring back, I want to see you "Finette took leave of her, taking away, by its order, for thirty or forty million diamonds. in a small box, she pocketed the horse was ready, and reported as usual. At daybreak, the queen called the princesses; they came and told them, "The king is not doing too well, I dreamed last night that I have to go pick her flowers and herbs in a country where they are very excellent, they it will rejuvenate;. so let's just now "Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit, who did not believe that their mother would still want to lose them, grieved these new . It took yet from; and they went so far that he never made such a long journey. Flannelette, who said nothing, stood behind the other, and shook his ashes beautifully, without the wind or rain gâtassent nothing there. The queen being convinced that they could not find the way, noticed one evening that his three daughters were sleeping well; she took this time to leave, and returned home. When it was day, and Finette knew that her mother was gone, she awoke her sisters: "We are alone, she said, the queen is gone." Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de -Night is assumed to cry: they tore their hair, and their bruised face with punches. They cried: "Alas what shall we do?" Finette was the best girl in the world; she was still pity her sisters. "See what I expose myself, she told them, because when my godmother gave me a way back, she forbade me to teach you the way, and that if I disobeyed him she did not want me see "Belle de Nuit throws Finette neck, as did the Fleur d'Amour. they caressed the so tenderly, it was enough to return all three together to the king and the reine.Leurs majesties were very surprised to see the princesses; they talked all night, and the younger who are not called Fine-Ear for nothing, heard they were doing a new plot, and the next day, the queen would call into campaign. She ran to awaken her sisters. "Alas, she told them, we are lost, the Queen insists lead us into some desert, and we leave. You are angry because I have my godmother, I dare not go like I did always find . "They stayed at a loss, and were saying to one another:" What shall we do "Finally, Belle de Nuit said to the other two?" do not embarrass the old Hake not so much mind that remains a little to others: we have only charge us peas; we will sow them along the way and we'll be back "Fleur d'Amour found. admirable expedient; they undertook peas, they filled their pockets; for Fine-Ear, instead of taking peas, she took the bag with beautiful clothes, with small box of diamonds, and when the queen called them to leave, they found themselves all prêtes.Elle said, "I ' I dreamed last night that there is in a country, it is not necessary to appoint three handsome princes who are waiting to marry you, I'll take you there, to see if my dream is "The. Queen went before and after his daughters, who sowed peas without worry because they were certain to return home. This time the queen went further than it had gone, but a dark night, she left and returned to the king; she got very tired and very glad to have over a large household on bras.Les three princesses who slept until eleven o'clock awoke; Finette saw the first in the absence of the queen; although it was prepared, it does not let cry, trusting more to her return to her fairy godmother, to the skill of his sisters. She was scared to tell them all: "The queen is gone, it must be followed as soon as possible - Hush, little baboon replied Fleur d'Amour, we'll find the way when we want you doing here my godmother. the evil eager about. "Finette dared replicate. But when they wanted to find the way, there was no traces or trails; pigeons, of which there are many in that country, had come to eat the peas; they wept until cries. After having spent two days without eating, Fleur d'Amour said to Belle de Nuit: "Sister, do you have anything to eat - No?" She said. She said the same thing to Finette: "I have nothing either, she retorted, but I just found an acorn - Ha give it to me, said one - Give le.!. I said the other. "Each wanted to have. "We will not satiated from an acorn to us three, says Finette, planting it, there will come another that we can serve." They are consented although there was little appearance he came a tree in a country where there was none, we only saw cabbages and lettuces, which ate the princesses; if they had been well delicate, they would have died a hundred times; they almost always slept under the stars; every morning and every night they would turn water the acorn, and told him: "Believe, believe, beautiful acorn." He began to grow visibly. When he was a little big, Fleur d'Amour wanted to ride it, but he was not strong enough to carry; she felt bend under it, immediately it down; Belle de Nuit was the same adventure; Finette lighter sat under long; and his sisters asked him, "Do you see anything, my sister," she answered, "No, I see nothing - Oh, is that the oak is not high enough.", said Fleur d 'Love. So they continued to water the acorn and say, "Believe, believe, beautiful acorn." Finette never failed to climb it twice a day: one morning she was there, Belle-de- night said Fleur d'Amour: "I found a bag our sister hid us what there may be in it?" said Fleur d'Amour "She said it was old lace she mends, and I think it's sweet, "said Belle-de-Nuit; she was fond, and wanted to see it; she actually found all the lace of the king and queen, but they were used to hide the fine clothes Finette and diamonds box. "Well, then, can it be more naughty girl cried she, take everything for us, and put stones instead." They did so promptly. Finette returned without perceiving the malice of his sisters, because it is not advised to dress in a desert; she thought only oak that became the most beautiful of all chênes.Une time she went up, and his sisters, as was their custom, asked her if she could discover nothing, she exclaimed: "I discovered a big house, so beautiful, so beautiful that I can not quite say, the walls are emeralds and ruby, diamond roof: it is all covered with gold bells, weathervanes come and go like the wind . - you're lying, they say, this is not so beautiful as you say. - Believe me, answered Finette, I'm not lying, come there instead see yourself, I have eyes all dazzled "Fleur d'Amour climbed the tree. when she saw the castle, she could be in silence. Belle de Nuit was very curious, did not fail to mount in turn, she remained too thrilled that his sisters. "Certainly, they said they must go to the palace, perhaps we shall find beautiful princes will be too happy to marry us." Until the evening was long, they spoke only of their purpose, they lay down on the grass; but when their Finette seemed very sleepy, Fleur d'Amour said to Belle de Nuit: "Do you know what to do, my sister, let us rise and get dressed in rich clothes Finette has brought. - You are right, "said Belle-de-Nuit; they arose, if frisèrent if poudrèrent, then they put the flies, and the beautiful dresses of gold and silver all covered with diamonds, it has never anything so ignorant magnifique.Finette the flight wicked sisters had made her, she took her bag with the intention of dressing, but she remained very distressed to find only rocks; she saw her sisters together who were accommodated like suns she cried and complained of betrayal that had made him. and they to laugh and mock "is it possible, she told them, you have it. courage to take me to the castle without counter me and make me beautiful? - We have not too much for us, 'said Fleur d'Amour, you will have only beaten us if you unwelcome. - But, she continued, the clothes you wear are to me, my godmother gave them to me, they do not need. - If you talk more, they said, we'll whack you, and we will bury you without anyone knowing. "Poor Finette had no custody annoying; she followed them slowly and walked a little behind, unable to move for their servante.Plus they approached the house, the more it seemed wonderful to them." Ha! said Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit, we'll entertain us well! we will do good food, we eat at the king's table, but it Finette wash the bowls in the kitchen, because it is made like a slut, and if one asks who she is, let us beware of call our sister: it will say that it is the small village milkmaid "Finette who was witty and beauty, despair is being so abused when they came to the castle gate, they knocked.. soon appalling old woman opened the door to them, she had only one eye in the forehead, but it was bigger than five or six, flat nose, dark complexion and mouth so horrible, it was scary ; she was fifteen feet high and thirty-turn "0 unhappy.! which brings you here? she told them. Do you ignore that it is the castle of the ogre, and that hardly can you enough for lunch; but I'm better than my husband; enter I do not eat all of a sudden, you will have the consolation to live two or three days more. "When they heard the ogress speak, they fled, believing himself to save, but only one of his stride was worth fifty of them, and she ran after and returned, some by the hair, others by the skin neck, and putting them under her arm, she threw all three in the basement that was full of toads and snakes, and it only worked on the bones of those they had mangés.Comme she would chew on -the-field Finette she was fetch vinegar, oil and salt to eat salad, but she heard coming ogre, and finding that the princesses had the delicate white skin, she resolved to eat alone, and promptly put under a large vat where they saw only a trou.L'ogre was six times higher than his wife when he spoke, the house shook, and when he coughed it seemed bursts of thunder; he had a big ugly eye, his hair was all h rissés, it was based on a log which he had a cane; he had in his hand a covered basket; he drew five grandchildren he had stolen the roads, and he swallowed as fifteen fresh eggs. When the three princesses saw him, they trembled under the tank, they dared not cry loudly, lest he heard them; but they entredisaient whispered: "It will eat us all alive, how will escape us?" The ogre said to his wife: "You see, I feel fresh flesh, I want you to give me. - Well, said the ogress, you have always got fresh flesh, and these are your sheep have been there - Oh, I did not wrong, says the ogre, I feel fresh flesh certainly;. I'll look everywhere . - Seeking, she says, and you will not find anything. - If I find, replied the ogre, and you hide me, I will cut your head into a ball "she was afraid of this threat. and said, "do not displease you, my little ogre, I'll declare you the truth He came three young girls today that I have taken, but it would be a shame to eat them, because they know it all.. as I am old, I have based myself; you see that our beautiful home is very dirty, our bread is not cooked, the soup did you seem so good, and I do t e seem more beautiful since I kill myself to work; will my servant; I pray thee, do not eat now; if you feel like some day you shall be quite the master. "The ogre had much difficulty to promise to do not eat just now He said." Leave it to me, I do not eat two. - No, you do not eat. - Well, I will not eat the smallest. "And she said," No, you will not eat not. "Finally after many protests, he promised to do not eat She believed in herself." When he goes to hunt, I eat, and I'll tell him they fled. "The ogre came out of the cellar, he told her to bring them to him, the poor girls were almost scared to death, the ogress reassured them;? And when he saw them, he asked them what they knew, they do answered that they knew sweep, they knew sewing and spinning wonder, they were such good stews, you were eating even to the dishes as bread, cakes and pies, are in came to fetch home a thousand miles around the ogre was fond of, he said. "this, here, quickly put these good workers into work; But he said to Finette, when you set fire to the oven, how can you know if it's warm enough? - Sir, she replied, I throw butter, and then I taste with language. - Well, he says, so turn on the oven. "This oven was as big as stable as the ogre and ogress ate more bread than two armies. The princess there was a terrible fire, it was burning like a furnace, and the ogre who was present, . Meanwhile the soft bread, ate hundred lambs and a hundred little piglets Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit accommodated paste the ogre master said. "well, the oven is hot? "Finette replied:" Sir, you'll see. "She looked at him a thousand pounds of butter in the bottom of the oven, and then she said:" We must feel with the language, but I'm too small. - I'm great, "said the ogre, and stooping, he plunged so deeply that he could not withdraw, so it burned to the bone When the ogress came baked it. remained very much astonished to find a mountain ash bones of his mari.Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit, who saw strong afflicted, consoled their best, but they feared that his pain did too apaisât early, and the appetite from him, she would put them in salads, as she had ever thought to do they said to him. "Take heart, Madame, you will find some king or some marquis, who will be happy to marry you. "She smiled a little, showing teeth longer than the finger When they saw her in a good mood, Finette said." If you wanted to leave these horrible bearskins, you're dressed, you put fashionable we coifferions you perfectly, you'd like a star. - Let's see, she said, as you hear; but make sure you that if there is some more pretty ladies that I like you hacherai menu mincemeat. "Thereupon the three princesses took off his cap, and began combing and curling; in the fun of their chatter, Finette took an ax and gave her behind a great blow, she broke her body with his tête.Il never was such a joy, and they rode on the roof of the house for entertainment to ring the golden bells, they were in all the rooms, which were pearls and diamonds, and furniture so rich that they were dying of pleasure; they laughed and sang, nothing they lacked, wheat, jams, fruit and dolls galore Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit lay down in. beds brocade and velvet, and entredirent: "here we are richer than our father was when he had his kingdom, but we lack to be married, it will come one here, this house certainly going to a cut-throat, because nobody knows the death of the ogre and ogre. We must go to the nearest town to show us with our best clothes; and we will not be there long without finding a good financial that will be very glad to marry princesses. "As soon as they were dressed, they said they were going to Finette walk, she should remain at home to do housework and laundry, and upon their return everything was neat and clean; if she missing the shots they assommeraient. the Finette poor whose heart was tight with pain, remained alone in the house, sweeping, cleaning, washing without resting, and always crying. "I'm so unhappy, she said, to disobeying my godmother, it happens to me all sorts of misfortunes; my sisters have stolen my rich clothes; they serve to ward off; without me, the ogre and his wife still would wear well; what advantage to me to have them killed? Do not I'd eaten as much as they would have me live like I live? "When she had said this, she cried to choke and his sisters came loaded with oranges from Portugal, jams, sugar, and they said to him:" Ah! we have a beautiful ball! there were people! the king's son danced; it made us a thousand honors go, just take off our shoes and décrotter us because that is your job. "Finette obeyed; and if by chance she wanted to say something to complain about, they threw themselves on her, and beat her to leave for morte.Le next day they returned again and returned to tell the wonders one night that was close Finette sitting. fire on an ash heap, not knowing what to do, she was looking into the slots on the chimney and thus seeking a small key she found so old and filthy, she had all the trouble to clean when. it was clear she knew she was golden, and thought that a golden key was to open a nice little box, she immediately began to run through the house, trying the key locks, and finally it . found a tape that was a masterpiece she opened it: it was inside the clothes, diamonds, lace, linen, ribbons immense sums: it says nothing of his good fortune, but she waited impatiently for her sisters sortissent the lendem ain. Once more she saw, she Para, so she was more beautiful than the sun. Thus adjusted, it was the same ball where his sisters were dancing; and though she would not have a mask, she was so changed for the better, they do not recognized. When she appeared in the assembly, there arose a murmuring of voices, one of admiration, and the others with envy. We took her to dance, she surpassed all the ladies to dance as she surpassed them in beauty. The mistress of the house came to her, and he has made a deep bow, she begged her to tell her what her name was, to never forget the name of a wonderful person. She replied civilly she was called Cendron. There was no lover who was unfaithful to his mistress to Cendron poet point that Rimat in Cendron; Never pet name not made so much noise in so little time; echoes only repeated the praises of Cendron; we did not have enough eyes to look at her, mouth enough for louer.Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit, who had made great first crash in the places where they had appeared, seeing the welcome we were doing at this newcomer, despite bursting; but Finette be disentangled from it all with the best grace in the world; it seemed, to his air, that she was made to order. Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit, who saw their sister with chimney soot on the face, and smeared a small dog, had lost so much the idea of ​​beauty, that 'they recognized her at all; they made their court to Cendron like the others. As soon as she saw the ball ready to finish it out fast, come home, undressed stagecoach, resumed his rags; ! And when her sisters came: "Oh Finette, we have just seen, they said to him, a young princess who is all lovely; it's not a guenuche like you; it is white as snow, more ruddy than pink, her teeth pearls, her coral lips, and has a dress that weighs more than a thousand pounds is not that gold and diamonds: she is beautiful she is lovable "Finette answered between! his teeth: "so I was, so I was - what you buzzed.?", they said. Finette even lower replied: "So I was." This game lasted a long time; there was almost no day that would change clothes Finette not because the tape was a fairy, and we are taking, the more he came back, and so much the fashion, the ladies dressed as his modèle.Un evening Finette had danced more than usual, and it was late enough to retire later, wanting to make up for lost time and get home a little before his sisters, walking to his full strength, she dropped one of her mules, which was red velvet, embroidered with beads. She did her best to find her in the way; but the weather was so black, she took unnecessary trouble; she came home, a shod foot and the other day nu.Le Prince Darling, the king's eldest son, going to hunt, find the mule Finette; he did pick up, looks, admires the small and kindness, running, back, fucking, cherishes and takes it with him. Since that day, he could not eat; it became lean and changed, as yellow as a quince, sad, dejected. The king and queen, who loved him madly, sent from all sides to have good game and jams; it was to him less than nothing; he watched all this without meeting the queen, when she spoke to him. The fetch was sent doctors everywhere, even Paris and Montpellier. When they arrived, they were shown the prince, and after having considered three days and three nights without losing sight, they concluded he was in love, and he would die if they are brought remède.La queen, who loved him madly, crying to melt water, unable to find the woman he loved for him to marry. She brought in her most beautiful ladies room, he did not deign to look at them. Finally she told him once: "My dear son, you want us to choke in pain because you love, and you we hide your feelings, tell us who you want, and we will to give, if it be that . a simple shepherdess "the Prince, bolder by the promises of the queen, took the mule from under his pillow, and having shown" Here, madam, 'he said, causing my pain; I found this little pampers, cute, pretty mule going hunting; I will never marry as that may fit the - well, my son, said the queen, not grieve thee, we will seek. ". it was to the king this news; he remained very surprised and ordered at the same time that one was with drums and trumpets, announcing that all girls and women should come to put on the mule, and to whom they would own, marry the prince. Each heard what it was all about, is décrassa feet with all sorts of waters, pastes and ointments. There were ladies who made them peel, to have the most beautiful skin; others were fasting or the flayed to be the smallest. They went in droves to try the mule, one could not put the more he came in vain, over the prince affligeait.Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit made it a day so brave, it was an amazing thing. ? "Where are you going their Finette said - We go to the big city, they replied, where the king and queen remains, try the mule the king's son found;. Because if it is specific to the one of us, he will marry her, and we will be queens - and I said Finette, do I not go - Really, they said, you're a nice gosling restrained.?: will, will water our cabbages, you are good for nothing "Finette thought that it would soon his best clothes, and she would make the attempt as the others, because she had some little suspicion that she would much. what made him sad is that she did not know the way, the ball where we went dancing was not in the big city. She was beautifully dressed; her dress was blue satin, all covered with stars and diamonds; she had a sun on his head, a full moon on the back; all shone so strong that one could look without blinking the eyes. When she opened the door to leave she remained very surprised to find the beautiful Spanish horse that had carried with her godmother. She stroked him and said: "Be well come, my little hobby, I am obliged to my godmother Hake." He bent down; she sat on it as a nymph. He was all covered with gold bells and ribbons; its cover and flange had no price; and Finette was thirty times more beautiful than the beautiful Hélène.Le Spanish horse was slightly, its bells were din, din, din. Fleur d'Amour and Belle-de-Nuit who heard them, turned and saw it coming; but in that moment what was their surprise? They recognized the Finette for Cendron. They were very muddy, their best clothes were covered in mud: "My sister cried Fleur d'Amour, talking to Belle de Nuit, I protest that here Finette Cendron"; another cried anyway, Finette and passing near them, his horse splashed them and made them a mud mask: she laughed and said, "Your Highnesses, Cinderella despises you as much as you deserve "; and passing like a flash, here part. Belle de Nuit and Fleur d'Amour looked at each other. ? "Do we dream they say, who is it who may have provided clothes and a horse Finette How wonderful happiness wants him, she will put on the mule, and we will not have that trouble? . an unnecessary trip "As they despaired Finette arrives at the palace; as soon as we saw her, everyone thought it was a queen, the guards take their weapons, the drum is beaten, they blow the trumpet, you open all the doors, and those who had seen at the ball, went before her, saying: "Place, place is beautiful Cendron is the wonder of the universe." it comes with the unit in the dying prince's room; he cast his eyes on her, and still charmed, wishing she had a pretty little foot to shoe the mule: she put it all at once and showed the same, she had purposely made. At the same time it shouts: "Long live the Princess Honey, long live the Princess will be our queen!" The prince rose from his bed, he went to kiss her hands, she found the handsome and witty: he made a thousand friends. One told the king and queen, who ran; Queen takes Finette his arms, called her daughter, her darling, her little queen makes him admirable present, on which the Liberal King adds yet. The cannon is fired; violins, bagpipes, while playing; we only talk about dance and have réjouir.Le king, the queen and the prince pray Cendron to leave marry, "No, she said, you have until I you my story tale"; which it did in four words. When they learned that she was born a princess, it was another joy, he kept pretty than they should die; but when she told them the name of the king, his father, the queen mother, they knew that it was they who had conquered their kingdom: they announced it; and she swore that she would consent to his wedding spot, they might give the states of his father; they promised him, because they had more than a hundred kingdoms, one less is not a affaire.Cependant Belle de Nuit and Fleur d'Amour arrived. The first news was that Cendron had put the mule, they know what to do or what to say, they wanted to return without seeing; but when she knew they were there, she ushered them, and instead make them sad, and the punishment they deserved, she rose and was in front of them tenderly kissing, then presented to the Queen, saying: "Madam, these are my sisters who are very kind, I beg you to love them." they remained so confused goodness Finette, they could not utter a word. She promised them that they would return to their kingdom, the prince wanted to visit their families. At these words, they fell on their knees before her, crying wedding joie.Les were the best we had ever seen. Finette wrote to his godmother, and began his letter with great present on the pretty horse of Spain, requesting it to seek the king and queen to tell her happiness, and they only return royaume.La their fairy Hake acquitted himself well of the commission. The father and mother of Finette returned in their states, and her sisters were queens as well as she.
The brother and sister	105	450	French	Brother took his sister by the hand and said: - Since our mother died we no longer know that misfortune. Our stepmother beats us every day and when we want to get closer to her, she we hunt kicks. For food, we only have old crusts of bread, and the little dog under the table is more spoiled than we; from time to time, she throws him some good pieces. May God have mercy on us! If our mother knew that! Come, we will go into the wide world! All day they walked by meadows, fields and rubble, and when the rain began to fall, Sis said - God and our hearts weep together the evening they came to a large forest!. They were so exhausted from pain, hunger and have so long market they huddled in a hollow tree and fell asleep. When they awoke the next morning, the sun was already high in the sky and its heat penetrated the forest. bro told his sister: - Sis, I'm thirsty. If I knew where there is a source, I'd run to drink it; I seem to hear murmuring stream. He got up, took little sister by the hand and they both looking for the source. Their wicked stepmother was a witch and she had seen from the kids. They had followed them in secret, without noise, like witches, and had cast a spell on all sources of the forest. When the two children found a flowing like quicksilver on the stones Frérot would drink. But sister heard the sound of water a voice say, "Who me drink becomes tiger Who drinks from me will become a tiger.." She exclaimed: - I beg you, Frérot, do not drink; or you will become a wild beast that will devour me. The brother did not drink, despite his thirst, and said - I'll wait until next spring. When they reached the second brook the sister heard her say: "Whoever drinks from me becomes wolf Who would drink becomes wolf.." She exclaimed: - The brother, I beg you, do not drink or you will become a wolf and you shall eat me. Bro did not object and said: - I will wait until we come to a third source, but then I drink, whatever you say, because my thirst is too great. When they came to the third brook the sister heard the sound of water ".. Who gets me drunk deer who drinks becomes my deer" She said - Ah Bro, I beg you, do not drink, or you will become deer and you will go away from me. But already Frérot knelt at the edge of the source, he had already examined the water and he drank. When the first drops touched his lips, he was transformed into a young deer. Little sister wept over the fate of Brother and the fawn wept and sadly lay with her. Finally, the girl said: - Do not cry dear little roe, I will never abandon you. She untied her golden garter, put it around the neck of the deer, plucked rushes and wove a flexible rope. She tied the little animal and they sank still deeper into the forest. After walking a long, long time, they came to a small house. The girl looked out the window and saw it was empty, she said: "We could live there." She picked up the leaves and moss to make a soft layer good for deer. Every morning she went out and gathered roots and berries and nuts for herself and soft grass to Frérot. He ate out of her hand, was happy and frolicked around her. In the evening, when the sister was tired and had said her prayer, she laid her head on the back of the deer-it was a soft pillow - and fell asleep. Their existence would have been wonderful if The brother had had his human form! For a time they lived well in solitude. It happened that the king of the country held a great hunt in the forest. They heard the sound of tubes, the voice of the dogs and cheerful calls of hunters through the trees. The little deer, the noise, would have liked to be in the party. - I beg you, little sister, let me go hunting, he said; I can not stand it. He insisted until she finally agreed. - But she told him, come back tonight without fault. For fear of wild hunters, I shut my door. On your return, so I recognize you, knock and say, "Little sister, let me in." If you do not do well, I will not open. The small deer darted out, delighted to be free. The king and his huntsmen saw the beautiful animal, pursued, but were unable to catch him. Whenever they believed to hold it, he jumped over the bushes and disappeared. When evening came, he ran to the house, knocked and said: - Little sister, let me in! The door was opened, he went and rested all night on his soft bed. The next morning the hunt began and the little deer heard the sound of horns and "Oh! Oh!" Hunters. He could not resist. - Sis, open, open, I have to kind! he said. Sis opened it and said: - But tonight we have to come back and that you should say the same words yesterday. When the king and his huntsmen again saw the small deer gold necklace, they pursued it again. But it was too fast, too agile. This lasted all day. Towards evening, the hunters finally identify it and one of them slightly injured his foot, so he was limping and could not go slowly. A hunter followed him to the little house and heard him say: - Little sister, let me in! He saw that the door was opened and she was closing soon. He recorded this scene in his mind, went to the king and told him what he had seen and heard. Then the king said: - Tomorrow we will hunt again little sister had been very distressed to see that her fawn was hurt!. She washed the blood flowing, laid herbs on the wound and said: - Go to bed, dear fawn, that you heal quickly. The injury was so insignificant that morning he felt in not at all. When he again heard the hunting he said - I can not stand! It must be there! They will not have me. Little sister wept and said: - They will kill you and I will be alone in the forest, abandoned by all. I will not let you out! - Then I will die here of grief, answered the roe. When I hear the horn, I feel I'll jump out of my shoes. Sis could do nothing more. With a heavy heart, she opened the door and the little deer left happy in the forest. When the king saw him, he said to his fighters: - Continue it without respite all day, but no one takes him wrong when the sun went down, he said to one of the hunters: - Now you're going ! show me the little house when he was at the door, he knocked and said: - little sister, let me in! The door opened and the king entered. He saw a beautiful girl he had ever seen before. When she saw that it was not deer, but a man wearing a gold crown on his head coming in, she was frightened. But the King looked kindly, held out his hand and said: - Will you come to my castle and be my wife? - Oh! Yes, replied the girl, but you have the deer come to me, I will not abandon him. The king said: - He will remain with you as long as you live and it will lack nothing. At that moment, the deer came. Sis passed him his leash and, holding herself in hand, left the small house. The king took the girl on his horse and led her to his castle, where their wedding was celebrated with great pomp. Sis thus became Royal Highness and they lived together happily for many years. It was enough for the deer had plenty of time to romp in the fenced park. However, the wicked stepmother, because of which the children had left the world, imagined that the sister had been eaten by wild beasts of the forest and Frérot, turned into deer had been killed by hunters. When she learned that both were living happy, envy and jealousy filled his heart and left her more rest. She had no other idea in mind to make still unhappy. Her own daughter, who was ugly as night and had only one eye, complained to her, saying: - It is I who should have become queen! - Be quiet! said the old. When the time comes, I'll deal. Time passed and the queen gave birth to a beautiful baby boy. The king was just hunting. The old witch took the appearance of a maid, entered the room where the queen and told her whereabouts: - Come, your bath is ready. It will do you good and give you new strength. Hurry up before the water does refroidisse.Sa daughter was also in place. They carried the queen weakened in the bathroom and laid him in the tub. Then they closed the door and went away. In the bathroom, they had lit a roaring fire, thinking that the queen would suffocate quickly. Having done so, the old woman took her daughter to a crush and made her sleep in the bed, instead of the queen she had given her size and appearance. But she had .pu replace eye that was missing. For the king was not noticing, she ordered him to lie on the side where she had no eye. At night, when the King came home and heard that a son was born to him, he rejoiced in his heart and wanted to go to his beloved wife to take from her. The old immediately exclaimed: - Take care to leave the curtains drawn; Queen should see no light must rest! The King withdrew. He did not see that a false queen was lying in bed When it was midnight and everything was asleep, the nurse, who stood by the cradle in the nursery and one still awake, saw the door open and the true queen enter. She pulled the child from the cradle, took him in his arms and gave him a drink. Then she patted his pillow, lay down again, and covered the spread the quilt. She forgot not the little deer, approached the corner where he slept and stroked. Then, quietly, she came out and, the next morning, when the nurse asked the guards if they had seen anyone enter the castle at night, they answered: - No, we have not seen anyone. The queen and came every night, always silent. The nurse saw her, but she did not dare tell anyone. After a while, the queen began to speak in the night and said: - What happens to my child? My fawn twice more I come back; then never. The nurse did not answer him. But when she had gone, she went to the king and told him everything. The king said: - My God, what is this? I will see tomorrow night with the child. In the evening he went to the nursery, and at midnight the Queen appeared again and said: - What happens to my child? My fawn? Again I then never come back. She took care of the child as usual before disappearing. The King dared not speak to him, but he still watched the next night. Again she said: - What happens to my child? My fawn? This time came back, never return. The king could not contain himself. He rushed to her and said: - You can not be other than my beloved wife! She answered: - Yes, I'm your wife sweetheart. And at the same time, by the grace of God, life returned to him. It was fresh, pink and healthy. She then told the king the crime that the wicked witch and her daughter had committed against her. The king summoned both to the court where it was judged them. The girl was taken to the forest where the wild beasts tore. The witch was thrown into the fire and burned horribly. When there remained more than ashes, the small deer turned and found human form. Sis and The brother then lived happily together until they died.
Knoist and his three son	1316	1965	French	Half distance between Ouerle and Souste lived a man called Knoist, who had three son: the first was blind, the second and third paralytic naked as a worm. One day they were walking through the fields, they saw a hare pulled the blind, the lame one caught the stark naked in his pocket. They then arrived on the shore of a large and powerful river, and there were three boats: one was updated, the other casting and third bottomless. They went all three into a boat without bottom. They then reached a vast and immense forest, and in it there was a huge, huge tree, and the tree there was a huge, huge chapel and the chapel there was a charming wooden sacristan and a wooden boxwood priest, who distributed holy water with big clubs. Blessed is he quiPeut evade holy water!
Little Claus and big Claus	2009	1535	French	In a town remained two men who were called by the same name, Claus; but one had four horses, and the other was only one: therefore, to distinguish them, to be called the first great Claus. and the other big Claus. Listen carefully now what happened to them, because it is a true story Throughout the week, Little Claus was obliged to plow the land of Great Claus, and lend him his one horse!; However, Great Claus was helping her with her four horses once a week, that is to say every Sunday only. Hutsch! as big Claus then cracked his whip above the five horses! He regarded them as his own. The sun was so beautiful! All the bells calling the world to the church; Men and women dressed in their best clothes went to Little Claus, who, plowing cheerfully, cracked his whip and exclaimed: "Gee, then, my horses!" "Do not tell my horses, "cried once great Claus," there is only one that is yours. "But little Claus soon forgot the warning, and seeing some other people go, he could not help cry again: "! Hue therefore, my horses" "for the last time, 'said great Claus, not repeated these words If this happens to you again, I will take such a blow to the front of your horse that! . it will fall dead on the spot "I will not say more," said little Claus But when he passed still people who greeted him in a friendly head, he became very happy;. and proud to be able to plow his field with five horses, he cracked his whip, exclaiming, "Hue therefore, my horses!" "I will learn the hue so! to your horses, "said Great Claus; then he took a club, and applied a blow so hard the little horse from the front Claus he fell dead on-champ.Son master began to weep and lament ; then he skinned the dead animal, made dry the skin to the wind, put it in a bag, and went to the city for the way vendre.Le was long and went through a great forest; it was a terrible time Little Claus. lost his way, and before he had found the right path, the night came, he had to give up in return ville.Près the road was a large farm, and though the shutters were closed, there gleamed . light "Maybe I could spend the night," thought he, and he knocked on the Portela woman opened it, but when she heard what he wanted, she told him to go his way her husband was out, and she did not receive foreigners "Either I will sleep outside," he answered the woman closed the porte.Près of the house was.. a barn filled with hay thatched roof. "I will sleep well," said Little Claus, "the bed is good, and there is no danger that the stork bite my legs." On the roof perched a stork beside his nid.Il crawled into the barn, where it lay. He turned several times to sleep well. The shutters of the house is not closing completely, he could see what was happening in the chambre.Au middle stood a large table adorned with a roast, fish and several bottles of wine. The peasant and the singer sat happily and feasted. "As they are happy!" said Little Claus. And he stretched his head to see better. The woman served a delicious cake. Good God, what a feast Suddenly a man on horseback approached the house!; was the husband of the peasant who was returning home lui.Tout the world felt like a good man, but he had a strange disease: he could see a cantor without coming into fury. Knowing this particular, the champion had the opportunity to make a visit to the woman and say hello, while the husband was away; and the good woman had made him honor him for a delicious meal. To avoid inconvenience, when she heard her husband was, she begged his guest to hide in a large empty chest; which he did willingly, knowing the farmer's disease. Then the woman promptly shook the room and wine in the oven, so that her husband did not Adressat him question embarrassante.Quel pity! sighed Little Claus in the barn seeing disappear gâteau.- Who's up there? cried the peasant, turning, he saw Little Claus. Why sleep you there? Come instead in the room "Little Claus told him how he had lost his way, and asked for hospitality for the night." Willingly! replied the farmer, but first eat a piece "The woman received them both with kindness, prepared the table again, and served a large plate of rice the farmer, who was hungry, ate heartily;.. but little Claus thought about the delicious roast, cake and wine hidden in four.Il threw under the table the bag containing the horse's skin, as he could not bear the rice, he pressed his foot on the bag, and cracked dry skin. "Hush! he said in his bag; but at the same time, he cracked more fort.- What is it in the bag? asked the paysan.- A wizard replied Claus; he does not want us to eat rice. He said that, for an effect of his magic, he is in the oven roast, fish and cake "It's not possible," said the farmer promptly opening the oven. he discovered the wonderful dishes that his wife had tightened it, and thought that the wizard had done this miracle. The woman, without daring to say anything, put everything on the table, and they began to eat fish, roast and cake. Claus was again packed his skin. "What does he say now? Asked the paysan.- He said near the oven, he brought three bottles of wine." The woman served them wine, and her husband began to drink by brightening more. He would have liked to have such a sorcerer with that of Little Claus Bag "I wish he might show me the devil, said the peasant. I would be pleased, as I am quite train.- My sorcerer can all I ask him. " Then he cracked the bag: "Do you hear it said yes, but the devil is in terrible voir.- Oh, I'm not afraid mine What he has - he will appear before us in?.?.? as a chantre.- Phew it's ugly I can not stand the sight of a cantor no matter;!. as I know it's the devil, I have courage only. it does not approach me "Little Claus put his ear to listen as the bag the sorcerer." what he said -? he says, if you want to open that large chest over there in the corner, you will see the devil, but we must hold the lid so that it escapes pas.- Help me hold it, "said the peasant, approaching the chest where the woman had hidden the true champion trembling frayeur.Le was raised to cover. "Whew exclaimed the farmer by making a leap backwards, I saw It looks quite the champion of our church! It's horrible!" Then they resumed drinking well into the night. " Sell ​​me your sorcerer, said the peasant, I'll give you anything you like; a whole bushel full of money if you exiges.- I can not, said little Claus Dream a little how much. me is utile.- Yet you rendrais me very happy, 'said the peasant insistant.- Either! finally said little Claus, since you gave me hospitality, I will give you the wizard for a bushel full of money, but do me good mesure.- you will be satisfied, only I pray you to take away the chest; I do not want it rest another hour in the house Perhaps the devil is always there. ". this small Claus gave the farmer his bag with dry skin; he received in return a whole bushel full of money, and, into the bargain, a large wheelbarrow to transport money and chest. "Goodbye!" he said, and he éloigna.De the other side of the forest, he stopped on a brand new bridge, used to cross a deep river, and said aloud: "What would I do to ? this bad chest weighs as if it were filled with stones I'm already tired of the roll;. it is better that I threw into the river if the water the door to my house, fine, otherwise I m. 'to pass. "Then he lifted the trunk of a hand, as if to throw it in the water." wait a minute, wait so cried the bard in the trunk, let me first out ! .- Whew exclaimed little Claus, pretending to frighten the devil is still there, I have the drowning soon - No, no, cried the bard, spare me, I will give you a bushel of money. "it's different," said little Claus, opening the chest. cantor went out, pushed the empty chest into the water and returned to give him his big Claus bushel of money. Claus was and what fill his wheelbarrow. Returning che z him in his room, he rolled on the floor all the coins. "This is a horsehide sold well! if he cried. Big Claus die of spite when he hears all the wealth that my only horse reported to me. "Then he sent a boy to Great Claus, requesting him to lend him a bushel empty." What does he do? " thought great Claus. he smeared tar background, so that there remained something attached. When the valve was returned to him, he found glued three dimes. "What! Is he exclaimed, where the hell he took all this?" He ran immediately to Little Claus. "Where did you get all this money?" - From my horse's skin, I sold yesterday soir.- You've drawn a good price, "said Great Claus, and then he quickly returned home, took an ax, cut down his four horses, and carried their skin flayed to the city. "the skin! skins! who wants to buy skins? "cried he in all rues.Tous cobblers and tanners came running to ask the price." A bushel of money for each large Claus.- replied Are you crazy? do you think we have money by bushels - Hides! skins! continued he, who wants to buy skins "And if anyone bargained them"? A bushel of money for each, he replied toujours.- He wants to mock us, "finally cried all . Then the world shoemakers took their straps, curriers their aprons, and they began to hit roughly great Claus "We will arrange so your skin, it will become red and blue, they said. do you want to save you, do you want to save you! "And Great Claus, amid blows, ran out of town." Good! he said after returning home; it's small Claus is the cause of it all. I'll kill him. "But the old nurse from Little Claus was dead, and, although it was shown very nasty to him, he wept. He laid the dead woman in his bed, to see if he could not . recall to life, and stayed all night in a corner on a chaise.Au middle of the night, the door opened, and great Claus came in with his ax. Knowing where was placed the bed little Claus, he approached it slowly, and applied a violent blow to the front of the old dead nurse. "Now you do not deceive me! he said walking away because he thought killing her ennemi.- What a wicked man! cried Little Claus; it's me he wanted to kill. Fortunately for my old nurse she was already dead. "He then donned the old woman of his Sunday clothes, borrowed a horse of his neighbor, and harnessed to his car. He set the old in the back seat, so she could fall, and thus crossed the forest. Arriving at an inn, little Claus stopped to ask something manger.L'aubergiste was a very rich man, a good fellow at bottom, but away as if his body had been filled with pepper and tobacco. "Hello! said he to Little Claus; ! As you're dressed up today - Yes, replied Claus coming down; I'll drive my old nurse in the city. Bring her a glass of mead to cool, and speak to him loudly as it does almost hear pas.- I will not fail, said the innkeeper; and he went to pour a large glass of mead, he carried it to the old in the car "Here is a glass of mead," cried he to the dead woman. but she did not move. "Did you not hear me shouted it with all his might;? here's a glass of mead from your master." But it was nice to run out shout, old did not move. So carried away by anger, he threw the glass in the face with such force that she fell back into the car being retained by any attache.En this time, Little Claus came. "A thousand misfortunes! Is he exclaimed, grabbing the innkeeper in the chest, you killed my nurse, look at the hole that thou hast done front.- Yes! Woe to me! Replied the innkeeper wringing his hands, I again yielded to my passion. my dear little Claus, I will fill you a bushel of money, and I will bury your nurse like she was my mother, if you will not betray me. The executioner cut off my head than you'd be none the wiser, and it would do me much harm, to me. "Claus accepted, received a third bushel of money, and instructed the innkeeper at the enterrement.Revenu , he sent a boy to great Claus to borrow a bushel empty "what to say exclaimed one;.? so I did not kill I have to see him myself! . " He immediately went to Little Claus with boisseau.Comme he opened his eyes when he saw all that money! "How did you win the treasure asked, il.- You killed my nurse in my place? I sold her body, and it gave me a bushel of argent.- C ' is a good price! " said Great Claus. Then he hurried back home, took an ax and killed his nurse old. Then he placed it in his car, went to the city and asked the druggist if he wanted to buy a corpse "Come, said the apothecary. But first tell me where you tiens.- this is my nurse that I have killed for selling a bushel of argent.- Good God, are you crazy to say such things, the risk of you to cut your head? " But having learned the truth, he understood the wicked man the horror of his conduct and the punishment he deserved. Thereupon Great Claus frightened jumped into his car, whipped the horses and returned at a gallop. Everyone thought the fool. "I will avenge me! If he cried on the highway, avenge me of Little Claus!" And as soon as he returned, he took a large bag, went to Little Claus, and said: "I was fooled again thy After shooting my four horses, I killed my nurse; you alone! are the cause of all evil, but you do not deceive me. " Then he seized Little Claus by the waist, shoved it in the bag, and threw it over her shoulders, saying, "I'm going to drown you!" The path to the river was long, and big Claus much to bear: that's why the killer went into a tavern to cool, leaving the bag behind the house, where no one went. "alas, alas!" sighed Little Claus in the bag turning and turning; but could not get to untie the rope. By chance, a cow escaped from the meadow ran in that direction, and an old shepherd ran after him to make him reach his flock. Seeing the bag that was moving, he stopped. "Who's there? Cried-il.- A poor young man who is just now entering paradis.- You are very disgusted! I, a poor old man, I'd be glad to enter more earlier possible.- well my good man, opens the bag and put yourself in my place!. seras.- soon you will all my heart said the old shepherd by opening the bag to push out the small Claus "But me you promise to keep my herd? "" Certainly! "And the old man went into the bag that big Claus closed. After that, Claus meets all cattle, and went by pushing ahead moments later lui.Quelques Great Claus came out of the tavern and handed the bag on his back. he found much light as the old shepherd lean less weighed little Claus. "This is the water of life that gave me strength, he said, the better." And arrived at the river, he threw the shepherd shouting: "Now you will not deceive me!" Then he took the road to his house, but where roads crossed he met little Claus driving before him a herd of cattle. "What! exclaimed Great Claus, do not I drowned you? - Yes! you got me thrown into the river, there is a half-heure.- And where did you get that beautiful herd of cattle - cattle It is the sea! I'll tell you, by first thanking you for having drowned me; because now I am rich for ever, as you see. Locked in the bag, I shuddered with fear; and the wind whistled around my ears when you Jetas me in cold water. I immediately went to the bottom, but not to hurt me, as it grows a long soft grass. Soon the bag was opened, and a lovely young lady, dressed in white, wearing a green crown on the head, took my hand and said: "I waited for you, my little Claus; look what a nice gift I'm going make." And she showed me a herd of cattle. I thanked her politely, and asked her to show me the way back to earth; which she did with great kindness. You see, Great Claus, the river is for the people of the sea as a highway lined with beautiful trees, leafy and fragrant flower fields. I felt the fish swimming around my head like birds flying through the air; everywhere in the valleys grazed a bold and beautiful animals. Soon I arrived with my flock to rise leading to land, and here I am - You are lucky! said Great Claus; Do you believe that I also have a herd of cattle, if I go to the river bottom - Probably, but I can carry you into the bag until then, you're too heavy: if you want to go and poke you in the bag after, I will push you there volontiers.- you're a good boy, little Claus; but remember well that if I do not come back with a sea herd of cattle, I will administer you a good thrashing of bâton.- There is no danger, "said Little Claus, and they When set off the beasts, which were thirsty, saw the water, they ran with all their might to drink "Look how they hurry, said little Claus.. I long to return to their fond.- Come quickly! Help me, great replied Claus entering the bag; and, for greater safety, adds a large stone; otherwise I might perhaps not get to fond.- Be quiet! said Little Claus, you will arrive there. "But he added a huge stone, tied up the bag, and pushed him into the river. Ploum! Here Great Claus falling to the bottom." I'm afraid there not meeting the girl to cattle, "said little Claus, and then he escorted his flock on the high road, and went home very happy.
Hansel and Gretel	145	327A	French	At the edge of a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter and his wife and two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. The family does not eat. One year there was famine in the country and that the bread itself came to be missed, the woodcutter brooding dark thoughts, a night in bed and chewed his worries. He told his wife - What are we becoming? How to feed our poor children, when we have nothing for ourselves? - Well, my man, 'said the woman, do you know what we'll do? At dawn, we will take the children deep into the forest we will light their fire and give them each a piece of bread. Then we will go to our work and leave them alone. They find the way home and we will be freed. - No, wife, said the man. I will not do that! How could I bring myself to leave our children alone in the forest! Wild animals would soon devour them. - Oh! crazy, she replied, you prefer so that we die of hunger every four? So there remains only you planing the boards for our coffins. She never stopped he consented that it proposed. - But I still pity the poor children, said the man. The two children had been unable to sleep as they were hungry. They had heard that the stepmother said to their father. Gretel wept bitter tears and said to his brother: - It is all of us - Easy, Gretel, said Hansel. Do not worry; I'll find a way we learn. When parents were asleep, he got up, put his clothes, opened the door, and slipped out. The moon shone in the sky and the white gravel in front of the house glittered like diamonds. Hansel bent over and put in his pockets as he could. Then he went into the house and said to Gretel: - Have faith, dear little sister, and sleep in peace. God will not abandon us. And he himself went back to bed. When the day came, even before the sun had risen, the woman woke the two children - Standing lazy! We will go into the forest to fetch wood. She gave them a piece of bread to each and said: - Here for lunch; do not eat anything before, because you have nothing else. As Hansel's pockets were full of stones, Gretel put the bread in her apron. Then they went all the way to the forest. After some time, Hansel stopped and looked toward the house. And always, he repeated the gesture. The father said: - What are you looking Hansel and why do you always remains behind? Take care of yourself and do not forget to walk! - Ah! father said Hansel, I look at my little white cat that is sitting up on the roof and say goodbye. The woman said: - Fool that you are! this is not the kitten, it is a reflection of the sun on the fireplace. Hansel, in reality, had not seen the cat. But at every stop, he took a white stone in his pocket and threw on the way. When they arrived in the middle of the forest, the father said: - Now, children, collect wood! I will light a fire that you do not cold. Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood atop a small hill. When it was set on fire and it was well taken, the woman said: - Lie down with him, children, and rest. We will cut wood. When we finish, we'll get you. Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire and when lunchtime came, they ate their piece of bread. They heard sound of an ax and thought their father was near. But it was not the ax. It was a branch that the woodcutter had tied to a dead tree and that the wind was beating it, and there. As they sat there for hours, eyes finally drop their tired and they fell asleep. When they awoke, it was dark. Gretel began to cry and said: - How will we get out of the forest Hansel comforted - Wait a little, he said, until the moon rises?. So we will find our way. When the full moon shone in the sky, he took his sister by the hand and followed the white pebbles. They sparkled like fresh ECU beaten and showed the way. The children went all night, and when the day dawned, they reached his father's house. They knocked at the door. When the woman had opened and when she saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said - naughty children! why have you slept so long in the forest? We thought you never would return. Their father, he was glad, because he had a heavy heart for having left them alone in the forest. Shortly after, misery reigned over again and the children heard their mother say at night to her husband: - It only remains for us nothing to eat half a loaf only, and after, no more song! We must get rid of the children; we will drive even deeper into the forest so that they can no longer find their way; There is nothing else to do. The father was very unhappy. He thought - "It would be better to share the last bite with children." But the woman would not hear. She scolded him and asked a thousand reproaches. Who said "A" must say "B." As he accepted the first time, he had to agree again. The children were still asleep. They had heard everything. When the parents had gone to sleep Hansel got up with the intention to go pick up pebbles as the previous time. But the wife had locked the door and the boy could not get out. But he comforted his little sister: - Do not cry, Gretel, sleep in peace; the good God will help us. Early morning the wife came and pulled the children. She gave them a piece of bread, even smaller than the other times. On the road to the forest, Hansel crumbled in his pocket; he often stopped to throw some on the floor. - Hansel, what have you stopping and looking around you? the father said. Go thy way! - I look at my little dove on the roof, saying goodbye! Hansel said. - Crazy! said the woman. This is not the dove, the morning sun shining on the chimney. Hansel, however, continued to sow bread crumbs along the way. The woman led the children in the depths of the forest, further than they had never been. We remade it a great fire and the woman said: - Stay there, kids. When you are tired you can sleep a little we will cut wood and tonight when we finish, we will pick you. At noon, Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, who had strewed his along the way. Then they slept and the evening passed without anyone would return to them. They awoke in the middle of the night, and Hansel comforted his little sister, saying: - Wait until the moon rises, Gretel, we shall see the crumbs of bread that I have scattered they show us the way home. When the moon rose, they set off. But crumbs point. The thousand birds of the fields and woods had eaten them. The two children went all night and the next day, without finding out of the forest. They were starving, having to put in their mouths some berries. They were so tired that their legs would no longer carry them. They lay down beneath a tree and fell asleep. Three days had already passed since they left home. They continued walking, still sinking further into the forest. If no one was coming to their aid, they would soon die. At noon they saw a pretty bird on a branch, white as snow. He sang so that the children stopped to listen. When he finished, he spread his wings and flew in front of them. They followed him to a small house on top of which the beautiful white bird perched. When they were approached in close, they saw that it was made of bread and covered with cakes. The windows were in sugar. - We'll get to work, said Hansel, and make a meal blessed of God. I will eat a piece of the roof; it looks to be good! Hansel climbed onto the roof and tore a small piece to taste. Grethel started to lick the tiles. We then heard a sweet voice from the room - Language, tongue licking! ? Who licks my house The children answered - The wind is the wind. This heavenly child. And they continued to eat without being deflected from their task. Hansel, who found the very good roof, knocked a chunk down and Gretel poked an entire window, sat on the floor and began to eat. The door suddenly opened and a woman as old as the stones, leaning on a cane, left the house. Hansel and Gretel were so frightened that they let fall what they had in their hands. Old shook his head and said: - Hey! dear children, that you drove here? Enter, come home! There will be no harm. She took them both by the hand and brought him into the house. She served them a good meal, milk and donuts with sugar, apples and walnuts. She then prepared two small beds. Hansel and Gretel it slept. They thought they were in paradise. But the friendship of old was only apparent. In reality, it was a wicked witch on the lookout for children. She had built the house of bread to attract them. When she took one, it was killing him, was the cook and eat. For her, it was so festive day. The witch's eyes were red and she could not see very clearly. But she had a sure instinct, like the beasts, and come away feeling human beings. When Hansel and Gretel had approached her house, she laughed wickedly and said in a honeyed voice: - Those, I have them! It will not take that escape me! At dawn, before children will be awake, she got up. When she saw that relied so nicely with their rosy cheeks, she muttered: - What good meal I'll do! She grabbed Hansel with her withered hand, and led him into a little stable, and shut him up in the lock. It was beautiful scream, it served him for nothing. The witch then approached Gretel, shook her awake and cried - up, lazy! Fetch water and cook something good to eat your brother. He is locked in the barn and he must fatten. When he is at the point, I will eat. Gretel began to cry, but it served him for nothing. She was forced to do what he asked the ogress. We prepared for poor Hansel most delicate dishes. Grethel got nothing but crab shells. Every morning the old glided up the team and said: - Hansel, stretch out your fingers, I see if you're getting fat. But Hansel held out a small bone and the witch who had bad eyes, do not realize. She believed that it was really the finger of Hansel and marveled that he developed fatter. When four weeks had passed, and the child was still thin, she lost patience and decided not to wait any longer. - Whoa! Gretel, she cried, hurry to bring water. Whether Hansel is fat or thin, tomorrow I'll kill and eat. Oh, how she wept, little poor in carting his water buckets, as tears rolled down her cheeks! - Good God, help us then! cried she. If only the beasts of the forest we had eaten! At least we should have died together! - Stop you whine! said the old woman; it will serve you for nothing! Early morning Grethel had to fill the big pot of water and light the fire. - We will first make the dough, said the witch. I've heated the oven and prepared it takes. She pushed poor Grethel towards the oven, from which came great flames. - Creep in! she commanded, and see if it is hot enough for cooking. She intended to close the oven when the little there is to roast. She wanted to eat, too. But Grethel perceived her intention, and said: - I do not know how to do, how do we enter this oven? - Small goose, said the witch, the opening is large enough, see, I could get in myself. And she put her head. Then Gretel pushed strongly in the oven, slammed the door and put the lock. The witch screamed terribly. But Grethel went and this terrible witch had only to roasting. Grethel, she ran as fast as she could in Hansel. She opened the little stable, and said: - Hansel, we are free! The old witch is dead! Hansel jumped out of his prison, as fast as a bird which has just opened the cage. As they were happy! As they took each other by the neck, danced and kissed! With nothing to fear, they entered the house of the witch. In every corner there stood chests of pearls and diamonds. - It's even better than my small stones! said Hansel by filling his pockets. And Gretel added - I too want to take home and put it in as she could in her apron!. - Now we have to go, 'said Hansel, if we want to escape this forest bewitched. After a few hours, they arrived on the banks of a great river. - We can not cross it, said Hansel, I see no bridge or bridge. - You can not see no boat, said Gretel. But here is a white duck. If I ask him, he will help us to cross. She screamed: - Little duck, little duck, Hansel and Grethel We are. There is no boat, no ford or bridge, Make us go before it is late. The duckling came Hansel and straddled his back. He asked his sister to sit beside him. - No, she replied, that would be too heavy for the duck. We cross one after another. The good little animal and led them safely. When they had thus passed the water without damage, they realized after some time that the forest became their increasingly familiar. Finally, they saw off the house of their father. They began to run, rushed into the room with parents and jumped to their father's neck. The man had not had a single moment of happiness since he left his children in the forest. His wife had died. Grethel opened her apron and pearls and diamonds rolled through the room. Hansel took out of his other pocket by handles. That was the end of worries. They lived happily together.
History of the man who went forth to learn fear	5264	326	French	A father had two son; the first was smart and sensible, and could do any adventure. But the younger was stupid, unable to understand and learn. When people saw him, they said: "With him, his father did not finish see." When there was something to do, it was always the elder that returned the task, and if his father asked him to fetch something, evening or even at night, and had to go through the cemetery or some other terrifying place, he replied: "Oh no father, I will not go, I'm afraid!". For it was indeed afraid. When, at the vigil, stories were told to give goosebumps, sometimes those who heard them said, "It makes me shudder!" The youngest son, he sat in his corner, listened and did not understand what they meant. "They always say:" It gives me the creeps! it makes me shudder! Me never! This is another thing I do not understand. "It happened that one day his father told him:" Listen see you, there in your corner! You become big and strong. It's time you learned to earn your bread. See how your brother tries hard. "-" Oh! father, "he replied," I would learn willingly. If possible, I would like to learn to shudder. This is something that I have no idea "When he heard these words, the eldest son mused." Lord God! what idiot my brother! It will never do anything in his life "The father thought and said." You will learn some day to be afraid. But this is not how you earn your bread. "Shortly after, the beadle came to visit home. The father told him his sentence and explained how his son was very gifted in all things." Think see! When I asked him how he would do to earn his bread, he said he wanted to learn to shudder! "-" If this is it, "said the beadle," I'll teach him. . Entrust it to me "The father was happy, he said:" We will just stretch the "The sexton therefore brought the home and gave him the task of ringing bells After some time, his.. master asked awoke at midnight and him to get up and climb the bell tower to chime. "You'll see what it's like to be scared," he thought. he secretly left home and when the boy was come the top of the tower, as he was about to grab the ropes, he saw on the stairs below him, an all-white form. "Who goes there?" he shouted. the appearance did not answer , did not move. "Answer!" cried the young man. "Or decamped! You have nothing to do here "The beadle still did not move He wanted the young man took him for a ghost For the second time, it cried.."! What are you doing here? Speak if you are an honest man. Otherwise I'll throw you to the bottom of the staircase "The sexton thought,".... It will do nothing "He did not answer and remained motionless as if he were stone Then the boy warned for third time and as the ghost still did not answer, he took his momentum and rushed down the stairs. the appearance of tumbled down ten steps and remained lying there. the boy rang the bell, went home, lay without a word and slept the beadle's wife waited long for her husband, but he did not return Eventually she became frightened, the young man woke up and asked:... "do you know where my husband stayed? He climbed the steeple before you. "-" No, "he replied," I do not know. But there was someone on the stairs and as this person did not answer my questions and did not want to leave, I took it for a scoundrel and threw it at the bottom of the bell tower. Go ahead, see if it was your husband. . I regret it "The woman went running and found her husband moaning in the corner, one leg cassée.Elle brought him back to the house, then went with loud cries in the father of the young man:" Your boy did woes, "she told him." he threw my husband down the stairs, where he broke a leg. ! Get rid our house of this rascal "The father was very worried he fetched his son and said." What are these ways, miscreant! It is the devil that inspires you! "-" Listen to me, father, "he replied." I'm totally innocent. He stood there, in the night, as someone who meditates a bad shot. I did not know who it was, and three times I asked him to answer or leave. "-" Ah, "said the father," you will do me the miseries. Disappear! "-" Willingly, father. Just wait it's day. I will travel to learn to shudder. That way I know at least do something to earn my bread. "-" Learn what you want, "the father said." I do not care! Here fifty talents, will the world and especially do not tell anyone where you come from and who your father is. "-" Let it be done according to your will, Father. If this is all you require, I will keep myself easily "When the day came, the young man pocketed the fifty talents and took the road by saying." If only I was afraid! if only I shuddered "comes a man who hears the words of the boy said to himself a little further, to a place where they could see the gallows, he said."! You see that tree ? There are seven who were married there the daughter of tailpiece and now taking flying lessons. Sit there and wait until night falls. You'll know what it is to shudder. "-" If it's that easy, "replied the boy," it is as if it was already done. If I learn so quickly to shiver, I will give my fifty talents. Why do not you come back here tomorrow morning. "The young man sat under the gallows came and waited for the evening. And as he was cold, he lit the fire. At midnight the wind had become so cold that despite the fire, he could not manage to warm And hanged rattled by shaking it, to then he thought.. "I, here, by the fire, I freeze. As they must be cold and shivering, those who are up there! "And as he took pity on them, he placed the ladder against the gallows, the scaled, took down the hanged one after the other and went down all . seven he stirred the fire, blew on the embers and laid them hung around to warm them as they did not move and the flames were licking their clothes, he said. "so be careful! Otherwise I'll rependre you there! "The dead, however, heard nothing, said nothing and left burn their rags. The boy ends up getting angry." If you're not careful, "he said, "I can do nothing! I do not want to burn you. "And, one after another, he hung on the gallows. He lay down by the fire and fell asleep. The next day the man came and demanded him fifty talents, "So now you know what it is to have the thrill?" he said, "No," replied the boy, "where would I know.? Those who are up there did not open her mouth, and they are so stupid that they let burn some clothes they have on the back. "The man realized he would not get the fifty talents that day and went on to say: "I have never seen a being like that!" The young man also went his way and said again, speaking aloud: "Ah! if only I was afraid! If only I knew shudder "A coachman who was walking behind him he heard and asked," Who are you "-" I do not know, "the boy answered the coachman said."? Where are you from? "-" I do not know, "replied the young man." Who is your father? "-" I do not have the right to say it. "-" What you mumbling incessantly in your beard? "-" Hey! "the boy replied," I would shiver. But no one can tell me how I get there. "-" Stop talking nonsense, "said the driver." Come with me "The young man then accompanied the box and in the evening they arrived at an inn with! . plan to spend the night in entering his room, the boy repeated in a loud voice: "If only I was afraid! If only I knew shiver "The innkeeper heard it and laughed:" If it makes you really happy, surely you shall have the opportunity at home "-" Hold your tongue, "said his wife.".! to be curious, more than one has already died, and it would be a shame for her pretty eyes if they should never see the light of day "But the boy replied." Even if we had come there i want to learn to shudder. This is also why I travel. "He left the innkeeper neither truce nor rest until dévoilât his secret. Not far away, there was a cursed castle, in which he could certainly learn what it was like to be scared, just by spending three nights. the king had promised his daughter in marriage to attempting experience and this girl was the most beautiful we had ever seen as sun. There was also the castle of great treasures guarded by evil spirits whose release could make a very rich poor. Many people had already entered the castle, but no one was ever emerged. the next day, the young man went to the king: "If I may, I would like to spend three nights in the castle." the king looked, and as he pleased, he replied: "you can ask me three things. But none of them can be animated and you can carry them with you to the castle "The boy said to him." Well! I request you fire, a tower and a carver bench with a knife. "The same day, the king bring it all to the castle. At dusk, the young man went there, lit a big fire in a room, moved the stool with the knife while next door and sat on the lap. "Ah, if I could but shudder! "he said. "But it is not yet here I know what it is." Around midnight, he undertook to revive her fire. And as he was blowing it, a voice rang out suddenly in a corner of the room: "Wow, meow like we are cold!" - "Band of crazy!" if he cried. "Why do you scream like that? If you are cold, come here, sit by the fire and warm up!" Hardly had he uttered these words two black cats, a quantum leap, jumped toward him and settled on either side of the boy looking at him with a wild air with their fiery eyes. Some time after, having warmed up, they said: "If we played cards, comrade?" - "Why not!" he replied, "but first show me your paws." Cats out their claws. "Hola!" he said. "Let your nails are long! Wait! You first that I cut you." He took them through the skin of the back, placed on the grip and are wedged their paws. "I saw your fingers," he said, "I lost the desire to play cards." He killed them and threw them out the window in the water of a pond. No sooner was he freed and that all the nooks and crannies out cats and dogs, all black, drawing fire reddened chains. There were so many that he could not escape them. They were shouting frightfully, scattered firebrands from homes trampled the fire, trying to put it out. Slowly, the boy looked at them for a moment. When he had enough, he took the carver's knife and said, "Déguerpissez, scoundrels!" And he began to type on them. Some of the attackers fled; he killed another and threw them into the pond. Then he returned to the fire, revived him by blowing on the embers and warm. Soon he felt his eyes close and was sleepy. He looked around and saw a large bed in the corner. "That's what I need," he said. He lay. As he was falling asleep, the bed began itself to move and walk throughout the castle. "Very well!" he said. "Faster!" The bed went off again as if half a dozen horses were harnessed there, from the doors up and down the stairs. And suddenly he poured upside hop! and the boy found himself on the ground with as a mountain above lui.Il He got blankets and pillows, is slipped from under the bed and said: "Let those who want to walk walk." He lay by the fire and slept until morning. The next day, the king came to the castle. When he saw the boy lying on the ground, he thought that the ghosts had killed. He muttered: "What a shame for such a great man!" The boy heard him, stood up and said: "I'm not there yet!" The king was astonished, welcomes and asked how things had gone. "Very well. This is a night of past, others will do well too." When he arrived at the inn, it opened his eyes. "I never thought," he said, "I see you again alive. Have you finally learned to shudder?" - "No!" He replied, "everything is ineffective if only someone could tell me how." For the second night, he went back to the castle, sat down by the fire and resumed his old song: "Ah! if I could but shudder. " At midnight they heard strange noises. First softly, then louder, then after a short silence, a loud cry. And half of a man coming down the chimney fell before him. "Hola!" cried he. "He missed a half. That's not enough like that!" The uproar continued. It was storming, they cried. And the second half fell to turn the fireplace. "Wait," the boy said, "I will first start the fire for you." When he had done, he looked around again: the two halves had gathered and a man of dreadful mine was sitting in the place occupied by the young man before. "This is not what we agreed," he said. "This tour is mine!" The man tried to prevent him to sit but he did not give tell. He pushed him violently, and resumed his place. Many other men then began to tumble from the chimney one after the other and they brought nine guards and nine skulls with which they started bowling. The boy was tempted to do the same. "Say, can I play too?" - "Yes, if you have money." - "I've had enough," he replied, "but your balls are not round." He took the skull, moved to turn and made real balls. "That way they will roll better," he said. "Forward! Let's laugh!" He played and lost a bit of money. When struck one, everything was gone. In the morning, the king came to the information. "What happened to you this time?" asked he. "I played bowling," the boy replied, "and I lost some money." - "So you are not afraid?" - "Oh no!" he said, "I had fun If I only knew shudder!" The third night he sat down again on his turn and said sadly: "If only I could shudder!" When it began to get late, huge six men entered the room carrying a coffin. "Hi! Hi! Hi!" the boy said, "surely that is my cousin who died there a few days." Finger, he motioned to the coffin and cried: "Come, little cousin, come!" The men laid the coffin on the ground; he approached it and lifted the lid. A dead lay there. He touched her face. It was cold as ice. "Wait," he said, "I'll warm up to you." He went to the fire, it warmed her hand and placed it on the figure of death. But it all remained cold. Then he came out of the coffin, sat by the fire and sat on his lap as he rubbed his arms to restore circulation. As there was no point, he suddenly remembered that he simply be two in bed to keep warm. He put the corpse on the bed, covered him and lay down beside her. After a while, the death warmed and began to move. "You see, little cousin," said the young man, "did I not warmed you?" But the death, then stood up and exclaimed, "Now I'll strangle you!" - "About what!" said the boy, "this is how you repay me? Returns to the coffin!" He girdled, and threw in beer by closing the lid. The six men then came and took him. "I do not manage to shudder," he said. "It's definitely not where I teach." At that moment came a greater man than all the others and had a scary mine. He was old and wore a long white beard. "Poor devil," he said, "you do not slack to know what it is to shudder! You will die" - "Not so fast!" replied the boy. "For me to die, he would first have you held me." - "I will end well for you have!" said the monstrous man. "Softly, softly! Does not inflate you like that! I am as strong as you. And even much stronger!" - "This is what we see," said the old. "If you're stronger than me, I'll let you go. Come on, try!" He led by a dark passage in a forge, took an ax and suddenly, broke an anvil into the ground. "I will do better," said the young man approaching another anvil. The old man stood beside him, his white beard hanging down. The boy took the ax, split the anvil at once and are cornered beard old. "That's it! I want you!" he said, "for you to die now!" He grabbed an iron bar and began to pummel the old until it broke out into lamentation and suppliât to stop by promising a thousand treasures. The young man unblocked ax and released the old man led him back to the castle and showed her in a cellar, three boxes full of gold. "There is one for the poor, one for the king and the third will be for you," he said. Whereupon one o'clock struck, and the evil spirit disappeared. The boy was in the midst of darkness. "It will be necessary that I so," he said. He fumbled around, found the way to his room and fell asleep with his fire. In the morning, the king arrived and said, "So, did you learn to shudder?" - "No," the boy replied, "I'm still not sure I saw my dead cousin and a bearded man came who showed me a lot of gold, but nobody told me what it means to shiver.. . " The king said, "You freed the castle of its ghosts and you will marry my daughter." - "Good thing!" he replied, "but I do not know still shivering." We went for the gold and the wedding was celebrated. But the young king continued to say: "If only I was afraid if I could but shudder!" The queen eventually be thwarted. The maid said: "I will help to shiver I'll help shiver!" She went on the banks of the stream that ran into the garden and did give a full bucket of bolts. During the night, while her husband was asleep, the princess pulled the blankets and poured water on him and the studs, so that the small fish wriggled around him. He awoke and cried! "Ah, as I shudder, dear wife Ah yes, now I know what it is to shudder."
Jean Lucky	794	1415	French	John had served his master seven years; he said: "Sir, my time is up, I would return to my mother, pay me my wages, please." His master replied, 'You got me well and loyally served, the reward will good. "and he gave her a gold bar, as big as the head of Jean.Jean drew his handkerchief from his pocket, wrapped up the ingot, and, on his shoulder at the end of a stick, he set way to go to her parents. As he walked along, always one foot before the other, he saw a horseman trotting merrily on a powerful horse. "Ah, said Jean aloud to himself, what a beautiful thing to ride! You sit as on a chair, no mound against the stones of the way, we save her shoes, and advance God knows how "the rider, who had heard him, stopped and said:"!? Hey John, why are you walking - it must be so, he replied, I wear my parents what large ingot, it is true that it is gold, but it weighs no less on épaules.- If you like, said the rider, we will change; I will give you my horse, and you give me your ingot .- with all my heart, 'said John, but you will have your support, I warn you "the rider went down, and after taking the gold, he helped John to go up and put his bridle hand saying. "Now when you want to go fast, you just have to crack the language and say! Hop hop" John was in the joy of his soul when he saw himself on horseback. After a moment the urge took him to go faster, and he began to slam the language and shouting: "Hop hop!" As soon as the horse plunged galloping, and John before had time to beware, was thrown down in a ditch on the side of the road. The horse would have continued to run, he was arrested by a farmer who was in the opposite direction, driving a cow before him. John, a very bad temper, rose as he could and told the farmer: "It's a sad hobbies of riding, especially when dealing with poor beast like this, which throws you ground at the risk of breaking your neck, and God forbid I ever go above well and good cow like yours! we will quietly behind her, and the bargain was daily milk, butter, cheese What do not I give to have such a cow. - well, said the peasant, because it gives you so much pleasure, take my cow for your horse "John was overjoyed.. The farmer mounted his horse and quickly walked away, John drove his cow quietly before him, thinking of the excellent market he had done: "A piece of bread alone, and I shall not want, because I will always butter and cheese to put on it. If I'm thirsty, I milk my cow and drink the milk. What can you want? "at the first inn he came to, he halted and consumed happily all the provisions he had taken for the day; for two farthings he had left there was give half a glass of beer, and, taking his cow, he continued on his way. It was approaching noon; the heat was oppressive, and John found himself in a moor which had more than a mile long. He suffered so hot, his tongue was stuck thirst to his palace. "There is remedy for the evil thought he and I will milk my cow and refresh myself a glass of milk." He tied his cow to a dead tree trunk, and lack bucket, he handed his hat but it was useless to press the worse, not a drop of milk came only after his fingers. To make matters worse, as he did it clumsily, impatient beast gave him such a kick on the head, she stretched out on the ground, where he remained for some time without connaissance.Heureusement he was relieved by a butcher who was passing by, carrying a pig on a wheelbarrow. John told him what had happened. The butcher gave him a drink, saying, "Drink this to comfort you, this cow will never give you milk: it is an old beast that is not good for business or slaughter." John tore his hair in despair: "who would notice if he cried No doubt this will make the meat for him who shall break down, but for me I feel little cow meat!. it has no taste that's right a little pig like yours: that is good besides the pudding - Listen, John, said the butcher to please you, I willing to barter my pig.! against your vache.- May God reward you for your good friendship for me, "answered John!; and he gave the cow to the butcher. This setting his pig to the ground, put in the hands of John the rope that the attachait.Jean went his way, thinking how much he was lucky: he found a difficulty, she was immediately leveled. Meanwhile, he met a boy who was on his arm a fine white goose. They wished each other good morning, and John began to tell her chances and following exchanges happy he had made. For his part, the boy said that he wore a goose for a meal of baptism. "See, he said, taking her by the wings, see what gravity! It is true that the empâta for two months. He who bite in this-there will roast fat sink him on both sides of the mouth. - Yes, says John, the raising of the hand, it has its weight, but my pig has its merits as "Then the boy began to shake his head at all sides carefully.. "Listen, he said, the case of your pig could not be clearer. In the village through which I passed just now, one has just to steal one in the stable of the Mayor . I am afraid, I'm afraid it is the same as you take the country were sent people fight;. it would be an adventure for you ugly, if you were catching up with the beast, that the least you could get would be cast into a dead-end low-fosse.- Alas, my God, poor Jean replied, beginning to die of fear, pity me! there is only thing to do: take my pig and give me your oie.- This is much risk, said the boy, but if you harm came, I would not be the cause "and taking the rope there. promptly took the pig by a side road, while the honest John, cleared worry, went home with his goose under his arm. "On reflection, thought he to himself, I still won that exchange, first a good roast and then with all the fat that will flow, I am provided with goose fat for three months at least, and finally, with the beautiful white feathers, I will be a pillow on which I sleep well without being lulled me What joy for my mother "going through the last village before arriving home he.! saw a grinder that turned his wheel singing: I am grinder unparalleled; turn, my wheel, in the sunshine Jean stopped watching it and finally said: "You are happy, that I see; it seems ironing okay? - Yes, replied the grinder is a golden business a good grinder is a man who always has money in his pocket But where did you buy this beautiful goose.. ? - I did not buy it, I've had it in exchange for my cochon.- And the pig? - I got it for my vache.- And the cow - for cheval.- And the horse ? - P our a large gold bar as my tête.- And the ingot - It was my wages for seven years service.- I see, said the grinder, you always knew you hook. Now he'll just find a way to always have the purse, and your happiness is fait.- But how? asked Jean.- You need to grinder like me. To do this, just a whetstone; the rest comes by itself. I have one, a little chipped it's true, but I'll pass you to the little, your goose only. Want - This does not wonder, 'said Jean; Here I am the happiest man on earth. To hell cares when I'll always have full pocket. "He took the stone and gave her goose in payment." Here, said the grinder by giving him a big stone which was common at his feet, I still give you another good stone into the bargain; we can hit it all you want; it will serve to straighten your old nails. Take it with care. "John took charge of the pebble and went swollen heart and eyes shining with joy:" My faith! cried he, I was born wearing; everything I want happens to me, neither more nor less than if I had been born on a Sunday! "However, as he was on his legs since daybreak, he began to feel fatigue as hunger tormented;., For in his joy at having acquired the cow he had eaten all his provisions in one . He shot more advanced with difficulty and stopping at every step, stone and pebble horribly loaded He could not help thinking that it would be happy to have nothing to wear. . while he dragged himself to a nearby spring to rest and refresh themselves by drinking a shot, and, not to be injured with stones sitting down, he laid beside him on the waterfront and then, putting himself in shaping, he advanced to drink, but unwittingly he pushed the stones and they fell to the bottom seeing them disappear before his eyes, he jumped for joy, and tears it. thanked God that had made him the grace to discharge this burden uncomfortable without his having done nothing wrong. "There are not so us the sun, he cried a luckier man than me! "And free from all burdens, light heart like legs, he went on his way home to his mother.
Then Hans	1027	441	French	There was once a peasant who had money and land in greeting, but as rich as it was, there was still something missing in his happiness: he and his wife had no children. Often when he went to town with the other peasants they mocked him and asked him why he had no children. Then one day he got angry and when he returned home, he said: "I want a child, even if it be a hedgehog." Then his wife became pregnant and had a child. He had the head of a hedgehog and the body of a boy, and when the woman saw that she was frightened and said, "See, you wanted." The man replied: "What's it to The child must be christened, but we will not give her godfather?". The woman announced, "We can not call that. Then Hans" When he was baptized, the minister stated: "Because of his quills, he can not sleep in a normal bed." We then made him behind the stove, a litter with a little straw and Jean My Hedgehog was laid on it. He could not breastfeed because it would hurt his mother with his quills. He stayed eight years behind the stove and her father in boring wished he died; but he did not die; it remained lying there. One day there was a market in the city to which the peasant wanted to go; the farmer then asked his wife what he should bring him in. "A little meat and a pair of buns;? What finally What suits a household," she replied. Then turned to the maid who wished to a pair of inner boot and lower laces. Finally he addressing Then Hans: "What would you my boy?" - "Dad," he said, "I reported a bagpipes!" When the farmer returned home, he gave his wife what he had bought him meat and buns; to the servant: the slippers and stockings to lace; lastly, he went behind the stove and gave Hans My Hedgehog the bagpipes. When John my Hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said, "Daddy, go to the forge and make my cock shod there because I want to go away and never come back." The father was glad to be finally rid his cock and told him, and when he was done, Hans My Hedgehog climbed on the back of the cock and went away, but took swine and asses; he wanted to lead them to the woods. In the forest, he settled with the rooster on a high branch to monitor his pigs and donkeys. He stayed a long time, until the herd had grown without his father knowing anything. As he stood in his tree, his bagpipes and played music that was beautiful. One day a king came by, he was lost and heard music: he was astonished and sent his servant to find where it came from. The servant looked around and saw nothing but a little animal sitting on top of a tree; it looked like a rooster on which was perched a hedgehog; there was music. The king said to the servant he was to ask why he was sitting here and he did not know what path to take to get into his kingdom. Then Hans descended from the tree and said he would show the way if the King would write him and promise first met her once back in his court. The king thought, "I can do well at ease, Then Hans will understand nothing, so I can write what I want." Then he dipped his pen in the ink and wrote something, and when he had finished, Then Hans showed him the way; and the king returned home without trouble. But his daughter saw him from afar, full of joy rushed to meet him and kissed him. He thought Then Hans and told him what had happened; he had to promise the extraordinary animal met the first person he would make a once drove home; how the animal was astride a cock as is done with a horse; What beautiful music he played; that he, the king, had written that he would have nothing, since my Hedgehog John could not read. The princess was glad, and said that this was so because there would have gone for anything monde.Pendant this time, Then Hans, always watched his asses and pigs; he was always merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes. Soon it happened that another king came by with his servant and his insane: they were lost and did not know how to find their way because the forest was too great. He also heard in the distance the beautiful music and asked his crazy what could it be and asked him to go there. The runner went under the tree and saw the rooster sat and Jean My Hedgehog astride it. The fool asked him what he was doing up there, "I watch over my asses and my pigs, but what do I owe the pleasure?" The messenger said that they were lost and no longer found themselves the way to their kingdom, and that if he wanted to, he could perhaps show them the way home. Then Hans My Hedgehog descended from the tree and told the old king that he would show him the way if it would offer in exchange the first meeting he would do to his royal residence. The king agreed and wrote to John my Hedgehog, he would have what he asked. When it was done, Then Hans went in front, riding his cock and showed the king the way back who finally returned to his kingdom. When he arrived at the court it was a great joy. He had an only daughter who was very beautiful; She ran to him, fell on his neck welcoming the return of his old father. She also asked why he stayed so long away. He told her how he had lost and would never come home, if he had met in the forest, a creature, half man half hedgehog, riding a rooster, perched on a high branch and making a nice music; he had helped and shown the way but had made him promise to give him the first person he would meet once back at the castle; but alas, it was her and it was very sad. But she promised that she would go willingly with him if he ran for the love of his old père.Mais Then Hans was still watching his pigs, and these were more pigs so that they were so numerous that the whole forest was full. So Then Hans would not live in the forest; he tell his father that he had to empty all the stalls of the village so he came with his huge flock; all might kill as much as he would like. His father was troubled upon hearing this because he thought Then Hans was long dead. But Then Hans rode his cock and pushed his pigs to the village to shoot do. Ah! It was a great slaughter, a real slaughter because we could hear squealing round for two hours. Finally Then Hans said: "Dad, let me see my cock again to the blacksmith for me to leave and never come back." Then the father had the cock shod by farrier rejoicing in what John my Hedgehog would never revenir.Jean my Hedgehog rode into the first kingdom where the king had ordered to shoot, hitting, poking the first to occur by overlapping a cock and would bring a cabrette at his side; so he could get to the castle. But when John approached my Hedgehog, astride his cock, they fell upon him with their bayonets; while spurring, he flew over the gate onto the window of the king; dismounted; Hans cried the king, ordering him to give him what he had promised to the risk that he and his daughter should leave their lives. The king spoke vehemently to her daughter to go with John to my Hedgehog they both live. She dressed in white while his father made him give a car with six horses, good servants, good and money. She sat in the car, Then Hans rejoined the bagpipes at his side and they took leave; King thought he would never see them again. But it was quite otherwise, as when they were distant from the town, Then Hans took off her dress and pierced his quills until she was red with blood, and then he announced: "This is the price your perjury, go, I do not want you, "he drove and was cursed for the rest of his jours.Puis Then Hans overlapping again the rooster, with his bagpipes, arrived in dominions of the second King to whom he had shown the way. He had arranged that if any and Then Hans should submit weapons, guide, grow and lead the cheers at the royal residence. When the princess saw him she was frightened of his extraordinary appearance, but she thought she would not deny the word to his father. So she welcomed Then Hans; then he was married and he went to the royal table where she joined him to eat and drink. When the evening came, and he wanted to sleep, she took very afraid because of his quills, but he asked the old king to send four men who will watch near the door of his room and prepare a large fire. When he will go into the room to lie down, he shall take away his skin hedgehog and leave by the bed: then the men will be seized quickly to throw it in the fire; they will remain until it burns completely. When the clock struck eleven, he entered the room, took off his hedgehog skin and dropped it near the bed: then the men entered, seized it and threw it in the fire and when the flames had consumed Jean my Hedgehog was released from his fate and was lying in bed like a normal man except her skin was black with soot. The king sent him his doctor who washed him with good salves and ointments; then became his white skin; it was a young and handsome Chevalier. When the princess saw him, she was quite happy. When morning came they joyful rose; ate and drank; the wedding was solemnized, and Hans My Hedgehog received the kingdom from the aged roi.Lorsque years were ended, he went with his wife to his father to tell him he was his son; But the father claimed that he had none, he had had a good but that he was born like a hedgehog with spikes, and had gone around the world. Then Hans made himself known; the old father rejoiced and went with him to his kingdom. My story ended here, and then go home in Gustavine.
Jorinde and Joringel	659	405	French	There was once an old castle in the heart of a large thick forest dwelt all alone an old woman who was a great magician. The day she turned into a cat or owl, but in the evening she resumed human form. She had the power to attract birds and game, and then killed them for baking and roasting. If someone approached the castle at a hundred paces, he was forced to stop and could not move from there as it had not issued a magic formula, but if a girl came pure in this circle of pacing, she metamorphosed into a bird, and then locked him in a basket she was in a room of the castle. She had about seven thousand cages of this kind in the castle with a bird so rare in each elle.Or, he was once a young girl called Jorinde; she was more beautiful than all other girls. And then there was a beautiful young man named Joringel: they were promised to each other. They were at the time of their engagement and their delight was to be together.A day they went for a walk in the forest in order to talk in complete intimité.- Beware, says Joringel to go as close to the château.C'était a beautiful evening, the sun shone among the trunks of trees, into the dark green of the forest, and the turtle sang mournfully on old beeches. Jorinde wept now, she sat in the sun and groaned; Joringel groaned himself too. They were as sad as if they were going to die; they looked around, they were lost and did not know what direction they should take to return home. There was still a half of sun above the mountain, the other was already behind. Joringel looked through the thicket and saw the old walls of the castle close to him; he was seized with fear and filled with deadly fear. Jorinde sang: My little bird, with the necklace red, Sings sorrow, pain: He sings that the dove dead, Sings sorrow, doul ... tsitt, tsitt, tsitt. Joringel turned to Jorinda. She was transformed into a nightingale sang, "jug, tsitt." An owl with glowing eyes flew three times around her and shouted three times "hoo, hoo, hoo." Joringel could not move: he stood there like a stone, and could neither weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot. Now the sun had set: the owl flew into the thicket, and immediately after an old woman came out, yellow and lean, with large red eyes and a hooked nose whose tip reached her chin. She mumbled, caught the nightingale, and carried on his fist. Joringel could not speak, could not move: the nightingale was parti.Enfin, the woman came back and said in a low voice: "I salute you, Zachiel if the moon shines on the trash, detach it, Zachiel at the right time. "So Joringel was issued. He fell to his knees before the woman and begged him to make his Jorinde, but she said he did never would and went. He called, wept and lamented, but all in vain.Joringel went and eventually came to a strange village where he was long to keep the sheep. He would often turn around the castle, but not too close. Finally, one night he dreamed that he found a blood-red flower with a beautiful large pearl in his heart. He picked the flower and went to the castle: everything he touched with the flower was freed from enchantment, and he dreamed as he had found Jorinde this manière.En waking up the morning, began looking over hill and dale for such a flower he sought until the ninth day, and that at dawn he found the blood-red flower. In her heart, there was a big drop of dew, as big as the most belle.Il pearl brought this flower day and night until he came to the castle. When he approached a hundred paces of the castle he was not left behind, but he continued walking to the door. Joringel rejoiced; he touched the door with the flower, and it opened at once. He walked in through the courtyard, listening to see if he will not hear the many birds: finally, he heard them. He went in that direction and found the room where the magician was busy feeding the birds in the seven thousand corbeilles.Quand Joringel she saw she was angry, with great fury, she scolded and spat his venom against him, but she could not come within two steps. He disregarded the sorceress went and looked at the cages with the birds; but there were hundreds of nightingales. How was he to find his Jorinde now? While he watched, he saw that the witch quietly take away a cage with a bird and reached the door with it. On the spot he sprang towards her, touched the cage with the flower, and also the old woman: now she could not spell anything, and Jorinde was there, holding the kiss, as beautiful as she was before. So Joringel also refit all the other birds girls, then returned with his Jorinde, and they lived long happy.
The spider and the turtle	8985	60	French	One day Anansi the spider picked some very fat and tasty vegetables in his garden. She cooked with care and when they were ready, the smell was delicious. She was eager to get to table mangerTout Suddenly, someone knocked on his door. It was Turtle, who had traveled all day, was very tired and was very hungry. "Hello, Anansi," said Turtle. "For a long time I walk, and I felt the most delicious vegetables I have ever felt. Would you be kind enough to share your meal with me? "Anansi could not refuse because the tradition in his country wanted us to share a meal with visitors at mealtime. But she was not very happy because it was a little too greedy and wanted to keep all the delicious vegetables for herself. So Anansi thought for a moment before finding a plan. "Come, Tortoise, I beg you. I would be honored to have you as a guest tonight. Sit down, take a chair and use. "Turtle entered and sat down, but then she would get a vegetable, Anansi cried," Turtle, do not you know therefore that we do not come to the table with dirty hands? "Turtle looked at his hands and saw that they were disgusting. She had walked all day and had not had the opportunity to wash. Turtle got up and went to the river to clean his feet. She walked slowly, as do all the turtles, to come home and when she arrived, Anansi had already started eating. "I do not want these tasty vegetables so cool, so I had to begin," said Anansi. "But please, join me now, Turtle. "Turtle sat down again and reached for a vegetable, but Anansi shouted again:" Turtle, did you not hear me so? It is not polite to come to the table with dirty hands! "She looked down and saw that his own hands were dirty again, because she had to be used to back home. She went down again to the river to wash. And when she came back, this time, she was careful to walk on the grass so his hands are clean. But when she sat down at the table, Anansi had finished tasty vegetables without leaving a single crumb. Turtle looked at Anansi for a moment, then said, "Thank you for sharing your meal with me. If you ever find yourself near my home, I would love to return the favor. "Then she walked slowly to the door and went on his way. The days went by and Anansi thought more and more that meals offered him Turtle. The idea of ​​a free dinner pleased him more and more, until it can no longer resist. She left one day in search of the home of Turtle. She met turtle while she was sunbathing on the banks of a river just in time for dinner. Turtle looked up, saw her and said, "Hello, Anansi, have you come to share dinner with me? "" Oh yes, yes! "Said Anansi, whose hunger was growing by the minute. Turtle went back his house underwater to prepare the dinner table. Soon after, Turtle reappeared at the water's edge and said, "Your place is waiting and the meal is ready. Please join me, Anansi. "And then she dived underwater and began to slowly eat his meal. Anansi jumped into the water, but failed to reach the bottom of the river. She tried to swim to the bottom, but it was so light that it ever went back to the surface. She tried to dive and doing backstroke. She tried to run and jump, but nothing helped him down to the bottom of the river. Meanwhile, Turtle was slowly eating his meal. Anansi was not going give up like that to a free meal, and went on shore, wondering how she could do. She finally had an idea. She began to pick up pebbles and stones to fill the pockets of his jacket. When she jumped back into the water, it sank to the bottom and was able to sit at the table. The table was a veritable banquet full of delicious foods. Anansi could not believe that all this tasty food was there before her and could not wait any longer to begin his meal. But then it is taking the first piece, Turtle stopped eating and said: "In my country, we do not wear our jackets to the table. "Anansi noticed that Turtle had removed his own jacket before sitting. Anansi started to remove his jacket, and soon scarcely had she removed her shoulders she went up immediately on the surface. She dipped her head into the water and saw Turtle, basically, slowly savoring this wonderful banquet.
The blue Bird	3977	432	French	There was once a very rich king in land and money; his wife died, he was inconsolable. He shut himself up eight whole days in a small room, where he broke his head against the wall, he was so distressed. It was feared that it slay: they put mattresses between the wallpaper and the wall; so it was nice to hit, he was doing more harm. All Topics resolved them to go and tell him what they could of cleaner relieve his sadness. Some prepared grave and serious discourse, others pleasant and even pleasing; but it made no impression on his mind: he could hardly hear what he was told. Finally, he stood before him a woman so covered with black crape, veils, mantles, long clothes of mourning and crying and sobbing so hard and so high, he remained surprised. She says she does not like other undertaking to reduce his pain, which had to increase it, because nothing was more just than mourn a good woman; for her, who had the best of all husbands, she did his account to cry as he would eye him in the head. Thereupon she redoubled her cries, and the king, his example, began the hurler.Il received better than others; he maintained the good qualities of his late beloved, and she adds that of his dear departed: they caused so many, they knew what to say about their pain. When the fine widow saw nearly exhausted material, she looked a little sails, and the afflicted king recrea sight to watch this poor afflicted, who was turning aptly two large blue games, lined with long black eye: his complexion was quite ornate. The king gazed attentively; gradually he spoke less of his wife, then he spoke at all. The widow said she always wanted to cry her husband; King begged not to immortalize her grief. In conclusion, it was astonished that he should marry her, and that would change the black to green and pink color: just often know the weak people to enter their heart and to do all what is veut.Le king had had a daughter from his first marriage, who was considered the eighth wonder of the world, it was called Florine, because it looked like Flora, it was so fresh, young and beautiful. We hardly saw him beautiful clothes; she loved the dresses of taffeta flying with some jeweled clasps and strength garlands, which were an admirable effect when they were placed in her hair beautiful. She was only fifteen when the king remaria.La new queen sent for his daughter, who had been fed with her godmother, the fairy Soussio; but it was neither graceful nor more than ever: Soussio had wanted to work and had gained nothing; she did not leave to love dearly. They called Truitonne because his face had so many freckles that trout; his black hair was so fat and so filthy that we could reach there, its yellow skin oil distilled. The queen did not fail to love to madness; she spoke only of the charming Truitonne, and, like Florine had all kinds of benefits on top of her, the queen was in despair; she tried every possible means to put wrong to the king. There was no day as the queen and Truitonne fissent not some piece Florine. The princess, who was gentle and spiritual tried to get over the bad procédés.Le king once said to Queen Florine and Truitonne were large enough to be married, and as soon as a prince would come to court he had to make sure to give him one of the "I maintain, 'said the Queen, my daughter to be the first set. she is older than yours, and as it is a thousand times more amiable, he no swinging on it. "the king, who did not like the dispute, said he was willing and he was in the maîtresse.A some time there, we learned that King Charming had to happen. Never prince had worn away gallantry and magnificence; his mind and no one had anything that was answering his name. When the queen knew this news, she used all embroiderers, tailors all and all workers to make adjustments to Truitonne. She begged the king that Florine had nothing new, and, having won her women, she made him steal all his clothes, all his hair and all her jewels on the same day as charming arrived, so when she would ward off, it does not find a ribbon. She saw well where he got this good office. She sent in the shops for fabrics; they said that the queen had given orders that would give him. It therefore remained strong with a small filthy robe, and his shame was so great that she began in the corner of the room when the Prince Charmant arriva.La queen received him with great ceremonies: she presented her daughter more brighter than the sun and more ugly by all its finery than it was usually. The king turned his eyes the queen wanted to persuade it pleased him too much and he was afraid to commit, so that it always was put before him. He asked if there was not another princess named Florine. "Yes, said Truitonne by showing the finger; there she lies, because it is not good." Florine blushed and became so beautiful, so beautiful that the king remained as a charming man dazzled. He got up quickly and made a deep bow to the princess: "Madam, said he, your incomparable beauty you pare too so you need any help étranger.- Lord replied she, I you confess that I am unaccustomed to wear a coat as messy as it is, and you would have made me happy not to see you for me.- It would be impossible, cried charming, a wonderful Princess could be anywhere, and we have eyes for other than elle.- Oh said the irritated queen, I spend much of my time listening to you. Believe me, sir, Florine is enough flirt, and she does not need to be told so much gallant "King Charming unraveled once the reasons and were speaking the Queen. but as there was no requirement to compel, he let it show his admiration for Florine, and spoke three hours suite.La Queen in despair, and Truitonne inconsolable not to have preference over the princess , made great complaints to the king and forced him to agree that during the visit of King Charming, we would lock Florine in a tower, where they would not see the point. Indeed, as soon as she was back in her room, four masked men carried her to the top of the tower, and left there in the last desolation; because it saw that it did and wore to prevent it please the king already very pleased, and she longed for époux.Comme he did not know the violence that had just to the princess, waiting time to see her with a thousand impatience. He wanted to talk about it to those that the king had made to him to make him more honor; but by order of the Queen, they told him all the harm they could: she was coquettish, uneven, bad humor; she tormented his friends and servants, they could not be more messy, and she pushed so far greed, which would rather be dressed as a shepherdess, than buying in rich fabrics of money given him by his father the king. To all this detail, Charming suffered and felt angry movements he had great difficulty to moderate. "No, he said to himself, it is impossible that Heaven has put a soul so badly in the masterpiece of nature. I agree that it was not proper when I put the saw, but the shame she had sufficient proof that she was not accustomed to be so. What, it would be wrong with that air of modesty and sweetness that enchants? This is not something that makes sense to me; it is much easier to me to believe that it is the queen who decries as well: it is not for nothing stepmother; and Truitonne princess is so ugly beast that it would not be extraordinary wanted her to carry to the most perfect of all creatures. "While he reasoned it, the courtiers who surrounded guessed well in his air that they had not pleased him to speak evil of Florine. There were more skillful than others, that changing his tone and language to know the feelings of the prince began to speak of the wonders of the princess. With these words he awoke as from a deep sleep, he entered the conversation, joy spread across his face. Love, love, we hardly hide you! you appear everywhere, on the lips of a lover, in his eyes, the sound of his voice; when you love, silence, conversation, joy or sadness, everything speaks of what ressent.La queen, anxious to know if Prince Charmant was well received, sent for those she had put in her confidence, and she spent the rest of the night in the question. Everything they said it only served to confirm the opinion where it was, that the king loved Florine. But I'll tell you the melancholy of this poor princess? She was lying on the floor in the dungeon of that horrible turn when masked men had taken away. "I would be less to complain, she said, if we had put me here before I had seen this kind king. The idea that I canned can only serve to increase my pains I have no doubt that this is to prevent me from seeing him more than the Queen treats me so cruelly. Alas, the little beauty which provided me Heaven will cost dear to my rest! "She then wept so bitterly, so bitterly that his own enemy would have felt sorry if she had witnessed her douleurs.C'est and the night passed. The queen, who wanted to hire Prince Charmant by all accounts she could give it to his attention, sent him clothes and a wealth of unparalleled magnificence, made fashionable in the country, and order knights of Love that she had forced the king to institute the day of their wedding. It was an enameled gold heart of fire color, surrounded by several arrows, and pierced one, with these words: One hurt me. The queen had to carve a charming heart of a large ruby ​​as an ostrich egg; each arrow was a single diamond, as long as your finger, and the chain where it stood heart was made of pearls, the smallest of which weighed a book: finally, since the world began, it seemed nothing tel.Le king in this view, remained surprised if it was some time without speaking. He was presented at the same time a book whose leaves were of vellum, with wonderful miniatures, the gold cover, loaded with jewels; and statutes of the Order of Knights of Love there were written in a style very tender and very gallant. One told the king that the princess he had seen begged him to be her knight, and she sent him this present. At these words, he dared to boast that it was the one he loved "What the beautiful Princess Florine, if he cried, thinking of me in a way so generous and engaging -.? Lord, he was told, you mistake the name, we come from the kind Truitonne.- Truitonne This is who wants me for his knight said the king with a cold and serious air: I am sorry not to accept this honor. but a sovereign is not master of himself enough to take the commitments would I know those of a knight, I want to fill them all, and I prefer not to receive the grace that . it gives me that make me unworthy "He immediately put the heart, the chain and the book in the same basket; He sent everything to the queen, who thought choke with rage with his daughter, the contemptuous manner in which the foreign king had received a favor if particulière.Lorsqu'il could go to the King and Queen, he went into their apartment he hoped that there would Florine; He looked all around to see it. As soon as he heard someone enter the room, he turned his head sharply to the door; he seemed anxious and grief. The queen mischievous enough guessed what was going on in his soul, but it does not pretending. She spoke of her that pleasure parties; he answered all wrong. Finally he asked where was the Princess Florine. "Lord said proudly Queen, King defended his father so that her home until my daughter mariée.- And why, replied the king can we have to hold this fair prisoner person - I do not know, said the queen? and when I would know, I could excuse myself to tell you "the king felt inconceivable in anger. Truitonne he looked sideways, and thought to himself that it was because of this little monster that hid him the pleasure of seeing the princess. He promptly left the queen's presence caused him too much peine.Quand he returned to his room, he said to a young prince who had accompanied him, and he loved hard, giving everything one would want to world to win any of the women of the princess, so he could talk to her for a moment. This prince easily found the ladies of the palace came into confidence; there were a who assured that the evening Florine would be a little low window that met on the garden, and thus she could talk to him, provided he took great care so that no man should know no, "because, she said, the King and Queen are so severe, they would kill me if they found out I had fostered passion Charming" .The prince, delighted to have brought the case hitherto promised her anything she wanted, and ran to pay court to the king, telling him the time of appointment. But the bad confidante did not fail to warn the queen of what was happening and take orders. Immediately she thought he was sending his daughter to the little window: she taught well; and Truitonne not missed anything, although she was naturally a great bête.La night was so dark, it would have been impossible for the king to notice the deception that he was, though he would not have been also warned that it was so that he approached the window with inexpressible transports of joy. He told Truitonne all he would have said Florine to persuade his passion. Truitonne, taking advantage of the situation, told her she was the most miserable person in the world to have a cruel stepmother, and she still would suffer until his daughter was married. The king assured that if she wanted for her husband, he would be delighted to share with her his crown and heart. Thereupon, he took her ring finger; and putting the finger Truitonne, he added that it was an eternal pledge of his faith, and that she had only taken the time to go on diligently. Truitonne said the best she could for her attentions. He perceived that she was not saying anything worth; and it would have made him sad, if it was not persuaded that the fear of being surprised by the queen deprived him the freedom of his mind. He left her on the condition return the next day at the same hour she promised him all his queen cœur.La having known the happy success of this interview, she promised in all. And, indeed, the day being coordinated, the king came in to take a flying chair, drawn by winged frogs: enchanting his friends had made him this present. The night was very dark; Truitonne mysteriously disappeared through a little door, and the king, who was waiting, caught her in his arms and swore eternal fidelity hundred times. But as it was not in the mood to fly long in his flying chair without marrying the princess he loved, he asked her where she wanted the wedding to fissent. She told him she had a fairy godmother called Soussio, who was very famous; she felt going to the castle. Although the king knew not the way, he had only to tell his big frogs to drive there; they knew the general map of the universe and in no time they went to the king and Truitonne Soussio. The castle was so well informed, that on reaching the King would have recognized his mistake, if the princess had carefully covered with a veil. She asked her godmother; she spoke to him privately and told him how she had caught Charming, and she begged to appease. "Ah, my daughter, said the fairy, the thing will not be easy: he loves too Florine I am sure he will make us despair." But the king was waiting in a room whose walls were diamonds, if clear, so clear, he saw through Soussio Truitonne and talk together. He thought he was dreaming. "What, he said, have I betrayed? Demons did they bring this enemy of our peace? Does it come to disturb my wedding? My dear Florine not think! His father may have followed! "He thought a thousand things that began to the desolate. But it was much worse when they entered the room and told him Soussio an absolute tone: "King Charming, here is the Truitonne princess, to which you have given your faith, but my goddaughter, and I wish you the 'marry just heure.- me if he cried, I marry this little monster you think me a very docile nature when you make me such proposals: I know that I promised him nothing; if she said otherwise, she has ...- do not complete, Soussio interrupted, and never be bold enough to miss me respect.- I consent, said the king, as you respect that a fairy is respectable, provided you give me back my princess -.?.? did I do'm not, perjury said Truitonne showing him her ring who did you give this ring to pledge your faith a who have you talked to the little window, if it is not to me - How then he said, I was disappointed and deceived no, I shall be the dupe?. Come, come, my frogs, frogs my, I want to leave just heure.- Oh! it is not one thing in your power if I do not consent, "said Soussio. She touched him, and tied his feet to the floor, as if they had nailed." When you lapideriez me said King, when you écorcheriez me, I would point to another Florine; I am committed, and you can after that use your power as desired. "Soussio employed gentleness, threats, promises, prayers. Truitonne wept, cried, moaned, grew angry subsided. The king did not say a word, and both of them looking with the world of the air more indignant, he did not answer all their verbiages.Il went by twenty days and nights without it ceasing to speak, without eating, without sleeping and without sitting down. Soussio Finally, out and tired, said King: "well, you're a stubborn who do not want to listen to reason; choose, or be seven years in penance for having given your word without holding or to marry my goddaughter. "The king, who had kept a profound silence, cried suddenly:" Do with me whatever you want, provided I be delivered from this maussade.- Sullen yourself, Truitonne said angrily: I consider you a pleasant wren, marsh with your crew to come up to my country tell me insults and break your word if you had four deniers of honor in useriez you as well - that touching reproach? the king said, derisively. You see, it is wrong not to take such a beautiful person for his wife - No, no, she will not be cried Soussio angry. You only have you fly out the window, if you want, because you will be seven years Blue Bird. "At the same time the king exchange figure: his arms are covered with feathers and form wings, legs and feet become black and menus; it grows her hooked nails; his body apetisse, it is topped with long feathers fine and mixed sky blue, his eyes are rounded and shine like suns nose is no longer a beak ivory it rises on its head a white plume which forms a ring; it sings ravishingly, and speaks the same. in this state it takes a painful cry at being thus transformed, and flies on the wing to escape the fatal palace Soussio.Dans melancholy that overwhelms him, he flutters from branch to branch, and chooses only the trees dedicated to love or sadness, sometimes on the myrtles, now in the cypress. he sings pitiful air, where he laments his bad fortune and that of Florine " in what place his enemies have they hidden? he said. What happened to this great victim? The barbarism of the queen she leaves still breathing? Where shall I seek? Am I condemned to spend seven years without it? Maybe during this time it is married, and I'll lose forever the hope that sustains my life. "These different thoughts afflicted the Blue Bird to the point, he wanted to leave mourir.D'un other hand, the fairy Soussio Truitonne sent to the Queen, who was much concerned how the wedding would have happened. But when she saw her daughter, and she told him everything that had happened, she went into a terrible rage, the backlash fell on poor Florine. "We must, she said, she was more repent of once have been popular in Charmant. "She went up in the tower with Truitonne, she was dressed in her rich clothes: she wore a diamond crown on his head, and three daughters of the richest state Barons held the tail of his royal mantle; it thumb had the ring of King Charming, Florine noticed the day they talked together. it was strangely surprised Truitonne in so pompous. " That's my daughter who just bring you presents his wedding, said the queen: Prince Charmant married her, he loves her to distraction, he has never been happier people. "As soon as we spread before the princess of cloth of gold and silver, precious stones, lace, ribbons, which were in large baskets of gold filigree. In presenting him all these things, was not without Truitonne shining ring of the king. so the Princess Florine could not doubt his misfortune she cried in despair, that might take away from his eyes all those present so fatal; it could wear only black, or rather she wanted to die now it is vain and wicked queen, delighted to have done so well, do not we allowed the helper for. she only let in more deplorable state of the world, and went to tell the king slyly that her daughter was so transported tenderness that nothing could equal the extravagances she was doing,. he had to give guard to let her out of the tower King he said she could govern the case to his fancy and he s always erait satisfait.Lorsque the princess returned to her swoon, and it reflects the conduct that stood with her abuse she received from her stepmother unworthy, and hope that she lost for ever Charming to marry the king, his pain became so intense that she cried all night; in this state she went to the window, where she was very tender and very touching regrets. When the day came, she closed it and continued pleurer.La next night, she opened the window, she let out deep sighs and sobs, she poured a flood of tears: the day came, she hid in her room. However King Charming, or rather the beautiful Blue Bird, never ceased to hover around the palace; he felt that his beloved princess was locked there, and if she was sad complaints, hers were not less. He approached the window as he could, to look in the rooms; but the fear that Truitonne did perceiving and not suspecting that it was him, prevented him from doing what he wanted. "It is in my life, he said to himself: if these bad discovered where I am, they would avenge; I would have éloignasse me, or that I was exposed to the latest threats." These reasons the forced him to keep large steps, and he usually sang the nuit.Il had vis-à-vis the window where Florine began, a cypress of prodigious height: Blue Bird came s' perch there. It just was there, he heard someone complained: "I suffer for a long time said she, death does come unto mine rescue those who fear not see it too soon? ;.! I desire and cruel to me Ah queen flees barbaric, what have I done to you to keep me in captivity so awful hast thou not enough other places to grieve me you '? have to go witness the happiness your unworthy daughter tastes with Prince Charmant "the Blue Bird had not lost a word of this complaint!; he remained very surprised, and he waited for the day with the utmost impatience to see the distressed lady; but before he came, she closed the window and was curious retirée.L'oiseau did not fail to return the following night, it was moonlight. He saw a girl at the window of the tower, who began his regrets: "Fortune, she said, you who flattered myself to reign, you who had made me love my father, what have I done to you to immerse myself suddenly in the most bitter pain Does a tender age as mine we should start to feel your inconstancy Return, barbarian, if possible;? I ask for any favors, terminate my fatal destiny. "L'Oiseau Bleu listening; and the more he listened, the more he was convinced that it was his dear princess who complained he said to him." Adorable Florine, wonder today why end so soon do you want yours? your pain is not without remède.- Hey! talking me, she cried, in a way consoling - An unhappy king, 'said Bird, who loves you and will never love that sure.- A king who loves me! she added: is this a trap set by my enemy? But really, what does it win? If she seeks to discover my feelings, I am ready to make him the aveu.- No, my princess, he said: the lover who speaks is not capable of betraying you. "So saying, he flew out the window. Florine had first great fear of a bird so extraordinary, who spoke with as much spirit as if it were human, though should retain the small tone of voice a nightingale, but the beauty of its plumage and what he told her reassured. " May I be allowed to see you, my princess? if he cried. Can I taste a happiness so perfect without dying of joy? But unfortunately ! that joy is troubled by your captivity and the state where the wicked Soussio reduced me for seven years - And who are you, lovely Bird? said the princess, the caressant.- You said my name, added the king, and you pretend not connaître.- me What! the greatest king of the world, what! Prince Charmant, said the princess, the little bird would I want - Alas! Florine beautiful, it is only too true, 'he said; and, if anything can console me is that I preferred this punishment than give up the passion I have for sure.- To me! said Florine. Ah! do not try to fool me! I know, I know you married Truitonne; I recognized your ring on his finger: I've seen it all shiny diamonds that you have given him. She came to insult me ​​in my sad prison loaded with a rich crown and a royal mantle she held your hand while I was in chains and fers.- You saw Truitonne in this crew? interrupted the king; she and her mother have dared to say that these gems came from me? 0 sky! is it possible that I hear lies so awful, and I can not revenge myself as soon as I want? Know they wanted to disappoint me, qu'abusant your name, they hired me to remove this ugly Truitonne; but as soon as I knew my mistake, I wanted to give up, and I finally choose to be Blue Bird seven years on, rather than miss the loyalty that you have vowed. "Florine was a pleasure so sensitive to hear his amiable lover, she could not remember the misfortunes of his prison. What does she told him not to comfort his sad adventure, and to persuade it would not do less for him than he had done for her? the day seemed, most officers were already raised, as the Blue Bird and Princess were still talking together. They parted with a thousand pains after s' be promised that every night they would maintain ainsi.La joy of having found was so extreme, that it is no words can express it; their separate thanked the love and fortune. However Florine was worried about the Blue Bird "who will guarantee the hunters, she said, or some acute greenhouse eagle, or some hungry vulture, which would eat it with as much appetite as if it n ' was not a great king? 0 sky! that if I become his light and fine feathers, driven by the wind, came into my cell and told me that I fear the disaster? "This thought prevented the poor princess Fermat eyes: for when one loves, illusions appear truths, and what was believed impossible in another time seems easy in this one, so it spent the day crying, until the time had come to get his window.The charming Bird, hidden in the hollow of a tree, had been all day busy thinking about his beautiful princess. " I'm glad, he said, to have found! it is engaging! I strongly feel the kindness she shows me! "This tender lover had even the smallest moments of penance which prevented him from marrying her, and no one ever has the desired end with more passion. As he wanted to Florine all the compliments he was capable he flew to the capital city of his kingdom, he went to his palace, he went into his office with a window that was broken and took the dangling diamond earrings, so perfect and so beautiful that n 'there were none in the world who approchassent; he brought the evening to Florine, and asked her to adorn "I would consent, she told him, if you see me on the day. . But since I do not speak that night, I did not put "The Bird promised to take his time so he would come to the tower at the time she would immediately it started hanging ears, and the night went to talk, as had happened the day after the other.The Blue Bird returned to his kingdom he went to his palace. he entered his office through the broken glass, and brought in the richest bracelets we had ever seen: they were one emerald-cut faceted hollow in the middle, to spend the hand and arm. " Do you think, said the princess, my feelings for you have need to be cultivated by gifts? Ah! you know me mal.- No, madam, replied he, I do not think trifles that I offer are necessary to keep me your tenderness; but mine would hurt if I neglected no chance of you my attention; and when you see me not, these little gems remind me to your remembrance. "Florine told him about it a thousand obliging things, which he answered by a thousand others who were not moins.La next night Bird lovers did not fail to bring to her in a watch of a reasonable size, who was in a pearl: excellence surpassed labor that of matter. " Needless to regale me a watch, she said gallantly; when you are away from me, the endless hours seem to me; when you're with me, they pass like a dream, so I can not give them a fair mesure.- Alas! my princess cried the Blue Bird, I have the same opinion as you, and I am confident that I still renchéris on délicatesse.- After that you have to keep me your heart, replied she I am ready to believe you wore the friendship and esteem as far as they can go. "As soon as day broke, the bird flew into the bottom of the tree, where the fruit served him food sometimes even sang beautiful tunes. His voice delighted the bystanders, they heard and saw no one, as it was concluded that they were spirits. this view became so common, that we dared not go into the wood, it was reported thousand fabulous adventures that had happened there, and the general terror was the particular security of Bird Bleu.Il not be happening any day without him to do a present to Florine: sometimes a pearl necklace, or rings brighter and better implemented, diamonds ties, punches, bunches stones imitating the color of flowers, nice books, medals, finally, she had a pile of wonderful treasures. it will never appear only at night to please the king, and the day, having no where to put them, she hid soigneusemen t in his paillasse.Deux years passed thus without Florine once pitied her captivity. And how to Would complaint? she had the satisfaction of talking all night what she loved; he never said so nice things. Although she might see that person and the bird should pass the day in the hollow of a tree, they had a thousand news to tell: the matter was inexhaustible, their heart and their spirit abundantly supplied the subjects of conversation.Cependant malicious queen, who held her so cruelly in prison, made useless efforts to marry Truitonne. She sent ambassadors to offer to all the princes whose names she knew as soon as they arrived, they dismissed them abruptly. "If it was the Princess Florine, you would be received with joy, their was said, but for Truitonne, it can remain vestal without anyone opposing it." At this news, she and her mother s' outweighed anger against the innocent princess that they were persecuting, "What spite of his captivity, cross the arrogant telling us what they mean to forgive the tricks that made us It must have the!.? secret correspondence in foreign countries: it is at least a state criminal; treat it on that foot, and seek all possible means to convince "They finished their board so late, it was over. midnight when they resolved to climb the tower for questioning. She was with the Blue Bird at the window, wearing her jewels, wearing her hair beautiful, with a care that was not natural to people afflicted; his room and his bed were strewn with flowers, and a few pellets of Spain that it had spread to burn an excellent odor. The queen listened at the door; she thought she heard a tune in two parts because Florine had an almost heavenly voice. Here are the lyrics, which appeared to him to tender:! Let our fate is deplorable, and we suffer from tourmentPour love us too constantly But it is in vain that overwhelms us despite our bitter enemies, our hearts will always be united. sighs finished their little concert. "Ah, my Truitonne, we are betrayed," cried the queen, suddenly opened the door and fell into the room. Florine became this view? She promptly pushed his small window, to give time to the golden flying bird. It was much more occupied its conservation than his own; but he did not feel the strength to walk away: his piercing eyes had discovered it the danger to which his princess was exposed. He had seen the Queen and Truitonne; what affliction of not being able to defend his mistress! They approached her like furies who wanted to devour. "The intrigues against your state is known, said the queen, do not think that your rank saves you the punishment you méritez.- And with that, ma'am? 'replied the princess. are not you my jailer for two years? do I saw other people than the ones you sent me? "as she spoke, the queen and the daughter 'examined with a surprise unparalleled, his admirable beauty and extraordinary adornment dazzled them. "and where are you, ma'am,' said the Queen, these jewels that shine more than the sun? We'll make you believe that he is has mines in this tour - I found them there, 'said Florine? that's all I know "the queen looked carefully, to penetrate to the bottom of his heart that it. . going "We are not your dupes, she said, you think we make believe, but Princess, we know what you are doing then in the morning until the evening. We gave you all those jewels in the one to get you to sell your kingdom père.- I would be very ready to deliver! She replied with a disdainful smile: an unfortunate princess, who languished in chains for so long, has much in a scheme of this nature - And therefore, returned the queen, are you wearing like a little flirtatious, your! ? room full of odors, and your person so beautiful, in the middle of the yard you would be less adorned - I have enough leisure, said the princess; it is not extraordinary that I give some time to dress; As I pass others to cry my troubles, that those are not me reprocher.- Here, here, come, said the queen, if this innocent person has not made any treaty with the enemies. "She herself looked everywhere, and coming to the bench, it was empty, she found a large quantity of diamonds, pearls, rubies, emeralds and topaz, she knew of why it was she had resolved to put in place some papers to lose the princess in time we are not taking care, she hid in the fireplace. but fortunately the Blue Bird perched au above, who saw better than a lynx, and listened while he cried. "Beware, Florine, behold thy enemy who wants you to treason." that voice so unexpected terrified to the point the queen she did not dare do what she had meditated. "You see, madam, said the princess, the spirits that fly in the air to me favorables.- I believe, said the queen outraged anger, that the demons are concerned for you; but in spite of them your father will be justice.- Would to Heaven, cried Florine not have to worry that my father's fury! But yours, madam, is more terrible. "The queen left her troubled of all she had seen and heard it took counsel on what to do against the princess. It is said that if some fairy or some enchanting took her under their protection, the real secret to irritate him would be to make new penalties, and it would be better to try to discover his plot Queen approved this thought;. she sent to bed in his room a girl who imitated the innocent she was about to tell him we put it to her to serve but what looks to give a panel so rude the princess looked at her as a spy, she could feel a sharp pain.?. "What! I will speak more to this bird that is so dear to me! she said. He helped me to bear my misfortunes, I soulageais his; our love was enough for us. What is he going to do ? What will I do myself? "Thinking about all these things, she poured streams of larmes.Elle dared not put themselves in the small window, although hear flit around: she was dying to open it, but she was afraid of exposing the life of this dear lover She spent a month without appearing around; the Blue Bird was in despair. what complaints did he not live without seeing how his princess he had never felt more pain and no? those of metamorphosis; he sought in vain for remedies to the one and the other, after having dug up, he found nothing which soulageât.L'espionne of the princess, who watched day and night since a month felt so overwhelmed with sleep, she finally fell asleep deeply Florine noticed; he opened his small window, and said,. Blue Bird, color of time, Fly me promptement.Ce are his own words, to which we did not want to change. the bird heard so well, that vi nt promptly on the window. What a joy to see! They had things to say! The friendships and loyalty protests were repeated a thousand times: the princess who could not help shedding tears, her lover was touched a lot and consoled her best. Finally, the time to leave came, without the jailer would have woken up, they said the most touching farewell world. The next day again the spy fell asleep; Princess diligently proceeded to the window, and she said as before: Bird Blue, Color of Time, Fly me promptement.Aussitôt Bird came and the night passed like the other, without noise or shine including our lovers were delighted: they flattered themselves that the supervisor would take so much pleasure in sleep, she would do the same every night. Indeed, the third went still very happily; but that which followed, the sleeper heard the noise, she listened without seeming to nothing; then she looked her best, and lives in the moonlight the most beautiful bird of the universe speaking to the Princess, who stroked his leg, which pecked gently; Finally, she heard many things of their conversation, and remained very surprised: for the Bird spoke like a lover, and the beautiful Florine replied with tendresse.Le was day, they said farewell; and, as if they had a presentiment of their next disgrace, they parted with extreme pain. The princess threw herself on her bed bathed in tears, and the king returned in the palm of his tree. His jailer ran to the queen; she told him what she had seen and heard. The queen sent for Truitonne and confidantes; they reasoned together long, and concluded that the Blue Bird was King Charming. "What an affront! Cried the queen, what affront, my Truitonne! This cheeky princess, I thought so afflicted, enjoyed pleasant conversations rest of our ungrateful Ah avenge me such a bloody manner that shall speak "Truitonne begged her are losing no time. and as she thought more interested in the case that the queen, she died of joy when she thought of all that would do to desolate lover and Queen maîtresse.La dismissed the spy in the tower; She ordered him to testify or suspicion or curiosity, and seem more sleepy than usual. She went to bed early, she snored his best, and the poor princess disappointed, opening the small window, cried, Blue Bird, Color of Time, Fly me promptement.Mais she called all night unnecessarily, he did not appear, for the wicked queen had attached cypress swords, knives, razors, daggers; and when he came on the wing befall it, these deadly weapons cut off his feet; it fell to others who cut off his wings; and finally, all pierced, he escaped with a thousand pains up the tree, leaving a long trail of sang.Que were you there, beautiful princess, to relieve this royal bird? But she would have died if she had seen him in a deplorable state. He did not take any care of his life, convinced that it was Florine who had made him play this trick. "Ah, barbarous, he said painfully, is that how you pay the purest passion and tender that will ever be? If you wanted me dead, than my asking you about yourself? It m ' was dear to your hand. I had to find you with so much love and trust! I suffered for you, and I suffered without complaint! What! thou hast sacrificed to the cruelest of women! She was our enemy common;. you just make your peace at my expense it's you, Florine, it is you who stab me you borrowed Truitonne hand, and hast driving into my breast "These pernicious ideas! overwhelmed him to the point he resolved to mourir.Mais his friend the enchanter, who had seen back home flying frogs with the cart without the king appeared, went so troubled, that could be him arrived, he ran eight times the earth to look for without it he could possibly find. It was his ninth lap when he passed into the woods where he was, and, according to the rules he had prescribed, he sounded the trumpet long enough, and then he cried five times with all his might: "King ? charming, Prince Charmant, where are you "the King recognized the voice of his best friend." Come, he said, that tree and see the unfortunate king you treasure, drowned in his own blood "the enchanting, surprised, looked all around without seeing anything: "I'm Blue Bird," said the king in a weak and languid voice. At these words, the enchanting without difficulty found in his nest. Another would be that surprised him more than he was; but he did not know any tricks of the necromancer art: it cost him a few words to stop the blood flowing again; and with herbs he found in the woods, and on which he said two words scrawl, he healed the king as perfectly as if it had not been the blessé.Il then asked to teach him by what adventure it Bird had become, and that had hurt so badly. The king satisfied his curiosity: he said it was Florine who had identified the mystery of love secret visits that he made, and that, to make his peace with the queen, she had agreed to let the daggers garnish cypress and razors, for which it was almost chopped; he cried a thousand times over the unfaithfulness of the princess, and said he would consider himself happy to be dead before he knew his heart wicked. The magician was unleashed against her and all women; He advised the king to forget. "Woe be yours, he said, if you were able to enjoy longer this ungrateful after what she has done to you, we must in all fear." The Blue Bird does could remain in agreement, he still loved her too dearly Florine; and enchanting, which knew his feelings despite the care he took to hide them, told him in a nice way: Overwhelmed by a cruel misfortune In vain we speak and we reason, We ' listens to her pain, and the point donne.Il the advice we have to let us do the time; Everything has its point of view; and when the time has not come, we vainement.Le Royal turmoil Bird agreed, and asked his friend to bring him home and put in a cage where he was sheltered from the paw of the cat and any deadly weapon. "But, said the enchanter, will you stay another five years in a deplorable state and so unbecoming your business and your dignity After all, you have enemies who maintain that you are dead;? They want to invade your kingdom: I fear that you did before having recovered lost your first forme.- could I not, 'said he, go to my palace and govern as I was usually - Oh s! ! 'exclaimed his friend, the thing is difficult Tel who wants to obey a man does not obey a parrot such fears you are king, being surrounded by greatness and splendor that you pluck all the feathers, seeing you a little oiseau.- Ah human weakness! shiny exterior cried the king, yet you do signify nothing to the merit and virtue, let you do not have places disappointing that we could not defend nearly Ah, well, he went on, let's philosopher despise what we powe ns get: our party will not be the most mauvais.- I do not surrender soon, said the magician, I hope to find some good expedients. "Florine Florine the sad, desperate not to see the king spent the days and nights at the window, constantly repeating: Blue Bird, Color of Time, Fly me promptement.La presence of his spy did in prevent him, his despair was such that it no longer spared nothing. " What are you now, King Charming? cried she. Our common enemies Have you been feeling the cruel effects of their rage? Have you been sacrificed to their fury? Alas! alas! are you most? Shall I see you? or tired of my misfortunes, have you abandoned me to the hardness of my fate? "What tears, sobs that followed these tender complaints That the hours became longer by the absence of a lover so kind and dear Princess, shot, sick, skinny and changed, could barely support!; she was convinced that everything was more fatal had happened to the queen and roi.La Truitonne triumphed;. vengeance gave them more pleasure than the offense had made their penalty and, basically, what offense was it? the King Charming had not wanted to marry a little monster that he had a thousand topics haïr.Cependant Florine's father, who was old, fell ill and died. the wealth of the wicked queen and his daughter changed the face: they were regarded as favorites who had abused their favor, the mutinous people ran to the palace to ask the Princess Florine grateful for the sovereign Queen, irritated, tried to deal with the case with height; she seemed. a balcony and threatened s mutineers At the same time became general sedition. is pressed the doors of his apartment, they pillaged, and knocks him out with stones. Truitonne fled to his Soussio fairy godmother; She did not run less risk than its major mère.Les the kingdom assembled quickly and went up to the tower where the princess was very ill: she knew the death of his father and the agony of his enemy. When she heard so much noise, she did not doubt that we came to take her to death; it was developed by frightened: life was hateful to her since she lost the Blue Bird. But his subjects being thrown at his feet and told him the change had happened to his fortune; it was moved to the point. They carried her to his palace and crowned. The infinite care we took of his health, and the desire she had to go for the Blue Bird, did much to restore, and soon gave him enough strength to appoint a board, in order to take care of his kingdom in his absence; and then took to the thousand million stones, and she left a night alone, without anyone knowing where she allait.L'enchanteur who took care of the king's charming, not having enough power to destroy what Soussio did, thought fit to go and find him and provide some accommodation for which it would make the king his natural figure: he took the frog and flew to the fairy, who was talking in the moment with Truitonne. On the enchanting fairy there is the hand; they had known five or six hundred years, and in that space of time they had been a thousand times good and bad together. She received him very nicely: "What does my friend said she (so they call all) Is it something-you for his service depend on me - Yes, my godmother?.? said the magician you all to my satisfaction; it is the best friend of a king that you have made infortuné.- Aha, I hear you, brother, cried Soussio;! j ' am sorry, but there is no grace hoped for him, if he wants to marry my goddaughter; here it is beautiful and pretty, you see: it consults "the enchanting thought to remain silent. he found ugly; However, he could not bring himself to leave without paying anything with it, because the king had run a thousand risks since he was caged. The nail that the hanging was broken; the cage had fallen, and Her Majesty feathered suffered much of this fall; Minet, who was in the room when the accident happened, gave him a scratch in the eye which he thought to remain blind. Another time we had forgotten to give him drink; he was the great way to have the pip, when it guarantees a few drops of water. A little naughty monkey, having escaped, grabbed his feathers through the bars of his cage, and he also spared little he would have done a jay or blackbird. The worst of it all is that it was about to lose his kingdom; his heirs were daily news trickery to prove that he was dead. Finally the enchanting concludes with his godmother Soussio Truitonne it would lead to the palace of Prince Charmant; it would remain there a few months, during which he would take his resolution to marry him, and she would make her figure; leaving to take the bird, if he did not gave marier.La fairy clothes while gold and silver Truitonne, then made her get in kit behind on a dragon, and they went the kingdom of Charming, who had just arrived with his faithful friend the enchanter. In three shots wand he saw as he was, handsome, amiable, witty and beautiful; but he bought dearly the time we declined his penance: the thought of marrying Truitonne made him shudder. The enchanting told him the best reason he could, they made a poor impression on his mind; and it was less busy driving his kingdom as ways to extend the term Soussio had given her to marry Truitonne.Cependant Queen Florine, disguised as a peasant dress, with its scattered and mixed hair that hid his face , a straw hat, a canvas bag on his shoulder, began his journey, sometimes on foot, sometimes on horseback, sometimes by sea, sometimes on the floor: it was all due dispatch; but, not knowing where she was turning her steps, she was always afraid to go to one side while his amiable king would be another. One day she had stopped at the edge of a fountain whose water jumped on silver pebbles, she wanted to wash his feet; She sat on the grass, she lifted her blond hair with a ribbon, and put his feet in the stream: she looked like Diane who bathes returning from a hunt. He went into this place a little old hunched, leaning on a big stick; she stopped, and said, "What are you doing there, my beautiful daughter you are alone - My good mother, said the queen, I do not cease to be in great company, because I have to! my sorrows, worries and displeasures. "At these words, his eyes were covered with tears." what! so young, you cry, said the good woman. Ah, my daughter, do not grieve. Tell me what . you have sincerely and hopefully relieve you "the Queen was pleased; she told him her troubles, driving the Soussio fairy had held in the case, and finally as it sought the Blue Bird. The old woman is recovering, fits, changes all of a face shot, appears beautiful, young, dressed superbly; and looking at the queen with a gracious smile: "Incomparable Florine, she told him, the king you seek is not bird Soussio my sister made her first figure, it is in his kingdom do you not grieve; you will get there, and you will overcome your design Here are four eggs. you will break them into your pressing needs, and you will find relief that will be useful "So saying, she vanished.. Florine felt very comforted by what she had heard; She put the eggs in his bag and turned his steps towards the kingdom of Charmant.Après having walked eight days and nights without stopping, she arrived at the foot of a prodigious mountain by its height, all of ivory, and if we are right that could put your feet without falling. She thousand useless attempts; she slipped, she grew tired and, desperate for a barrier so insurmountable, she lay at the foot of the mountain, determined to let it die, when she remembered the eggs that the fairy had given him. She took one: "Now, she said, if she did is not mocked me, promising me relief that I would need." As soon as she took off, she found small spikes of gold, she began her feet and her hands. When she came, she climbed the mountain ivory without any trouble, because the spikes came in and prevented from slipping. When she was on top, she had new penalties to go down: the valley was one ice sheet. There were around more than sixty thousand women that mirrored it with extreme pleasure because the mirror was full two leagues wide and six high. Each saw it for what it wanted to be: the red there seemed blonde, the brunette had black hair, old believed to be young, the young are growing old spot; Finally, all the defects there were so well hidden that we came there from all over the world. It was enough to die laughing to see the grimaces and affectations that most of these were pretty. This circumstance attracted no fewer men; the mirror also pleased. It made him look to some beautiful hair, the other taller and better decision, the martial air, and look better. Women, they mocked, ridiculed does not least of them; so they called this mountain of a thousand different names. No one was ever reached to the summit; and when they saw Florine, ladies uttered long cries of despair: "Where is this misguided said they probably it clever enough to walk our ice; the first not break it all?.." they made a noise épouvantable.La Queen knew how to do, for she saw a great danger to go down there; she broke another egg, which he took out two pigeons and a carriage, which became in even large enough time to place them conveniently; then the pigeons gently down with the Queen, without her nothing untoward happen. She said: "My little friends, if you wanted to take me to the place where the king holds court Charming, you will oblige developed a thankless." Pigeons, civil and obedient, did not stop, day or night they had arrived at the gates of the city. Florine came down and gave them each a sweet kiss more estimable than couronne.Oh! the heart beat him by entering! she smeared the face to the point being known. She asked passersby where she could see the king. Some began to laugh! "See the King they said,? Oh what do you want him, my love Slut Go, go you polish up, did not you pretty good eyes to see such a monarch!?." The queen did not answer: she walked away slowly and even asked those she met when she could bring to see the king. "He has to come tomorrow to the temple with the Truitonne princess said to him: for he finally agrees to marry him." Heaven! what news ! Truitonne, unworthy Truitonne about to marry the king! Florine nearly died; she had no more strength to speak or to walk: it began as a door, sitting on stones, hidden away from her hair and her straw hat. "Unfortunate that I am, she said, I come here to increase the triumph of my rival and make me a witness to his satisfaction! So it was because of her that the Blue Bird stopped coming to see me! It ' was for this little monster that made me the most cruel of all infidelities during qu'abîmée in pain I was worried about the preservation of his life the traitor had changed;! and less remembering me that s he had never seen me, he let me grieve the care of his long absence, regardless of mine "When you have a lot of grief, it is rare to have a good appetite. Queen sought where to stay, and lay without supper. She rose with the day, she ran to the temple; she went there after having suffered rebuffs thousand guards and soldiers. She saw the king's throne and of Truitonne, which already looked like the queen. What pain for a person as tender and delicate as Florine! She approached the throne of his rival; She stood, leaning against a marble pillar. The king came first, more beautiful and pleasant it would have been in his life. Truitonne appeared then, richly dressed, and so ugly, she was scared. She looked at the queen, frowning. "Who are you, 'she said, to dare to approach you for my excellent figure, and so close to my golden throne - My name Mie-Slut, she replied,? I come from afar to sell you . rarities "She fumbled once in his canvas bag; she drew emerald bracelets that King Charming had given him. "! Ho ho said Truitonne, that's pretty glasses, do you want a piece of the five sub - Show them, Madam, the connoisseur, said the queen, and then we will do our market?". Truitonne, who loved King more tenderly that such a beast was capable of being delighted to find opportunities to talk to her, advanced to his throne and showed him the bracelets, begging him to tell her his feelings. At the sight of these bracelets, he remembered those he had given to Florine; he turned pale, he sighed, and was long answer; Finally, fearing that we might perceive the state's reduced the different thoughts, he made an effort and replied: "These bracelets are worth, I think, as much as my kingdom, I thought it n ' there was only one pair in the world, but here in similar "Truitonne returned from his throne, where it was less good-looking than the shell oyster. she asked the how Queen without overcharge, she wanted these bracelets "You would have too much trouble to pay me, madam, she said. It is better to offer another market if you want me get to sleep a. night in the office of Les Echos is the king's palace, I will give you my émeraudes.- Willingly, Mie-Slut "said Truitonne laughing like a lost and showing, teeth longer than the defenses of a sanglier.Le king inquired the point where were these bracelets, less indifference to the one that had (although it was not proper to give birth to curiosity) by an invincible dislike he felt for Truitonne. Now it is about to be known that while he was Blue Bird, he had told the princess that there was in his apartment a cabinet, called the Cabinet of Echoes, which was so ingeniously actually, all that hard bottom said it was understood when the king was lying in his room; and, like Florine wanted to reproach her infidelity, she had none imagined better moyen.On led her into the cabinet in order of Truitonne: she began her complaints and regrets. "The trouble I wanted doubt is too certain, cruel Blue Bird said she; thou hast forgotten me, you like my unworthy rival bracelets that I have received from your hand could not unfair to me! remind your memory, as I walked away! "Then the sobs interrupted his words, and when she had enough strength to speak, she complained again and continued until daybreak. room valets had heard all night moan and sigh, they said to Truitonne, who asked her what she had din. The queen said she slept so well, and ordinarily she dreamed she spoke often high. For the king, he had not heard, by a strange fatality: that, since he had loved Florine, he could not sleep, and when he went to bed to take some rest, we gave her the queen opium.La spent part of the day in a strange uneasiness. "If he heard me, she said, can it be a cruel indifference? If he did not hear me, what shall I do to reach my voice?" He was not more extraordinary rarities because precious stones are always beautiful; but it was something that Piquat taste Truitonne: she resorted to her eggs. She broke into a; immediately there came out a little carriage of polished steel, gold-trimmed report was drawn by six green mouse, led by a raccoon color pink, and the coachman, who was also ratonnière family was gray linen . There were four more in this carriage dashing puppets and more spiritual than any that appear to Saint-Germain and Saint-Laurent fairs; they did amazing things, especially two small Egyptian who, for dancing the sarabande and pass-feet, have not yielded to Léance.La queen remained delighted with this new masterpiece of art necromancer; she said nothing until the evening, which was the time that Truitonne going to walk; she began in an alley, making his gallop mice, hanging the coach, raccoons and puppets. This new Truitonne surprised so hard she cried two or three times: "Slut-Mie Mie-Slut, will you five under the coach and your Souriquois hitch - Ask people to letters and doctors? this kingdom, said Florine, what such a wonder can argue, and I refer the matter to estimate the wiser. "Truitonne, who was absolute in all, replied:" No longer bother me thy filthy presence, tell me the prix.- Sleeping still in the cabinet of Echoes, she said, is all I Application.- Go, poor thing, 'said Truitonne, you do not will be denied "; and turning to the ladies: "That's a silly creature, she said, removing so few advantages of its rarities." Night came. Florine said all she could imagine more tender, and she also said unnecessarily she already had, because the king never failed to take his opium. The valets said to each other: "Without doubt this peasant is crazy: what did she reasoned overnight - With that, said the other it does not leave to be of the mind and passion in what she tale. "She waited impatiently for the day, to see what effect his words would have produced. "What, this barbarian became deaf to me! 'She said. He did not hear his beloved Florine? Oh, what weakness to love again! I deserve good marks contempt he gives me!" but she unnecessarily thought she could heal her tenderness. There was an egg in her bag which she had to hope for help; she snapped: he pulled out a block of six birds were clad, cooked and well primed; with that they sang beautifully, told fortunes, and knew the best medicine Aesculapius. The queen remained charmed an admirable thing; she went with her pate speaking in the antechamber of Truitonne.Comme she waited for her to pass, one of the king's valets approached her and said: "Ma Mie-Slut, you know that, if the king did not take opium to sleep, you certainly étourdiriez because you jasez night surprisingly "Florine was not surprised over what he had not heard?. She reached into her bag and said, "I'm afraid so little to stop the rest of the king, that, if you do not give him opium tonight if I sleep in the same cabinet, these beads and all these diamonds will be for you "The servant consented and gave him his parole.A few moments there came Truitonne. she saw the queen with his pate, which pretended to eat it wanting: "What are you doing here Mie-Slut told him elle.- Madam, replied Florine, I eat astrologers, musicians and doctors?." In same time all the birds begin to sing more sweetly than sirens; then they cried: "Give the white room and we'll tell your fortune." A duck, dominating, said above the others: "Can, can, can, I, am a doctor, I cured of all ills and all kinds of craziness, except that of love." Truitonne more surprise so many wonders it would have been of his days, swore "by the virtue-chou, that's an excellent pâté I want to have, here, here, Mie-SouilIon that I give you in -? the regular price, she said: sleeping in the office of Echoes, and nothing davantage.- Here, said generously Truitonne (as it was in good humor by the acquisition of such a block), you shall have a shilling. " Florine, more happy she would have been, because she hoped the king would hear, retired in the remerciant.Dès as night came, she drove into the cabinet, wishing fervently that valet should hold his word, and that instead of giving opium to the king he should present him something else that might keep him awake. When everyone thought he was asleep, she began her regular complaints. "How many perils am I exposed myself, she said, to get you, while you flee me and you marry Truitonne. What have I done to you, cruel to forget your oaths? Remember of your metamorphosis, my goodness, our tender conversation. "She repeated almost all with a memory which proved enough that nothing was dearer to him than souvenir.Le king slept point and heard so distinctly voice Florine and his words, he could not understand where they came from; but his heart, imbued with tenderness, reminded him so vividly the idea of ​​his incomparable princess he felt his separation with the same pain as when the knives had hurt the cypress. He began to talk of his side as the queen had made hers, "Oh princess, he says, too cruel for a lover who loved you is it possible that you have sacrificed me to our common enemies!" Florine heard what he said, and did not fail to respond and teach him him that if he wanted to maintain the Mie-Slut, it would be cleared of all the mysteries he could not penetrate far. At these words the king, impatient, called one of his valets and asked him if he could not find Mie-Slut and bring it. The servant replied that nothing was easier because she slept in the cabinet of the king did not know Échos.Le imagine. What a way to believe that such a great queen Florine was disguised as a slut? And what a way to believe that Mie-Slut had the voice of the queen and knew secrets so special, unless it were itself? In this uncertainty he got up and dressing hurriedly, he descended by a private firm in the degree of Echoes, which the queen had taken the key, but the king was one who opened the doors of palais.Il found her with a light white taffeta dress she wore under her ugly clothes; her hair covered her beautiful shoulders; it was lying on a couch, and a somewhat distant lamp made a dark light. The king came suddenly; and his love beating out his resentment, as soon as he knew he came and fell at his feet, he wet his hands with tears and nearly died of joy, pain, and a thousand different thoughts that passed him at the same esprit.La time in the queen did not remain less troubled; her heart sank, she could barely sigh. She stared at the king without a word; and when she had the strength to talk to her, she had no one to rebuke him; pleased to see him made him forget for a while the grievances she thought she had. Finally, they brightened, they are justified; their tenderness awoke; and all that embarrassed them was the Soussio.Mais fairy in this moment, the magician, who loved the king, arrived with a famous fairy: it was precisely the one that gave the four eggs Florine. After the first compliments, the enchanting fairy and declared that their power is united in favor of the king and queen, Soussio could do nothing against them, and so does their marriage would receive no retardement.Il is easy to imagine the joy of these two young lovers: as soon as it was day, it is published in all the palace, and everyone was delighted to see Florine. These new Truitonne went up; she ran to the king; what a surprise to find her beautiful rival! When she tried to open her mouth to tell him of blasphemy, and enchanting fairy appeared, which metamorphosed into a sow, so it was left to her at least part of its name and its natural grumbler. She always growling away into the backyard, where long bursts of laughter that we made on it completed the désespérer.Le the king and queen Lovely Florine issued to a person so odious, not thought more at the feast of their wedding; gallantry and magnificence also appeared there; it is easy to judge their happiness, after so long aspired to malheurs.Quand Truitonne hymen Charmant, and that without being able to please her, she wanted to form this sad engagementQue only death can break, she was reckless, alas, probably she did not know that such a fatal mariageDevient slavery If love the shape pas.Je find Charmant was sage.A I think it is much mieuxÊtre Blue Bird, raven, owl become even what to experience worth extrêmeD'avoir what one always hates eyes, In these kinds of hymen our century is fertile: the hymen would be happier if we still found some enchanting habileQui wished to oppose these nodes guilty, and never to allow Hymen unites, by interest or caprice, two unfortunate hearts, unless they both love.
The blue Beard	1989	312	French	There was once a man who had beautiful homes in the City and Country, dishes of gold and silver, embroidered furniture, and all gilded coaches; but unfortunately the man had Bluebeard: it made him so ugly and so terrible, that it was neither wife nor daughter who fled before him. One of his Neighbors, quality Dame had two perfectly beautiful girls. He asked in a wedding, leaving him the choice that she would give him. They resented both the point, and the sent back to each other, unable to bring himself to take a man who had a blue beard. What disgusted them again, that he had already married several wives, and nobody knew what these women had become. The Bluebeard, for knowledge led them with their mother and three or four of their best friends, and some young people of the neighborhood, in one of his houses campaign, where it remained for eight whole days. It was only walks, as parts of hunting and fishing, dances and festivities, as snacks: we slept point and we spent the whole night playing tricks to each other; Finally everything went so well that the youngest began to find that the Master of the house had no beard so blue, and it was a very honest man. As soon as they returned to the city, Marriage concludes. After a month Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to travel in the provinces, at least six weeks for an important business; he begged to be well entertained during his absence, she might bring her good friends that she's Ménat the campaign if she wanted, that she made good cheer everywhere. "Here," he said, "the keys of the two great wardrobes, that those of gold and silver that is not every day, that those of my safes, where my gold and my money, those tapes where are my jewels, and now everywhere pass all apartments. For this little key one is the key to the closet at the end of the great gallery of the lower apartment: open everything, go everywhere, but for this little closet, I forbid you to enter, and I you defend so that if you happen to open it, there is nothing you have to wait for my anger. " She promised to observe exactly all that had ordered it to be; and he, after kissing her, he got into his carriage and left for his trip. The neighbors and good friends did not wait to send for them to go to the young Bride, as they were impatient to see all the wealth of his house, who have dared to come here while Mari was there because of his blue beard, which frightened them. Here they immediately go to the rooms, closets, wardrobes, more beautiful and richer as each other. They then went to the furniture repository, where they could not sufficiently admire the number and beauty of the tapestry, beds, sofas, cabinets, pedestals, tables and mirrors, where we saw from the feet up 'to the head, and whose borders, ice together, the other silver and vermeil gold, were the most beautiful and most magnificent that had ever seen. They ceased not to exaggerate and envy the happiness of their friend, who is however not amused to see these riches, because of her impatience to go and open the cabinet of the lower apartment. So urgent was her curiosity that, without considering that it was unfair to leave her company, she went down a little back staircase, and in such a hurry, she thought she would break neck two or three times. Having reached the closet door, she stopped there some time, thinking of defending her husband had given her, and whereas it might happen to him for being disobedient; but the temptation was so strong she could not overcome it: she then took the little key, and opened it with trembling the cabinet door. At first she saw nothing because the windows were closed; after some moments she began to see that the floor was covered with clotted blood, and this blood were mirrored in the bodies of several dead women and attached along the walls (it was all women that Blue Beard had espoused and that he had slaughtered one after the other). She nearly died of fear, and the key of the closet she had removed the lock fell out of her hand. After a little regained consciousness, she picked up the key, closed the door and went up to his room to recover a bit, but she could not overcome, it was so emotional. Having observed that the key of the closet was stained with blood, she wiped it two or three times, but the blood did not go the point; she was beautiful wash it, and even rub with fine sand and with fertilizers, there still remained in the blood because the key was Fairy, and there was no way to clean it quite: when we took off the blood on one side, he came from the other. Blue Beard returned from his journey the same evening, and said he had received letters in the way, who had taught him that the case for which he was party had been completed to his advantage. His wife did all she could to show him that she was delighted with her speedy return. The next day he again asked him the keys, and she gave him, but with a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened. "Whence," said he, "that the key cabinet is not with the others?" - "You have to," she said, "that I have left there on my table." - "Do not miss," said Blue Beard, "to give it to me now." After several discounts, it was necessary to bring the key. Blue Beard, having seen, said to his wife: "Why is there blood on the key?" - "I do not know," replied the poor woman, paler than death. - "You know nothing," said Blue Beard, "I know, me you wanted to walk into the office! Well, madam, ye go, go and take your place among the ladies you are seen. " She threw herself at her husband's feet, crying and apologizing to him, with all the marks of a true repentance for not being obedient. She would have melted a rock, beautiful and afflicted as she was; but Blue Beard had a heart harder than a rock: "You must die, madam," he said, "and just now." - "Since I must die," she replied, looking at him, eyes bathed in tears, "give me a little time to pray to God." - "I give you a quarter of an hour," said Blue Beard, "but not a moment longer." When she was alone, she called her sister and said: "My sister Anne (for that was her name) go up, I pray thee, on the top of the Tower, to see if my brothers do not come; they promised me they would come to see me today, and if you see them, show them a sign to make haste. " Sister Anne ascended the top of the tower, and the poor afflicted shouted at him from time to time: - "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anything coming?" And sister Anne answered: "I see nothing but the sun which makes a dust, and the grass, which looks green." However Bluebeard, holding a large knife in hand, shouted with all his might to his wife: "Come down quickly, or I shall go there." - "One moment please," replied his wife; and immediately she cried softly, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anything coming?" And sister Anne answered: "I see nothing but the sun which makes a dust, and the grass, which looks green." - "Come down quickly," cried Blue Beard, "or I will go up there." - "I am going," replied his wife, and then she cried, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anything coming?" - "I see," replied sister Anne, "a big dust that comes from this side." - "Are they my brothers?" - "Alas! no, my sister is a Sheep Herd. " - "Do not you want to get off?" cried Blue Beard. - "Another time," replied his wife; and then she cried, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anything coming?" - "I see," she replied, "two jumpers that come from this side one, but they are still very far ..." Thank God, "if she cried a moment later," it is my brothers; I do sign them as I can to make haste. " Blue Beard cried so loudly that the whole house shook. The poor woman went down and threw himself at his feet épleurée any and all disheveled. "It is useless," said Blue Beard, "we must die." Then taking with one hand by the hair, and the other raising the knife in the air, he would shoot his head. The poor woman turned to him and looking at him with dying eyes, begged him to give him a little time to collect. "No, no," he said, "recommends yourself well to God"; and raising his arms ... In that moment they hit so hard on the door, that Blue Beard stopped short: it opened, and immediately there entered two riders who, putting the sword in hand, ran right to blue Beard. He recognized that it was the brothers of his wife, the Dragon and the other Musketeer, so he immediately fled to save themselves; but the two brothers pursued him so closely, they caught him before he could reach the front porch. They spent their swords through his body and left him dead. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and had not the strength to stand up to kiss his Brothers. It turned out that Blue Beard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his property. She used some to marry her sister Anne to a young gentleman, she was loved for a long time; another part to buy Captain Accrued his two brothers; and the rest to marry herself to a very honest man, which made him forget the bad time she had spent with Beard bleue.MoralitéLa curiosity despite all its attractions, Costs often regret; We see all examples paraître.C'est thousand days, whatever the sex, a good light fun; As soon as one takes it ceases to be, and still it costs too cher.Autre MoralitéPour if one has the sense mind, and let the world we know the grimoire, we soon see that this story is a tale of time spent; It is no longer so terrible husband, Ni who demand the impossible, Were he malcontent jealous. Near his wife gentle seen spinning; And whatever color his beard might be, It is hard to judge which of the two is the master.
The Sleeping Beauty	479	410	French	There was once a king and queen. Every day they said, "Oh, if only we had a child!". But child, period. One day when the queen was bathing, a frog jumped out of the water and said, "Your wish shall be fulfilled before a year has passed, you will put a girl in the world.." What the frog had predicted arrived. The queen gave birth to a daughter. She was so beautiful that the king could not contain himself with joy. He organized a big party. He was not content to invite parents, friends and acquaintances, but also fairies so they were favorable to the child. There were thirteen in his kingdom. But, as he had only twelve golden plates for them to eat, one of them was not invitée.La party was beautiful. While she was ending, fairy offered to fabulous gifts children: one virtue, another beauty, the third riches, and so on, all that is desirable in the world. As eleven of them had to do this, the thirteenth came suddenly. She wanted revenge for not having been invited. Without greeting anyone, she cried with a loud voice: "The king's daughter, in her fifteenth year prick herself with a spindle and fall down dead." Then she left the room. Everyone was very frightened. The twelfth fairy, the one that had not yet made his vow, came forward. And as she could not undo the evil spell, but only make it less dangerous, she said. "It will not be a real death, only sleep a one hundred years in which to dive the king's daughter" The king, would have liked to protect his beloved child of misfortune, ordered all time were burned in the kingdom. However, all the gifts that had given her the fairy blossomed in the girl. She was so beautiful, so virtuous, so nice and so reasonable that all who saw it loved him. It happened that on the day of its fifteenth year, the King and Queen left their remains. The girl was alone in the castle. She walked over to it, visiting rooms and bedrooms to his fancy. Finally, she entered an old tower. She climbed the narrow spiral staircase and came to a small door. In the lock there was a rusty key. She turned. The door opened suddenly. An old woman spinning her flax carefully, sat in a small room. "Hello, grandmother, said the girl. What are you doing here?" - "I am spinning, said the old woman, shaking her head." - "What exactly is this thing you do so briskly?" Asked the girl. She took the spindle and wanted to spin in turn. No sooner had she touched the curse is fulfilled, and she pricked her finger. At the moment, she sank down on a bed that was there and fell into a deep sleep sommeil.Et that spread across the castle. The king and queen, who had just returned and were in the great hall of the palace slept. And with them, the whole court. The horses fell asleep in their stables, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, flies against the walls. Even the fire burning in the hearth fell asleep and the roast stopped roasting. The cook, who was going to pull the hair of the kitchen boy because he had missed a dish, let go and fell asleep. And the wind ceased. Not a leaf moved on the trees before the castle. All around the palace, a hale of thorns began to grow, which every day became taller and bushier. Soon she last the whole castle, until we see her do anything, not even the flag on the toit.Dans the country, the legend of the Sleeping Beauty - thus was named the king's daughter - was spreading. From time to time, the king's son approached the castle and tried to penetrate through the thick wall of thorns. But they did not succeed. Thorns stood between them, such as the hands. The young men were caught there, unable to break away and died there, a dead cruelle.Au after many, many years, the son of a king passed by the country. An old man told him the story of the thorn hedge. Behind her, there had to be a castle in which slept for a hundred years, the beautiful daughter of a king, called the Sleeping Beauty. With it, slept the king and queen and the whole court. The old man had learned from his grandfather that many princes had already come who tried to force hale with thorns; but they were left hanging there and died a sad death. The young man said, "I'm afraid of nothing, I'll go I want to see the Sleeping Beauty.." The good old man tried to stop, but it was in vain, the prince did not listen. But the hundred years were just gone by and the day had come when the Sleeping Beauty would wake up. When the king's son approached the thorn hedge, he saw beautiful flowers, which parted themselves on his way and left him the way. Behind him, a thick hedge. In the castle, he saw the horses and spotted hunting dogs sleeping. On the roof, pigeons stood head under the wing. And when he entered the palace, he saw the flies slept against the walls. The cook in the kitchen, still had his hand up as if to catch the kitchen boy and the maid had a black hen she was plumer.En up on the steps of the throne, the king and queen were asleep. The prince went on his way and the silence was so profound that he heard his own breath. Finally, he came to the tower and opened the door of the little room where slept the Beautiful. She was there, so pretty he could to look away. He leaned over and gave her a baiser.Alors, the Sleeping Beauty woke up, opened his eyes and looked, smiling. They went out both and the king awoke in turn, and the queen, and the whole court. And everyone looked with large eyes. In the stables, the horses stood on their feet and shook themselves, the hounds sprang tail wagging. On the roof, pigeons out head under their wings, looked around and flew to the countryside. The flies on the walls, resumed their movement; in the kitchen, the fire blazed, and cooked the meat. The roast began to roast; Cook gave a slap in the kitchen boy so hard that he cried in, and good finished plucking the poule.Le marriage of the Prince and Sleeping Beauty was celebrated with all splendor. And they lived happily until their death.
The Sleeping Beauty	1990	410	French	There was once a king and queen who were so angry that they had children point, so angry that we can not say. They went to all the waters of the world, vows, pilgrimages, petty devotions, everything was implemented, and nothing worked. Finally however the queen became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter they made a beautiful baptism; they gave to the little princess godmothers all the fairies they could find in the country (there were found seven), that each of them making a donation, as was the custom of fairies in those days - there, the princess would by this means all perfections imaginables.Après ceremonies of baptism, all the company returned to the palace where there was a great feast for the fairies. They placed before each of them a magnificent cover with a solid gold case where there was a spoon, a fork and a knife end of gold, set with diamonds and rubies. But as everyone took his place at the table, there entered an old fairy, we had asked the point, because there were more than fifty years it was out of a turn, and that it is dead or enchanted believed. The king made her a cover; but there was no way to give it a solid gold case as in others, because we did had to do seven for the seven fairies. The old thought he was slighted, and muttered some threats between her teeth. One of the young fairies, which was found near her heard; and judging that she might give some unlucky gift the little princess, went as soon as we had risen from table to hide behind the tapestry to speak last, and to repair as much as he could, the evil which the old fairy might fait.Cependant began to make their gifts to the princess. The youngest gave her for gift that she would be the most beautiful person in the world; the one after that, she would have the wit of an angel; third, it would be wonderful with everything she did; the fourth, that she should dance perfectly well; fifth, it sing as a Nightingale; sixth, that she should play all kinds of music in the last perfection. The rank of the old fairy came, she said, shaking her head even more spite than age, that the princess would pierce the hand of a spindle and in mourrait.Ce terrible gift made her shudder all company, and there was nobody who did not weep. At that moment the young fairy came out from behind the tapestry, and said these words aloud: - Rest assured, King and Queen, your daughter will not die; While I do not have enough power to undo entirely what my elder has done. The princess will pierce the hand of a spindle; But instead of dying, she shall only fall into a deep sleep that will last a hundred years, after which the son of a king will come the king réveiller.Le, to try to avoid the misfortune foretold by the old, had published once an edict, by which he forbade all persons against spindles, or to have time at home, on pain of vie.Au after fifteen or sixteen, the King and Queen being gone to one of their recreational houses, it happened that the young princess current one day in the castle, and the amount of room to room, went to the top of a tower in a small garret, where a good old alone, was spinning with her spindle. This good woman had never heard of the defenses that the king had made to spin to fuseau.- What are you doing, my good woman? I said princesse.- spinning, my pretty child, replied the old woman who knew her pas.- Ah! it's pretty, said the princess, how are you? Give me that I may see if I can do well autant.Elle had no sooner taken the time, and as she was very lively, a little dizzy, and besides stopping the fairy had so ordained she ran into her hand and fell good old évanouie.La, although embarrassed, crying for help: people come from all sides, water thrown in the face of the princess, it is unlaced, knock him in hands, temples rubbed him with water of the Queen of Hungary; but nothing was revenir.Alors the king, who sat at the noise, remembered the prediction of the fairies, and rightly judging that this had to happen, since the fairies had said, had put the princess in finest apartment of the palace, on a golden bed embroidery and money. It seemed an angel, she was so beautiful; because his swoon had not taken the bright colors of her complexion: her cheeks were carnation, and her lips like coral; she only had eyes closed, but you could hear it breathing slowly, making see that she was not morte.Le king ordered to be allowed to sleep in peace until its time to wake up had come. The good fairy who had saved her life by condemning sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom of Matakin, twelve thousand miles away when the accident happened to the princess; but she was warned in an instant by a little dwarf, who had seven-league boots (it was the boots with which they made seven leagues with one stride). The fairy left immediately, and saw the end of an hour arrive in a fiery chariot drawn by dragons. The king went to him to be out to the descent of the carriage. It approved all he had done; but as it was very great foresight, she thought that when the princess would come to wake up, she would be embarrassed herself in this old castle: Here it fit.Elle touched with her wand everything in this castle (excluding King and Queen), housekeepers, maids, maids, gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, kitchen boys, urchins, guards, Swiss, pages, footmen; also touched all the horses which were in the stables with grooms, mastiffs big backyard, and little Pouffe, little dog of the princess, who was with her on her bed As soon as she had touched, they all fell asleep, not waking up at the same time as their mistress, to be ready to serve when she needed it. The same pins, which were fire, all full of partridges and pheasants, fell asleep, and the fire also. All this was done in a moment; the fairies were not long in their besogne.Alors the King and Queen, having kissed their dear child without waking her, went out of the castle, and did publish defenses anyone from approaching . These defenses were not needed; as he pushed in a quarter of an hour, all around the park, a large amount of large trees and small, brambles and thorns interlaced into each other, that neither man nor beast could pass ; so that one could only see the top of the castle towers, yet was it that far. We had no doubt that the Fairy would have done again a tour of his trade, so the princess would sleep for it, had nothing to fear from curieux.Au a hundred years, the king's son who then reigned, and who was of another family that the sleeping princess, having gone to the chase on this side here, wondered what it was that he saw the towers above a large wood very thick . Everyone answered according as he had heard. Some said it was an old castle where he returned spirits; the other, that all the wizards of the country are doing their Sabbath. The most common opinion was that an ogre lived there, and there he carried all the children he could catch, to be able to eat at ease, and without anyone could follow, with only the power to make a passage through the wood.The prince did not know what to believe, when an old peasant spoke, and said: - my prince, there are more than fifty years since I heard from my father that it was in this castle a princess, the most beautiful view we had known; she had to sleep there a hundred years and would be awakened by the son of a king, to whom it was réservée.Le young prince, in this speech was all on fire; he thought he would end without hesitation to this rare adventure; and moved by the love and glory, he resolved to see on the spot what was. No sooner he advanced towards the wood, all the great trees, the brambles and thorns these parted of themselves to let him pass. He walked to the castle, he saw the end of a large avenue which he entered; and, what surprised him a little, he saw that person of his people had been able to follow because the trees were close together when it was passed. He left not go his way: a young prince and love is always valiant. He entered a large forecourt where all he saw first was capable of the fear of icing. It was an awful silence, the image of death had it everywhere, and it was as extensive body of men and animals, who seemed dead. Yet he knew well, pimpled noses and ruddy face the Swiss, they were asleep; and cups where there were still a few drops of wine, showed plainly that they had fallen asleep while drinking .It spent a large marble courtyard; he went up the stairs, he entered the room ui guards were standing in their ranks, rifle on shoulder, and sounding their best. He passed through several rooms full of gentlemen and ladies, all asleep, some standing, others sitting. He entered a gilded room and saw on a bed, the curtains were open on all sides, the most beautiful sight he had ever seen: a princess who appeared to be fifteen or sixteen, and whose brightness resplendent was something bright and divine. He approached with trembling and admiration, and knelt with elle.Alors as the end of the enchantment was the princess awoke; and looking at him with eyes more tender than first glance seemed allow: - Is it you, my Prince? said she, you have done well attendre.Le prince charmed with these words, and even the way they were spoken, knew not how to show his joy and gratitude; he assured him that he loved him more than himself. His speeches were misplaced, they lurent more; little eloquence, much love. He was more embarrassed it, and we should not be surprised; she had time to think about what she would say to him, because there is appearance (the story says nothing of it) that the good fairy, during so long sleep, had given her very pleasant dreams. Finally there were four hours they talked, and they had not said half the things they had to dire.Cependant whole palace woke up with the Princess; everyone thought to his office, and as they were not all in love they were starving; matron of honor, being like others, grew impatient, and said aloud to the princess that the meat was served. The Prince helped the Princess to rise; she was all dressed and very beautifully, but he was careful not to tell her she was dressed like her grandmother, and she had a collar mounted; it was nonetheless passed belle.Ils in a salon mirrors, and supped there, served by the officers of the princesse.Les violins and oboes played old tunes, but excellent, although there were almost a hundred jouât years we do more; and after supper, without losing time, the grand chaplain married them in the chapel, and the maid of honor took their curtain: they slept little, the princess had no great need, and the prince left her in the morning to return to the city where his father would be worth lui.Le prince told him that he had lost hunting in the forest, and had slept in the hut of a charcoal burner, that had made him eat black bread and cheese. The king, his father, who was a good man, believed him; but his mother was not very convinced, and seeing that he went almost every day to hunt, and he always had a reason in hand to apologize, when he had slept two or three nights out, she no longer doubted that he was married; for he lived with the Princess above two whole years and had two children, the first of which was a daughter, was named Dawn, and the second a son who was called Day, because he seemed even more beautiful his sœur.La Queen said several times to his son for an explanation, he had to be content in life; but he dared not trust her his secret: he feared although he loved because it was race ogress, and the king had married her only because of its great wealth. It is even whispered to the court that she had the inclinations of ogres and that seeing little children passing by, she had all the trouble to keep from falling upon them; so the prince would never dire.Mais nothing when King was dead, which happened about two years, and he saw the master, he openly declared his marriage, and went with great ceremony to fetch his queen in his castle. a beautiful entrance they made him in the capital city, where she went into the midst of his two enfants.Quelque after the king went to make war with the emperor Cantalabutte neighbor. He left the regency to the queen mother, and highly recommended him his wife and his children, he had to be in the summer war, and when he was arti, the queen mother sent her daughter and her children at a country house in the woods, in order to more easily gratify her horrible longing. She went a few days later and said one evening to her butler - I want to eat my dinner tomorrow at the small Aurore.- Ah! Madam, said the butler ...- I will, said the queen (and she says in a tone of ogress who want to eat fresh meat), and I want to eat sauce Robert.Ce poor man although he had no indicator play an ogress, took his great knife and went up to the little Aurore room she had for four years and then came jumping and laughing fell at his neck, and ask him the candy. He began to cry: the knife fell from his hand and went into the yard to cut the throat a little lamb, and made him a good sauce that his mistress assured him that she had never eaten anything so good. He had at the same time little Morning, and had given it to his wife, for she acher in housing was at the bottom of the low-cour.Huit days, the wicked queen said to his master 's hotel: - I want to eat my supper in the small Jour.Il not answered, resolved to cheat like last time; he fetched the little Day, and found him with a little foil in his hand, which he was fencing with a great monkey; Yet he had only three years. He carried it to his wife who hid with little Aurore, and gave instead the little Day a little kid very tender, the ogress found beautifully bon.Cela was well gone far; but one evening this wicked Queen said to the waiter: - I want to eat the queen with the same sauce as its children.This was then that the poor clerk despaired of the power still wrong. The young queen was twenty, not counting the hundred years that she had slept: his skin was a bit hard, though beautiful and white; and the means of inding in the menagerie, a beast as hard as this? He resolved to save his life, cut his throat with the queen, and went to his room with the intention of do not do twice; he was excited to fury, and went, dagger in hand, in the bedroom of the young queen. He would, however much the surprise and said to him with great respect the order he had received from the Queen-mère. Do your duty, 'she said, handing him the pass, run the order that you were given; I will go and see my children, my poor children I have so aimés.Elle thought them dead, since they had removed them without him nothing dire.- No, madam, replied the poor while Butler moved, you will not die, and you will not let go see your children; but it will be my home where I have hidden, and I shall deceive the queen making her a young hind in your place.Il immediately took her to his room, where the kiss leaving her children and crying with them, he went ccommoder a hind, which the Queen had for her supper with the same appetite as if it had been the young Queen; she was glad of his cruelty, and she prepared to tell the king, on his return, the mad wolves had eaten his queen and two enfants.Un night she prowled as usual in the courses and low -courses castle for halener there any fresh meat, she heard a low room the little Day crying, because the queen mother wanted whipped because he had been naughty; and also heard little Aurore who asked forgiveness for his brother. The ogress recognized the voice of the queen and her children, and furious at having been deceived, she commanded, from the next morning with a terrible voice that shook everyone, we bring into the middle of the court a large tub, it was filled with toads, vipers, snakes and snakes, to do throw the queen and her children, hotel master, his wife and her maid she had given orders to get them hands tied behind dos.Ils were there, and the executioners were preparing to lay in the tub, when the King was not expected so soon, entered the court on horseback; he came in office, and asked astonished that meant that horrible spectacle. Nobody dared to instruct, when the ogress, enraged to see what had happened, threw herself head first into the tank, and was devoured in an instant by the ugly creatures that are had placed. The king left not to be angry: she was his mother; but he soon consoled himself with his beautiful wife and enfants.MoralitéAttendre some time to have a husband, Rich, well, gallant and sweet, the thing is quite natural; but wait a hundred years, and still sleeping, we find more female, who slept so fable tranquillement.La encor seems to want us to hear, that often hymen nodes pleasant to be deferred, are not less happy, and we lose nothing to wait. But sex, so hard, Aspire to conjugal faith, that I do not have the strength nor the heart, From preach this morality.
Beauty with Golden Hair	3984	531	French	There was once a king's daughter who was so beautiful that there was anything so beautiful in the world. It was called the Belle of the Golden Hair because his hair was finer than gold, and blond with wonder, all curly, falling onto her feet. She was always covered his curly hair with a wreath on his head and stitched clothes diamonds and pearls, so we could see her without aimer.Il there was a young king of his neighbors who was not married, and that was well done and very rich. When he had learned all that was said Belle with the Golden Hair, although he would have not yet seen, he began to love her so much, that he lost the drink and eat, and he decided to send an ambassador to propose to her. And he made a beautiful carriage to his ambassador; he gave her more than a hundred horses and a hundred lackeys, and told him good to get him princesse.Quand he had taken leave of the king and he was gone, the whole court was talking about something else; and the king, who had no doubt that the Belle of the Golden Hair not consent to his wishes, he was already making beautiful dresses and wonderful furniture. While the workers were busy working, the ambassador arrived at the Belle of the Golden Hair, gave him his little message. But whether she was not that day in a good mood, or that the compliment did not seem to him at will, she said to the ambassador that she thanked the king, but she had not want to marier.L'ambassadeur departed the court of the Princess, sad to do not bring with him; he brought all the presents he had brought her to the king: for it was very wise, and knew he should not be that girls receive no boys. So she would never accept the beautiful diamonds and the rest; and, not to displease the king, it took only a handful of pins of Angleterre.Quand ambassador arrived in the big city of the king, where he was waiting so impatiently, everyone grieved that n 'Belle Point brought the Golden Hair. The king began to weep like a child: it consoled him without being able to come bout.Il there was a young boy at the court that was beautiful as the sun, and done better whole kingdom because of his good grace and spirit, he was called Rider. Everyone loved her, off the envious, who were angry that the king made him good and he confided to him every day his affaires.Avenant found himself with people who spoke of the return of the ambassador, and said he had not done anything worthwhile. He told them, without noticing it, "If the king had sent me to the Beautiful with the Golden Hair, I'm sure she would have come with me." At once those wicked people will say to the king: "Sire you do not know what it says Rider? what if you had sent to the Belle of the Golden Hair, he would have returned. Consider well his malice, he claims to be more beautiful than you, and she would have so loved, she would have followed him anywhere. "This is the king who is angry, angry so many, he was out of it. "Ha! Ha! He says, this pretty cute laughs at my misfortune, and he was taken more than me. Well, like it put in my big tower, and there die of hunger!" The guards the king were at Rider, who thought no more of what he had said. They dragged him to prison and made him a thousand ills. This poor boy had only a little straw to lie down and he died without a small fountain that flowed into the base of the tower, which he drank a little to cool, for hunger had him well seasoned mouth .A day he was tired, he said, sighing, "what the king complains it has no subject that he be more faithful than I have ever offended?". the King, by chance, passing near the tower when he heard the voice of the man he had loved so much, he stopped to listen, even those who were with him, who hated Amendment and said to the king: "! what do you have fun, Sir do you know it's a knave?" the king replied: "Let me, I want to listen." Having heard his complaints, tears came to her eyes. He opened the door of the tower and came appela.Avenant sad to put her knees before him and kissed his feet, "What have I done to you, sir, 'he said, to treat me so badly - you've made fun of me and my ambassador, said the king. you said, if I had sent to the Belle of the Golden Hair, you'd have amenée.- It is true, Sire, Rider answered, I would have it so well know your qualities, I'm sure she could not defend himself, and in this I have not said that you had to be nice "King. found that indeed it was wrong point; he looked through those who told him the evil of his favorite, and he took her with him, repenting great difficulty that he had faite.Après have done wonderfully dinner, he called in his office and said: "Endorsement, I still like the belle of the Golden Hair, its refusal have not discouraged me, but I do not know how to take me for what wants to marry me: I want to send you there to see if you'll be successful. "Rider replied that he was willing to obey him in all things, and he would leave the next day." Oh said the king, i want to give you a great équipage.- This is not necessary, he said, do me a good horse with letters from you "the King embraced him, for he was delighted to see him soon prêt.Ce was. Monday morning he took leave of the king and his friends, to go to his own embassy, ​​without pomp and noise. He was only dreaming of ways to engage with the Beautiful Hair of Gold to marry the king. He had a writing in his pocket, and when he came to him some beautiful thought to put in his harangue, he dismounted and sat under trees to write to not forget anything. One morning he had gone to daybreak, passing in a large meadow, there came to him a thought very pretty; he put foot down, and stood against willows and poplars were planted along a small river that flowed beside the meadow. After he had written, he looked all around, delighted to be in such a beautiful place. He saw on the grass a big golden carp yawning and could not go, because who wanted to catch small flies, if she had jumped out of the water, she was slender on grass where she was dying. Rider took pity; and, though he was lean and day he could win for his dinner, he was taking it and handed it gently into the river. As soon as my godmother carp feel the coolness of the water, she began to rejoice, and let sink to the bottom; then returning all chirpy beside the river, "Rider said she, I thank you for the pleasure you just do me without you I'd be dead, and you saved me, and I will scratch yours." After this little compliment, she plunged into the water; Rider and remained very surprised of the spirit and civility of carpe.Un other day he continued his journey, he saw a raven at a loss: the poor bird was chased by an eagle large (big eater crows) he was about to catch it, and he would have swallowed like a lens, so Endorsement had not felt compassion for this bird. "That, he said, as the strong oppress the weak? Why is the eagle eating crow" He takes his bow he always wore, and arrow and aimed well eagle, croc! he let fly the arrow in the body and pierces through. The eagle falls dead, and the raven, happy, just perching on a tree. "Amendment, he said, you are very generous to have me rescued, who am miserable a crow, but I will remain ungrateful, I'll scratch yours. "Amendment admired the good spirit of the crow and went on his way. By entering into a large timber, so early that he barely saw his path, he heard an owl cried desperately owl." Yeah! he said, this is a very sad owl; he might have been caught in a net. "He looked everywhere, and finally he found large nets that had oiseleurs tense night to catch chicks." What a pity he said; men are made only for between-torment, or to persecute the poor animals that do them neither harm nor destroy. "He drew his knife and cut the cords The owl took the rise, but back on the wing." Endorsement, he said, it is not necessary that I make you a long harangue to you I understand the obligation that you have; she speaks enough for itself: the hunters were coming, I was caught, I was dead without your help. I am grateful heart, I'll scratch yours. "These are the three most significant adventures that came to Rider in his journey he was so anxious to reach, he was soon to the palace of the Belle of the Golden Hair Everything was admirable.. The one saw diamonds packed like stones, fine clothes, candy, money; they were wonderful things: and he thought to himself that if she left it all to come to the king his master, should he be lucky he took a brocade dress, the carnation and white feathers. he combed his hair, was powdered, washed her face, put a rich scarf, embroidered on his neck, with a small basket and in a nice little dog, he bought passing Bologna. Rider was so well done, so kind, he did everything with such grace, that when he came to the gate of the palace, all the guards made him great reverence, and we ran to tell Belle the Golden qu'Avenant Hair, ambas sador of its nearest neighbor king wished to see. On the name of Amendment, the princess said: "I would wager that it's nice and it pleases all the world.- Truly yes, madame, told him all her maids of honor: we have seen the attic where we accommodions your tow, and as long as he remained under the windows we could not faire.- nothing that's fine, 'said Belle with the Golden Hair, have fun watching the boys! Here, that is given me my big blue satin dress embroidered, and that is well scattered my hair blonde, which is make me garlands of fresh flowers; that they give me my shoes and my high range; that is sweeping my room and my throne because I want him to say all that I am truly the belle of the Golden Hair "that's all women who were eager to adorn like a queen.. They showed such haste that they entrecognaient and hardly advanced. Finally the princess spent in his gallery with large mirrors, to see if anything was missing. Then she got on her Golden throne of ivory, and ebony, which felt like a balm, and ordered his daughters to take instruments and sing softly to not stun personne.On led Rider in the courtroom. It remained so with admiration, he said for many times that he could almost speak. Nevertheless he took courage and made his speech perfectly and he prayed that the princess would not have the displeasure to return without it "Gentil Amendment, she told him all the reasons you just tell me. are very good, and I assure you I should like to encourage you more than another, but you must know that a month ago I was walking me down the river with all my ladies. and as 'I was served my snack, taking off my glove I pulled my finger a ring that unfortunately fell into the river. I cherished more than my kingdom. I leave you to judge what sorrow this loss was followed. I sworn to never listen to any proposal of marriage, the ambassador who will offer me a husband I do relate my ring. Look now what you have to do that, because when you speak to me fifteen days and nights, you do not persuaderiez me to change my feeling. "Rider remained astonished this response. He gave her a deep bow and begged her to get the dog, the basket and scarf; but he replied that she would present point, and his thinking that it came from him dire.Quand he was returned home, he went to bed without supper. Her little dog, named Caper, did not want supper either: he came to stand beside him. All night, Endorsement never ceased to sigh. "Where can I take a ring fell last month in a large river he said: it is folly to try the princess told me what to put me unable to obey.." he sighed and strong afflicted. Caper, who was listening, said, "My dear sir, I beg you, do not despair point of your good fortune: You are too kind not to be happy Well, as soon as it is light, bordering. the river "Rider gave him two flicks of the hand and said nothing. but, overwhelmed with sadness, he endormit.Cabriole, seeing the day cabriola as he awoke and said, "My master, habillez- you, and go out." Amendment willed good. He gets up, gets dressed and goes down into the garden, and the garden it will imperceptibly along the river, where he walked his hat over his eyes and his arms crossed one over the other, not thinking that his departure, when suddenly he heard was called "! Endorsement Endorsement" he looks all around and sees no one; he thought he was dreaming. He continued his walk; we recall: "Endorsement Endorsement - Who is calling me!?" said il.Cabriole, which was very small, and closely watched the water, replied: "Do not believe me, if not . golden carp that I see "Immediately the big carp seems, and said," you saved my life in the meadow Aliziers where I would have stayed without you, I promise you you revaloir Hold,. Amendment dear, here the ring of the Beautiful Or. Hair of "he bent down and took her in the mouth of my gossip carp, he thanked thousand fois.Au instead of returning home, he was right at the palace with little Cabriole, who was glad to have brought his master to the waterfront. They went to tell the princess that he wished to see. "Alas, said she, the poor boy, he comes to take leave of me. He considered that what I want is impossible, and he will say to his master." We brought in Amendment, which presented him his ring and told him, "the princess, this is your command; please receive it for my lord the king consort" When she saw her ring where nothing was missing, she remained so astonished, she believed dream. "Really, she says, graceful rider, you have to be favored in any fairy, because of course this is not possible.- Madam, he said, I know of none, but I had a great desire to you obéir.- Since you have such good will, she continued, you must do me another service, without which I will never marry. There is a prince, not far from here ., called Galifron, which was put in mind to marry me it made me declare his intention with terrible threats that if I refused he désolerait my kingdom But judge if I could accept it. c ' is a giant that is higher than a high tower; he eats a man like a monkey eating a brown When he goes to the country, he carries in his pockets small cannon, which he uses guns;. and, when it speaks loudly, those near him become deaf. I made him answer that I did not wish to marry, and he excused me. Since then he has this sse to persecute me; it kills all my subjects and, first of all, you have to fight against him and bring me his head. "Endorsement remained somewhat stunned by the proposal he dreamed some time, then said." Well, madam, I will fight Galifron. I believe I will be defeated; but I will die brave man. "The princess remained very surprised: she said a thousand things to stop doing business It was no use. He retired to fetch weapons and all he needed when he had that. he wanted, he gave the little Cabriole in her basket, mounted his beautiful horse, and was in the country of Galifron. he demanded from him to those he met, and everyone told him that it was a demon whose we dared not approach: the more he heard say this, the more he Caper Fear reassured him, saying to him: "My dear sir, while you fight, I'll bite his legs. he will drop his head to chase me, and you kill. "Amendment admired the spirit of the little dog, but he knew enough that his aid would suffice pas.Enfin he came near the castle of Galifron. All roads were covered with bones of men he had eaten carcasses . or in pieces he did not wait long, he saw coming across a wooden His head was over the tallest trees, and singing in a terrible voice. Where are the small enfantsQue I crunches ? teeth It takes me so, so and so, that the world is suffisant.Aussitôt Rider began singing the same tune: Approach: here Rider, who you snatch them dents.Bien it is not the greatest, to fight it suffisant.Les rhymes were not very regular but he made the song very quickly, and it is even a miracle that he did no worse did, because he was horribly fear. When Galifron heard these words, he looked all around and saw the rider sword, who told him two or tro is insulting to irritate. It was enough as He flew into a terrible rage, and taking any iron club, he would have knocked out the first time the gentle rider without a raven came to stand on the top of his head, and with its beak so just gave him in the eye, that the burst. His blood ran down his face. He was like a desperate, hitting from all sides. Amendment avoided him and bore him great sword that plunged to the hilt, and that made him a thousand injuries, where he lost so much blood that he fell. Endorsement soon cut off his head, although delighted to have been so happy; and the raven, who had perched on a tree, said: "I have not forgotten the service you rendîtes me in killing the eagle that you pursued me I promised to pay me. I think the having made aujourd'hui.- it's me that you have it, Mr. Crow replied Amendment;. I remain your servant "he immediately mounted his horse, responsible for terrible head Galifron.Quand he arrived in the city, everyone followed and shouted the "Behold the brave rider who has just killed the monster"; so that the princess, who heard much noise and trembling that we learn he came Rider death, dared not ask what had happened to him; but she saw him enter Amendment with the head of the giant, which left him still not to fear, although there was nothing to fear "Madam, said he, your enemy is dead. I hope you no longer refuse my lord the king? - Oh, if done, said Belle with the Golden Hair, I refuse if you find way, before I left, to bring me water of the dark cave . There is close by a deep cave that has six leagues in circumference. It is at the entrance two dragons that prevent us from there. They fire in the mouth and eyes. Then, when one is in the cave, there is a large hole in which you have to go. it is full of toads, snakes and snake at the bottom of this hole, there is a small cave where flows the beauty fountain and health: this is the water that i absolutely want All that lava is wonderful: if one is beautiful, it remains still beautiful; if it is ugly, it becomes beautiful; if. We are young, we still young; if one is old, one is young. You may well, Endorsement, I will not leave my kingdom without emporter.- Madam, he said, you are so beautiful that you water is useless; but I am a poor ambassador you want death, I'll get what you want, with the certainty of not being able to return. "Beauty of the Hair Or not changed point of purpose and Rider went with the little dog Cabriole, to go to the dark cave seek beauty of the water all those he met on the way were saying." C is a pity to see a boy so kind get lost light heart; it goes only to the cave, and when he would go with a hundred brave, he could not overcome. Why the princess she only wants the impossible? "He continued to walk, and did not say a word, but he was very sad. He came up a mountain, where he sat down to rest a bit, and he left his horse graze and run after Caper flies. He knew the dark cave was not far away, he watched if he would see the point. Finally he saw an ugly black rock as ink, where a large smoke came out, and after a while one of the dragons, who threw fire by the eyes and mouth: he had a yellow body and green, claws and a long tail that was over a hundred laps. Cabriole saw all this; he did not know where to hide, as he peur.Avenant, all determined to die, drew his sword, went down with a vial that Beauty with the Golden Hair had given her to fill it with beauty water. He told his dog Caper: "It is done me I can never have that water which is guarded by dragons When I am dead, filled vial of my blood and carries it to the princess!. so she could see what it costs me, and then goes to the king and my master tells him my misfortune "As he spoke, he heard was called" Rider Rider "he said,".! who calls me "and he saw an owl in the hole of an old tree, who said to him," you pulled me from the net hunters where I was taken, and you sauvâtes my life, I promised you I revaudrais you: here time Give me your bottle. I know all the ways of the dark cave; I'll get you the beauty water "Lady.! who was glad? I let you suggest. Rider gave him the vial quickly, and the owl went without any hindrance in the cave. In less than a quarter of an hour, he returned the bottle bring good bite. Rider was delighted. He thanked all his heart, and, going up the mountain, he took the path of good joyeux.Il city went straight to the palace; he presented the vial to the Belle of the Golden Hair, who had nothing more to say, she thanked Amendment, and ordered everything he had to leave; then she began traveling with him. She was very kind and sometimes said to him. "If you had wanted, I would have made you king, we should not be left in my kingdom" But he replied, "I would not do such a great displeasure of my master for all the kingdoms of the earth, although I think you are more beautiful than the sun. "Finally they came to the big city of the king, who, knowing that Belle had the Golden Hair, went to meet her and her was the best present in the world. He married her with such rejoicing that we spoke of something else. But the Belle of the Golden Hair, beloved of Rider in the bottom of his heart, was not happy when she saw him, and always rented. "I would come without spot Amendment, she told the king he had he made things impossible for my service. You need to be obliged to him He gave me the beauty of water. I never grow old, I will always be beautiful "the envious that heard the queen said to the king." you're jealous, and you have reason to be the Queen loves so strong rider she loses and drink. . eat it only talk about him and obligations you have it, as if this other than you sent do not have as much "the king said," Truly, I realize, that. you go put it in the round with shackled hands and feet. "they took Rider, and for his reward for having so well served the king, was locked up in the tower with fetters and hands . He saw no one that the jailer, who threw him a piece of black bread with a hole, and water in an earthen bowl. Yet her dog Caper will leave the point; he consoled and coming to him all nouvelles.Quand Belle with the Golden Hair knew his disgrace, she threw herself at the king's feet, and in tears, she begged him to leave prison Amendment. But the more she prayed, the more he became angry, thinking: "This is that she loves"; and he would not do anything. She spoke no more; it was well advised triste.Le king than it was maybe not good enough; he wanted to rub the face with beauty water, so that the queen loved him more than she did. This water was in a jar on the edge of the fireplace room of the queen, she had put there to watch it more often; but one of her maids, wanting to kill a spider with a broom, threw unfortunately the vial on the floor, which broke, and all the water was lost. She brushed avoidance, and not knowing what to do, she remembered that she had seen in the king's cabinet a very similar vial full of clear water was the beauty of water; she deftly took it without saying anything, and carried on the chimney of the reine.L'eau who was in the king's office was used to kill the princes and lords when they were criminals; instead of cutting their heads or hang them, they rubbed their faces in the water: they fell asleep, and woke more. One evening, the king took the bottle and rubbed out the face and then he fell asleep and died. The little dog Cabriole the learned among the first and will not fail to go tell rider, who told him to go find the Golden Belle and to remember the poor prisonnier.Cabriole Hair slipped gently into the press; because there was great noise in the court for the death of King. He told the queen: "Madame, do not forget the poor Amendment." She remembered that once the sentence had suffered because of it and its great fidelity. She left without speaking to anyone, and was entitled to the tower, where she removed herself irons feet and hands Rider. And putting a gold crown on his head and the royal coat over her shoulders, she said to him. "Come, friendly rider, I am king you and take you for my husband" He threw himself at her feet and thanked. Everyone was delighted to have her master. It was the most beautiful wedding in the world and the Beautiful with the Golden Hair lived long with beautiful rider, both happy and satisfaits.Si across a malheureuxTe request your support, Do not refuse him a généreux.Un relief benefit sooner or later receives his récompense.Quand Amendment, so kindly, Servati carp and raven; Owl when to even, without being put off by its extreme ugliness He retained freedom! Would we ever have thought, That these animals some DayThe lead at the height of fame, When the king would serve the tender love ? Despite all the attractions of a charming beauty, who was beginning to feel her desires, he keeps his master, stifling sighs, a constante.Toutefois fidelity, without reason, he was accused: But when his happiness it appears more obstacles, Heaven owed him a miracle That virtue never Heaven has denied.
The grasshopper and the ant	4034	280A	French	The Cicada, having chantéTout summer long, Found herself dépourvueQuand the north wind came morceauDe Not one little fly or vermisseau.Elle went screaming famineChez her neighbor the Ant, begging him the grain prêterQuelque subsisterJusqu'à for the new season . "I'll pay you, 'she said, before the OUT, faith animal, Interest and principal." the Ant is not lending: This is its lesser défaut.Que were you hot? she said this emprunteuse.- day and night at any venantJe sing, do déplaise.- you sing? I am very well aise.Eh! dance now.
Bride of the little rabbit	632	311	French	There once was a woman with her daughter who had a beautiful garden sprouts. A rabbit came there in the winter season, and now that they ate all the cabbages. Then the woman said to her daughter: - Go to the garden and chase me rabbit - Shoo! shoo! said the girl. Bunny, do not eat up all the cabbages - Come on, girl, said the rabbit, put yourself on my tail rabbit and follow me in my cottage lapin.La little girl does not.The next day comes the little rabbit who still eats the cabbage, and the woman said to her daughter: - Go to the garden and chase me rabbit - Shoo! shoo! said the girl. , Little rabbit do not eat up our cabbages - Come on, girl, said the rabbit, put yourself on my tail rabbit and follow me in my cottage lapin.La little girl does not.The day after, that's the bunny income, and ate away at the cabbages. So the mother told her daughter: - Go to the garden and chase me rabbit - Come on, girl, said the rabbit, put yourself on my tail rabbit and follow me in my cottage small lapin.La! girl sits on the small piece of tail rabbit, which spins off and leads his chaumière.- Now girl, boil the cabbage and millet, I will invite the people of the noce.Et guests the wedding came together. But who were the people in the wedding party? I can tell you because that's what I was told: the guests, they were all the rabbits, and the raven also came there as pastor to unite husband and the fox was the sacristan, and the altar under the rainbow ciel.Mais the girl felt sad: she was all seule.Arrive the rabbit, who said: - Come serve! Come serve! Guests are gays! The bride said nothing. She's crying. Bunny goes. Bunny revient.- Serve them alone! he said to him. Serve them alone! The guests are hungry! The bride said nothing. She's crying. Bunny goes. Bunny revient.- Sers last! he said to him. Sers last! Guests will get impatient fiancée still says nothing!; so little rabbit goes. It is a straw doll, she dresses in her clothes, puts a wooden spoon in hand, pose in front of the pot millet, then goes back to his mère.Petit rabbit comes back again shouting "? will you serve will you serve" He rushes on the straw doll and hit him a blow on the head, making him drop his bonnet.Il realizes when it is not his fiancée and moves away; and it is sad.
The Frog and the Mouse	4110	278	French	Such as Merlin said, Cuide engeigner others, who often engeigne yourself. I regret that this word is too old now: It always seemed to me an extreme energy. But to come to the plan that I took, A rat full of overweight, fat, and better fed, and who knew Advent or Lent, On the edge of a marsh brightened his spirits. A frog approach, and he said in his language: Come to my house, I will make you feast. Sir Rat suddenly promised: He did not need more long harangue. Yet she alleged the delights of Bath, Curiosity, pleasure travel, Hundred rarities to see along the swamp: One day he would tell his grandchildren the beauty of these places, the manners of the inhabitants, and the government of Water public affairs. A point without holding the stop galand: He swam somewhat; but needed help. The Frog this is a very good remedy: The Rat was at its foot attached by the leg; A rush Brinc made in the case. In the marshes entered our good gossip Strives to take his guest to the bottom of the water, against the law of nations, against his oath; Claims it will make throat-hot and quarry; (This was, in his opinion, an excellent piece). Already in his mind Galande the undertaker. It certifies the Gods; treacherous cares. He resists; it draws. In this new struggle, a Milan that hovered in the air, made the round sees from above the poverty struggling on the wave. It melts above, removes, and, by the same means and the link La Grenouille. While was; so much so, That this double prey The bird gives heart to joy, that way Having A dinner meat and fish. The best trick hatched May damage inventor; And often the Returns perfidy on its author.
The Girl without Hands	296	706	French	Once upon a time, there a few days, in the days when flour villagers had crashed to the grindstone, a miller who had fallen on hard times. He was left with this big millstone in a shed and behind a beautiful apple tree in bloom. One day, while he went into the forest to cut dead wood with his ax in cutting money, a curious old man appeared from behind a tree. "What good tire yourself with chopping wood? He said. Look, if you give me what is behind your mill, I'll make riche.- What is it behind my mill, but my apple tree in bloom? thought the miller. He accepted the old market homme.- in three years, I'll pick my property abroad chuckled before disappearing limping behind the trees. "on the trail in back, the miller saw his wife flew to meet him, her hair down, the deck in battle. "My husband, my husband, when the time has come, a beautiful pendulum took place on the wall of our house, the velvet chairs have replaced our rustic seats, the pantry began to abound in game and all our chests, our overflowing boxes. I beg you, tell me what happened? "and at that point yet, gold rings adorning his fingers came while her hair was caught in a circle 'gold. "Ah," said the miller, who with fear mingled respect, then saw her become leotard satin and old shoes, heels so hackneyed he walked tilted back, giving way to fine shoes. "Well, it all comes from a stranger, he managed to stammer. I have met in the forest a strange man, wearing a dark coat, which promised abundance of goods if I gave him this who is behind the mill what do you want, my wife, we may well plant another apple .... - Oh, my husband moaned wife thunderstruck man in dark coat, it was the Devil and behind the mill. there are many apple, but our daughter, sweeping the yard with a willow broom. " And parents to go home unsteadily, shedding bitter tears over their beautiful habits.Pendant three years, their daughter was left without taking husband. She had such a gentle nature that the first spring potatoes. The day the devil came to fetch her, she took a bath, put on a white dress and stood in the middle of a circle she had drawn in chalk around it. And when the devil reached out to grab it, an invisible force pushed her to the other end of the court. "It should not wash, yelled it, otherwise I can not approach him." parents and the girl were terrified. A few weeks passed. The girl was washing over and soon his hair were sticky, his nails black, his skin gray, his clothes stiff with grime. Every day she looked more and more to the devil beast sauvage.Alors returned. The girl began to cry. His tears flowed so many on his hands and along her arms as soon his hands and arms were perfectly clean, immaculate. Enraged, the devil shouted, "Cut her hands, otherwise I can approach her!" The father was horrified: "You want me to slice the hands of my child - Everything here will die, roared the Devil, while your wife you, fields as far as door his eyes:" The father was so terrified that he obeys. Asked forgiveness of his daughter, he began to sharpen his ax. His daughter accepted his fate. "I am your child, she said, do as you do." So he said, and no one knows who shouted the loudest, or the father of her child. And it was done in life had known the young fille.Quand the devil returned, the girl had cried so much that the stumps of his arms were clean again and again, he found himself on the other end court when he tried to grab her. He threw curses that lit small fires in the forest, then disappeared forever, for he had no rights over it. The father had aged a hundred years, like his wife. They endeavored to go, like true forest dwellers they were. The old man offered his daughter to live in a beautiful castle, surrounded for the life of wealth and magnificence, but she replied that she would be better placed in now begging for subsistence and dependent on others for a living. So she wrapped her arms with a clean gauze and at dawn left the life she had known. She walked long. When the sun was at its zenith, sweat traced the furrows on his face smudged. The wind décoiffa it until her hair look like a pile of twigs. And in the middle of the night she came to a royal garden where the moon was shining fruit hanging from the trees. A moat surrounding the orchard and she could not enter. But she fell to her knees as she was starving. So a spirit dressed in white appeared and touched one of the locks of the moat, which was empty. The girl walked among the pear trees. She knew that each fruit, perfect shape, had been counted and numbered, and that the orchard was kept; However, in a light crunch, a branch stooped towards it so as to bring within reach the pretty fruit hanging on the end. She put her lips on the golden skin of a pear and ate standing in the moonlight, her arms wrapped in gauze, his hair disheveled, the girl unparalleled hands a creature of mud. The scene did not escape the gardener, but he did not intervene because he knew that a magical spirit kept the girl. When it had finished eating that single pear, she recrossed the ditch and went to sleep in the woods, away from arbres.Le next morning the king came to count his pears. He realized that he was missing one, but it was useless to look around, he could not find the fruit. The gardener explained, "Last night two spirits drained the moat, entered the garden when the moon was high and he who had no hands, a female spirit, ate pear that was offered to him. " The king said he would ride custody the next night. When it was dark, he arrived with his gardener and his magician, who knew how to speak with the spirits. All three sat down under a tree and waited. At midnight the girl came out of the forest, floating with her arms without hands, his dirty clothes in tatters, his hair disheveled and his face where the sweat had drawn channeled the spirit dressed in white at his side. They entered the orchard in the same way as the day before and again a tree started a branch within the reach of the girl gracefully leaning toward her and she consumed in small bites the fruit that leaned on the end. The magician approached them, a little but not much. "Are you or are you not of this world?" asked he. And the girl replied: "I was in the world and yet I am not of this world." The king asked the magician: "Is she human Is it a spirit?" the magician replied that she was both at fois.Alors the king's heart jumped in his chest and he cried: "I will not leave you From that day, I will watch over you.." In his castle, he made for her a pair of hands in silver, which is tied to his arms. So the king he married the girl without hands. After some time, the king had to go to war in a faraway kingdom, and he asked his mother to care for his young queen, because he loved her with all my heart. "If she gives birth to a child, send me a message right away." The young queen gave birth to a beautiful enfant.La king's mother sent her son a messenger to tell him the good news. But on the way, the messenger felt tired, and when he approached a river, sleep won, so that he fell asleep at the water's edge. The devil came out from behind a tree and substituted another with the message saying that the queen had given birth to a child that was half-man half-dog. Horrified, the king nevertheless sent a note in which he expressed his love for the queen and all her affection in this terrible ordeal. The young messenger came back to the river and there, he felt heavy, as if waking from a feast and soon fell asleep. Whereupon the devil appeared and changed the message against another that said, "Kill the queen and her child." The old mother, upset by the order issued by his son, sent and received confirmation. And the messengers made the round trip. Arriving at the river, each was caught sleeping and the Devil change the messages became more and more terrible, the last saying, "Keep the tongue and the eyes of the queen to prove that she has been killed. "the old mother could not bear to kill the sweet young queen. So she sacrificed a deer, took his tongue and eyes and kept in a safe place. Then she helped the young queen to tie her child to her breast, put a veil and told her she had to flee to save their lives. Women wept together and kissed and parted. The young queen went to the adventure and soon came to a forest which was the biggest, the largest she had ever seen. She tried desperately to find a way. Towards evening, the spirit reappeared dressed in white and guided her to a poor inn run by friendly people of the forest. Another young girl wearing a white dress, placed her calling Majesty and put the child to her. "As you know I am a queen? Asked, elle.- We the people of the forest are aware of these things-there, my queen. Now rest." The queen therefore spent seven years at the inn, where she led a happy life with his child. Gradually, his hands repulsed. First came the hands of an infant, a pearly pink and the little girl's hands and finally hands femme.Pendant this time the king returned from the war. His old mother greeted crying. "Why did you want me to kill two innocent people?" asked she, pointing to the eyes and tongue? Hearing the terrible story, the king wavered and wept endlessly. In front of her grief, her mother said it was the eyes and tongue of a doe as it had done from the queen and her child in the forest. The king vowed to remain without water and without food and travel to the ends of the sky to find them. He tried for seven years. His hands turned black, his beard was brown like moss, his eyes reddened and withered. He neither ate nor drank, but a more powerful force that helped him to live. At the end, he came to the inn run by the people of the forest. The woman in white brought him and he lay down, exhausted. She put her veil on the face. He fell asleep and while he breathed deeply, the veil slipped slowly from his face. When he awoke a pretty woman and a beautiful child it contemplated. "I am your wife and your child here." The king asked only to believe, but he noticed that she had hands. "My labors and myself did the push," said the young woman. The woman in white hands pulled the silver box in which they were stored. The king rose hugged his wife and child, and that day, the joy was great in the heart of the forest. All spirits and inhabitants of the inn took part in a splendid feast. Thereafter, the king and queen and their son returned to the old mother married a second time.
Blue light	1105	562	French	There was once a brave soldier named Francis, who for years had fought in many battles and always did his duty. But when peace was made and he was fired with the bulk of the army, was not granted him any pension; he went to the king and he claimed against this injustice. But His Majesty, who needed a lot of money to build a magnificent palace, sent him packing. "You will pay me maybe one day," says the soldier, and he went to buy bread with the last farthing he had left. Then he left the city and traveled the countryside to find some work as a drudge; because he had learned of another profession than a soldier. The day passed without anyone wished to occupy. Towards evening he entered a forest, and night came, he was not out yet. Suddenly he saw in the distance a light; He walked in that direction and finally reached a house. He found an old woman, who was nothing but a wicked witch. - Good evening, my good woman, said Francois; I lost my way in the forest and I just ask you to give me a bed for the night and a crust for dinner. - Another replied the witch refuse to accommodate a man like you has something like a vagrant. But I have a good heart and I'll give you something to calm your hunger. Tomorrow you shalt me, I hope, a little service. - Willingly, said Francis, if it's in my power. - Oh! it is only to dig my garden. Thereupon Francis, having supped, went to the attic to sleep on a bale of straw. The next day he went to work and Becha the garden; it was difficult to have the evening ended. - We are quits, said the old woman; but if you want tomorrow splitting logs in my supply of wood for the winter, I will give back to dinner and I'll house you night. Francis agreed and the next day he played the ax until the evening; he was quite exhausted. - You worked well, said the old woman; also tomorrow I will ask you a lightweight service that does not tire you. This will go down in the old well of the court; it contains more water, but I gave up a candle; I care because it gives a beautiful blue flame that never goes out. The next day Francis went to the well with the old woman who let him down in a basket attached to the rope pulley. When he was at the bottom, he saw indeed a blue flame that came from the magic candle; a case of species was next, in which you could lock him; when it is reopened, the flame shone again, and never did the candle was wearing. Francis and took the holster and waved the rope. The witch went up the cart and when he arrived at the mouth of the well, she immediately reached out and said, "Come quickly, pass me my candle!" But Francis, became suspicious, answered: - Previously I again want to have my feet on solid ground. - Give immediately, said the old, full of anger. Francis refused again; Then rage seized the witch dropped the rope, the poor Francis fell into the well. When it was raised, he remembered that he had in his pocket a half pipe stuffed with tobacco. "This will be my last consolation, he said, that still treat myself to some good flashes." Then, having lit his pipe to the blue flame, it began to smoke. After a few seconds appeared before him a little black man who, bowing respectfully, said to him: Master, what do you order? How do I order? said Francis. Why would you have to obey me? I never had in my life to give orders. - All I know, 'said the little man, is that I am responsible for carrying out your wishes. - Either, said Francois; Well, get me to that ugly place. The dwarf then made him see a hallway that led to a cave, where the witch had piled treasures. Francis drew extensively and there, gold and pockets full of diamonds, he came to the light of day. - Now, he said, will grab the Witch and the book justice. The boy was soon he reappeared mounted on a large wild cat, and standing before him, tied the hands and legs, the awful old, screaming. After some time he came back and said: - She is locked in the tower; tomorrow we will judge. What do I do now? - Go and rest, my boy, 'said Francis. But if I need you, how would I do? - You will not have to smoke again a bit with your pipe after having lit in blue light. Francis left the forest and returned to the capital. After being dressed all new and very beautifully at the first tailor, he went to stay in the nicest hotel in the city, and he made a great expense. After a few days of this life of luxury, which seemed like a dream, an idea crossed his mind and with his pipe, he summoned the little black man. - Look, he says, I have to revenge the king who treated me unjustly. Tonight you bring them to me his only daughter, so she cleans my boots. - It's easy, 'said the dwarf. Only thing that task remains secret; you should know that the king did not hear the joke, and the rest of it is a bit strong. But that concern you; I have to obey. And indeed, at the stroke of midnight, he brought the princess, who was plunged into such a state sleepwalking. - In the book, Miss, exclaimed Francis, and serve me, as I have served your father. Take this broom and sweep the floor. The princess, silent and eyes almost completely closed, was somehow the work that was requested. - Now here's brushes and shoe polish, said Francois; clean my boots and let them shine well, I beg you. The king's daughter obeys again but having never done such work, she remained long. Then, on the order of Francis, the little man took her back to his apartment. The next morning she told her father what she believed to have been a mere dream. - However, she added, I'm all tired, and I like broken bones. But the king, who knew that this time fairies were happening extraordinary things well, took it seriously and told her daughter to fill the evening the pockets of his pea bathrobe and make a hole . That's what she did, and when the little man came to take her and carried her through the air to the Francis room, peas escaped and could indicate the path she had taken. But the little man noticed the ruse and, when he brought the princess to her, he went to sow peas in every street of the city. This is what we came to tell the king, who then no longer doubted that her daughter had not actually acts servant. He was mortified. After thinking, he said to the princess to keep her slippers lying down, and to leave under furniture if they came again to remove it. This is what she did. This time the little man did not notice anything, and when the next day the king came to visit people all the apartments in the city, they found in the room Francis, the mule of the princess. He was immediately arrested and the body thrown into prison. Through the bars of his cell, he saw placed there, a watchman, a former good comrades of the regiment. He managed to open the window and called his friend. - Listen, said Francis, when you will be relieved of faction task of introducing you in the room I occupied at the hotel. At the bottom of the cabinet wood, you will find a bag full of gold, it will be for you; I ask you in return to bring me a copper case you'll find next. The thing grinned the soldier he knew how to do it skillfully and came to bring the case where Francis was always to the candle, the blue flame; about the gold he kept for himself, as agreed. Reassured now, Francis, when he was brought before the court, allowed without protest death sentence. We immediately took him to the scaffold, on the largest square of the city. A huge crowd was there gathered the king with all the court had come to stand on a platform. During the trip, Francis asked the executioner, as last grace, to smoke a pipe of tobacco. This was granted. When having lit his pipe in the magical light, he had few puffs, the little man appeared at his side. - Rosse and whipping me all these people, says Francis, the king, the court, the judges and all the authorities. Cleaning only the princess; I have already done enough to suffer. Basically I was brutal towards her she was innocent of the wrongs of his father. The little man then sprang, and striking, daubant with supernatural strength on any assistance, he put everyone to flight. There was the king who bruised blows, could not save him, so he asked with Francis, who granted him unconditionally. The king then pricked her honor and gave Francis the princess in marriage.
the household	1336	1940	French	- You, where are you? - Me? But Walpe. - You're going to Walpe, I go to Walpe, so it goes, so we go ensemble.- Are you married too? How to call your husband? - Henry, this is my husband. - Your husband is Henry, my husband is Henry, you're going to Walpe, I go to Walpe, so it goes, we go ensemble.- And you as a child? What is the name your child? My little? Bris. - Your little, Bris; my boy, Bris; your husband is Henry, my husband is Henry; Walpe you go to, I go to Walpe, so it goes, so we go ensemble.- A cradle in you got one? What is the name your crib? Hippoleau. - Hippoleau your cradle, Hippoleau my cradle; your little breakage, little breakage, and your husband Henry and husband Henry; Walpe you go to, I go to Walpe, so it goes, so we go ensemble.Et a valet? How to call your valet? - His name is Bienlefait - Bienlefait thy servant, Bienlefait my servant; Hippoleau your crib, my crib Hippoleau; your little Bris Bris moin small, and your husband Henry and Henri my husband, you're going to Walpe, I go to Walpe, so it goes, so we go all that far.
The godmother death	423	332	French	There was once a poor man who had twelve children. To feed them, he had to work day and night. When the thirteenth came into the world, not knowing what to do, he went on the highway with the intention of asking the first time to be the godfather. The first he met was the Good Lord. It knew that the man was in his heart and said, "Good man, I pity you; I will keep your son at the baptismal font, take care of him and make him happy during his earthly life. " The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I am God." - "In this case, I'm not asking you to be the godfather of my child," said the man. "You give to the rich and you let the poor starve." The man said this because he did not know how God shares wealth and poverty. So he took leave of the Lord and went on his way. The Devil came to him and said, "What are you if you take me to sponsor your son, I will give him gold in abundance and all the delights of the earth on top of the market?". The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I'm the devil." - ". So I do not want you to sponsor're wrong men and you them away." He went on his way. The Great Reaper to dry bones came to him and addressed him in these words: ". Take me to Godfather" The man asked, "Who are you?" - "I am Death, who makes everyone equal with others." Then the man said, "You are what I need to make a difference No, you take the rich as the poor You'll be the godfather..." The Great Reaper replied: "I will make your son a rich man illustrates, because for me friend can lack nothing." The man added: "Baptism will be held next Sunday, be on time." The Great Reaper came as he had promised and was parrain.Quand his godson grew, and he called one day and asked him to follow him. He led him into the forest and showed him a herb which grew by saying.. "Now I will make you your christening gift I'll make you a famous physician When thou shalt to a sick, I will appear to you . If you see me on the side of his head, you can say without hesitation as you will heal. you give him of this herb and regain health. But if I am on the side of his foot is that m 'belongs; you say that there is nothing to do, no doctor in the world can save And beware of giving the grass against my will, he would cook you "it did.! not long before the young man became the most illustrious of the earth doctor. "He just needs to look sick to know what he is, he will heal or it will die," it was said of him. It had the look from afar to take him to sick and gold as he was given it soon became very rich. It was a day when the king fell ill. They called the doctor and asked if the cure was possible. When he was near the bed, Death was standing at the feet of the patient, so that the grass could do nothing for him. "And anyway, could I not a day notching Death? It certainly will hurt, but as I am his godson, she is sure to close your eyes. I'll try." He grabbed the patient by the horns, and turned so that now death was at his head. He then gave him his grass, King healed and recovered all his health. Death came to the doctor and gave her dark figure; she shook his finger and said, "You have deceived me This time I will not hold you discipline because you are my godson, but if you do it again, he will cook you and it's you! I will take! "Soon after, the king's daughter became seriously ill. She was the only child of the sovereign and it was crying day and night, to become blind. He informed that he who would save her husband and inherit the crown. When the doctor came to the patient, he saw that death was at his feet. He should have remembered the warning of his godfather, but the beauty of the princess and the hope of becoming her husband's strayed so he lost all reason. He saw not that Death was looking at him with angry eyes full and threatened his skeletal hand. He lifted the sick and he put his head where she had the feet. Then he made him swallow the grass and at once she found her colors at the same time the vie.Quand Death saw that, for the second time, he had been deprived of his property, she strode to the doctor and said: "This is the end of you Your turn has come!" She grabbed his hand, cold as ice, so hard he could not resist him, and led him into an underground cave. He saw it, endlessly, thousands and thousands of candles burning, long, others consumed half, the last little while. At every moment, he would put out and kicking in, so the little flames seemed to leap from here and there, in perpetual motion. "See," said Death, "these are the candles of life Large belong to children. Means adults in their best years, to old people, but often children and young people n. 'also has that small candles. " - "Show me my candle," said the doctor, thinking he was still very long. Death pointed to a little piece of candle that threatened to shut down and said, "Look, here!" - "Oh Dear godfather," said the terrified doctor, "lit me one again, do it for love of me, so I can enjoy life, become king and marry the beautiful princess." - "I can not," answered Death. "We must first it off in a so I can turn into a new one." - "In this case, instead my old candle on a new so it lights up immediately when the first stop burning," begged the doctor. The Great Reaper acted as if he wanted to fulfill his vow. He took a large candle, deliberately misunderstood by performing the requested installation and the small piece of candle fell and died. At the same time, the doctor fell to the ground and Death won.
The mermaid or the lady of the waters	754	313A	French	A boy and his little sister were playing near a fountain, and here he fell in. Basically, there was a mermaid. This is the name given to these ladies of eaux.- Now I want you, she told them, and you'll now work hard for me! She took them with her. At the girl she gave spinning of the tow any nasty dirty and matted all, and also to carry water in a bottomless pit; the boy, he took it to cut a shaft with an ax; but for all food, they were as hard as stone balls. This plan and his work exasperated children so much that they waited on Sunday, when the water lady went to Mass, and then they enfuirent.À returning from the church, the nix saw that the birds were no longer in the nest and began pursuing them with enormous good. But the children saw her coming from afar, and the girl threw a brush behind her; brush multiplied and stood in a huge brush mountain with countless quills, thousands and thousands of sharp spines which the nix was forced to scramble with great difficulty, but she ends by climbing still. Seeing that she had crossed the Mount of brushes, the boy threw behind him a comb, which became a huge Mount of Combs with thousands of thousands of sharp teeth erect before the mermaid. But she knew to be on the teeth and eventually cross the Mount of Peignes.Alors the girl threw behind a mirror that gave mirrors mountain, but so shiny, so polished and so smooth that it was impossible for s' there and hold up dessus.- I will soon go home take my ax, thought the mermaid, and cut the hill of Glaces.Mais the time she comes back, the children were taken off and fled much further, so that the lady had only to go back to live in her fountain.
The black and white married	1288	403	French	A poor peasant went to the fields to cut forage. She went there with her daughters - his daughter and stepdaughter. Suddenly, God went before them in the guise of a poor man and asked: - Can you tell me the way to the village? - We'll have to find yourself, replied the mother. And the daughter added: - If you are afraid to go astray, we share together. But the daughter suggested: - Come, my good man, I will guide you. God became angry against the mother and daughter, turned away from them, and made them turn black as night and as ugly as sin. The daughter however went into his good graces; he let accompany and when they approached the village, he blessed her and said: - Declare three doomed, they will be heard. - I want to be beautiful and pure as the sun, the girl said. And instantly she was white and beautiful as a day of sun. - Then I would like a purse full of crowns that never grow empty. God gave him, but he added: - Do not forget the best. The girl said: - My third wish eternal joy after death. God in secured and separated from it. The mother and daughter came home and they saw that they were both ugly and black like coal, while the daughter was beautiful and immaculate. Greater cruelty came upon their hearts and they had only one idea in mind: to hurt him. Now, the orphan had a brother named Regis. She loved above all. One day, Regis said: - My little sister, I want to draw your portrait to always have you by my side. I love you as I wish I could watch you all the time. - Never shows above my portrait in person, insisted his sister. The brother hung the picture, very faithful to the original, in the room he lived in the castle, because he was the driver of the king. Every day he looked at the picture and thanked God the happiness he gave to his sister. King served as Regis had just lost his wife. The servants at the court had noticed that the driver stopped every day in front of the magnificent painting and jealous and envious, they told the king. The latter then ordered that brings him the table and when he saw him, he could see that the girl's portrait looked incredibly his late wife, and she was even more gracious; he fell in love. He called the coachman and asked him who was the person on the table. - This is my sister, 'said Regis. - This is it, the only I want to marry, decided the king. He gave the driver a superb gold-embroidered robe, a horse and carriage, and he asked her to bring him the lucky lady of his heart. When Regis arrived with the coach, his sister listened joyfully the message of the king. But her stepmother and her sister were terribly jealous of the happiness of the orphan and vexation nigh become even blacker. - What is all your magic, reproached the girl to her mother, because you are unable to procure such happiness! - Wait a minute, reassured his mother, I will set this happiness in your favor. And she had recourse to magic: it veiled the eyes of the check so that he might see more than half; about the white wedding, she made her half deaf. All together then climbed into the carriage: first the bride in her beautiful royal robe, and behind his stepmother and his sister; Regis mounted the check and they set off. Shortly after Regis called: Sail your beautiful face, my little sister, to your pretty cheeks station for the sky crying: Prevents wind fort you décoiffer that soon the King admire your beauty - What he said! my little brother? asked the bride. - He just says you have to take off your golden dress and give it to your sister, said the stepmother. The girl took off the dress, her black sister slipped inside, and gave the bride her gray shirt coarse linen. They continued on their way, and the driver called again: Sail your beautiful face, my little sister station to your pretty cheeks, for the sky is crying; Prevents strong wind décoiffer you that soon the King admire your beauty - What it is, my little brother? the girl asked. - He just says you have to take off your golden hat on your head and give it to your sister. The girl took off his golden hat, donned the head of his sister and continued the journey bareheaded. Shortly after, Regis called again: Sail your beautiful face, my little sister station to your pretty cheeks, for the sky is crying; Prevents the strong wind of you décoiffer that soon the King admire your beauty! -That he said, my little brother? asked the bride for the third time. - He just says you have to look a little landscape. They were just passing on a bridge over deep water. And as soon as the bride stood up and leaned out of the coach window, his stepmother and stepdaughter pushed her so hard that she fell into the river. The water closed over it; at this time appeared to the water surface a small cane a whiteness which floated following the current. The brother on the seat of the driver had not noticed; he continued to darken with the coach to the king's court. His eyes were veiled but perceiving the glow of golden robe he was sincere when he led before the king black girl instead of her sister. When the king saw the alleged bride and her unspeakable ugliness, he went berserk and ordered to throw the box in a pit full of snakes. Meanwhile, the old witch manages to bewitch the King and blind to the point that he would not cast out, neither she nor her daughter; and better still she bewitched so that the king finally find black wedding rather acceptable and he married her. One evening, while the black bride was sitting on the lap of the king, arrived in the kitchens of the castle, led by the sink a little white duck, who spoke to the young kitchen boy: Light the fire, young apprentice, a short time, probably, enough to dry my feathers. The boy obeyed and lit the fire; the little duck approached, shook his feathers and smoothed with his little beak. A little exhilarated, she asked: - What is my brother Regis? The kitchen boy answered: Among the snakes in a pit His jail seems atrocious. And the little duck asked: What is the black witch? The boy answered: She is loved in the arms of the king. And the little duck sighed: My God, be with me face any adversity and she went by she had come!. The next evening she came back and she put the same questions and the third night also. The boy could bear it and decided to go to the king to tell him everything. The king, wanting to see for himself what was happening, went at night to the kitchen and when the duck thrust her head in the sink, he brandished his sword and pierced his throat. Suddenly, the little duck turned - and the king appeared a girl of indescribable beauty looks like two drops of water at the beautiful Regis panel. The king's face lit up with joy and as the girl was all wet, he immediately made a beautiful dress and ordered the clothed them. The young girl then told her how she was abused by her stepmother and her sister and how they had taken to the water. But first she begged the king to get his brother to the snake pit. The king granted her vows and then went to the room of the old witch. He told the story as it was passed and at the end asked: - What deserves the woman who committed such abominations? The witch, in his blindness, had not understood that it was a question and answered: - She deserves to be locked up naked in a barrel filled with sharp nails and we tie it was a hitch and that hitch is started at full speed. And this is how we treated them, she and her black daughter. The king married his beautiful white wedding and rewarded her faithful: he was the richest man and most esteemed of his kingdom.
The Princess and the Pea	2016	704	French	There was once a prince who wanted to marry a princess, but a real princess. He went around the world to find one, but there was always something wrong; princesses, he did not miss, but they were real princesses? It was difficult to assess, always one thing or another that was not as him. He went home sad, he wanted so much to have a real princesse.Un night in terrible weather, lightning and thunder, cascading rain that was scary, we knocked on the door of the city and the old king himself went ouvrir.C'était a princess who was out there. But, good gracious! what did she look in this rain, the weather! Water dripped from his hair and his clothes into the toes of her shoes and out at the heels ... and she claimed to be a real princess! "We're going to see that," thought the old queen, but do not say anything. she went into the bedroom, removed the bedding and laid a pea on the bottom; then she took twenty mattresses piled it on the pea and over, it still took twenty eiderdown feathers eider.C'est on it that the princess would sleep that night là.Au morning, asked her how she had slept. "Oh, very badly," she replied, "I 'have scarcely closed my eyes all night. God knows what was in that bed I was lying on some something so hard that I'm black and blue all over the body! it's terrible! "so they knew that she was a real princess because through the twenty mattresses and twenty quilts feather eider, she had felt the pea. A sensitive skin could be only that of an authentic princesse.Le prince therefore took her, now sure to have a real princess and the pea was put in the cabinet of art treasures, where you can still see if nobody emporté.Et this is a true story.
The queen bee	596	554	French	There were once two king's son who went in quest of adventures and threw themselves into disorders and dissipation, so they did not return to his father's house. Their younger brother, called the little simpleton, began their research; but, when he had recovered, they mocked him, which, in its simplicity, claimed to be heading in a world where they had lost both of them that had much more wit than put lui.S'étant all the way, they met an anthill. The two elder wanted to upset for fun anxiety tiny ants and see them running in all directions, carrying their eggs; but the little simpleton said, "Let peace in these animals, I do not suffer that the disorder." Further they found a lake where swimming umpteen ducks. The two elder wanted to catch a couple to roast; but the young objected saying; "Let peace in these animals. I do not suffer them to be killed" Further on they saw a tree in a honeycomb, so full of honey that flowed along the trunk. The two elder wanted to light a fire under the tree to smoke bees and steal honey. But the little simpleton stopped them and told them, "let these animals in peace, I will not allow that you are burning." At last the three brothers came to a castle whose stables were full of horses turned to stone; we could not see anyone. They went through all the rooms and managed to end before a closed door with three locks. In the middle of the door there was a small window through which we could see a flat. They saw a little man with gray hair, sitting at a table. They called once, twice, but he did not hear; in the third, he got up, opened the door and went out to meet them; then without a word, he led them to a richly spread table, and when they had eaten and drunk, he led them in each bedroom séparée.Le next morning the old man came to the eldest brother, and beckoning him to follow him, he led him to a stone table, on which were written three events that had to overcome to disenchant the castle. The first was to look into the foam, in the woods, a thousand pearls of the princess, which had sown; and if the researcher had not found them all before sunset, without his wanting one, it would be turned to stone. The elder spent all day looking for the pearls; But when the evening came, he did not find more than a hundred, and he was turned to stone, as it was written on the table. The next day, the second brother undertook the adventure; but he was no more successful than its predecessor: he found only two hundred pearls, and was changed to pierre.Enfin came the turn of the little simpleton. He sought them in the moss. But as it was very difficult and very long, he sat on a stone and began to cry. He was there when the king of the ants which he had saved my life, came with five thousand of his subjects, and it took a moment for these small animals to find all pearls and bring together in one heap. the second test was to recover the key to the bedroom of the princess, who was at the lake. When the young man approached, ducks he had saved came to meet him, dived to the seabed and brought the clef.Mais the third event was the most difficult: it was necessary to recognize the youngest and loveliest of the three princesses asleep. They looked perfectly, and the only thing that distinguish him was that before falling asleep, the eldest had eaten a piece of sugar, while the second had a sip of syrup, and the third took a spoonful honey. But the queen bee that the young man was saved from the fire came to his rescue: she went to sniff the mouth of the three princesses, and remained lying on the lips of those who had eaten the honey: the prince knew well. Then the enchantment is destroyed, the castle was taken from her magical sleep, and all that were turned into stones resumed human form. The alleged booby married the youngest and loveliest princess, and became king after the death of his father. As for his brothers, they married the two sisters.
The Sage Elise	326	1450	French	There was once a man who had a daughter named Elise Wise; when she was high, her father said she must be married, and her mother said, "Yes, provided you find someone who will agree to this." One day a stranger came, his name was Hans, and he accepted the take in marriage, provided it is really intelligente.- Oh, said the father, it really has the lead in cervelle.- Yes, she sees the wind pass and intends pin drop, added the mother. - well, says Hans, if it is not really very intelligent, I do take pas.Tandis they sat at the end of the meal, the mother said, "Elise, so going to the cellar to draw beer. "the Sage Elise took down the pitcher from the wall and went down to the cellar, snapping the lid regularly to spend time arrival time.A down, she took a small chair she placed in front of the barrel to not having to bend and thus avoid back injury. Then she put the penny jar tap and opened and while the beer flowed, to prevent eyes from being idle, she began to look here and there and eventually realize, after examining the retail ceiling, a pick that masons had left, just above his head. The Sage Elise then began to cry, saying "if I marry Hans, and if we have a child, and if, once great, we send for beer in the cellar, that draw might fall over him on his head and kill him. "She sat there, crying and lamenting thinking of the misfortune that attendait.Pendant this time, others expected to drink up, to no avail. The teacher finally said to the servant, "down therefore to the cellar to see why Elise does not go back." The servant went down, and found her sitting in front of the barrel, crying all the tears in her body. "Why are you crying ? asked the servante.- Oh, poor me, she answered, how could I not cry? If I marry Hans, and if we have a child, and if, once great, we send seek beer in the cellar, this pickaxe might fall on his head and the tuer.- Our Elise is definitely very wise, replied the servant, and she immediately sat down to mourn the fatal destin.Un later, when everyone up saw that the servant was slow to return, and as they increasingly thirsty, the householder said to his son "to go down to the cellar to see what are Elise and maid. "The boy went there and he found Sage Elise and maid sitting and weeping together. He asked them what was passait.- Oh, poor me, 'said Elise, how could I not cry ? If I marry Hans, and if we have a child, and if, once great, we send for beer in the cellar, this pickaxe might fall on his head and the tuer.- Our Elise is decidedly wise, the boy said, sitting beside her, and he began to cry good coeur.En up, everyone was waiting for his return, but he did not return, the master said to his wife "so go down to the cellar to see that Elise did. "So the mistress went down and found all three going to whine, and when she asked the cause of these complaints, Elise explained how his possible future son could be killed as soon as he was old enough to go down to look beer, the pickaxe falling on his head. Then the mother cried "our Elise is definitely very wise," and she sat down and began to cry like autres.En up, her husband waited a few moments, but as his wife did not return and as he had more and more thirsty, he said "I have to go down in my turn to the cellar to see what happened to Elise. "When he got to the basement, he found them all crying, and he learned that it was because of the child that Elise was likely to have, and the possibility he was killed by pickaxe might fall precisely when the child would sit just below to take beer. hearing this, he exclaimed "our Elise is definitely very wise," and then he sat down and began to mourn with others.The groom future was still up, alone, and he remained there a long time. But, as nobody came back, he ends up saying he'd better go see for himself what was going on. and he found them there, all five, whining and crying pitifully, each one louder than the other. " What the hell has happened, he asked. - Oh, dear Hans, 'said Elise, if we marry and if we have a child, and if, once great, we send for beer in the cellar, this pickaxe might fall on his head and to kill him. So how can we not cry? - Very well, said Hans. I can not imagine having more wisdom and good sense under my roof. You're so wise, Elise, I want you to wife. "Then, taking her by the hand, he led her up the stairs, and they were married on-champ.Peu after marriage, Hans said to his wife: - I will work to earn money, you, going into the field to harvest corn, we have the pain.- Okay, I will, dear Hans, replied elle.Après that Hans was gone, she prepared a delicious stew and took with her field when she was done, she said. - well, what now is it better that I mowing immediately, or I eat right, I'm going to eat first? .Then she ate all her stew, and when she could not longer take a bite, she said: - well, what now is it better that I mowing immediately, one that I do nap? Well, I'll first do the sieste.Puis she lay in the middle of corn and endormit.Hans returned and waited a long time at home. Elise did not return, so he thought, "My Sage Elise is so hardworking that It does not even think to go to eat. "But as the evening promised to do without Elise had returned, Hans went out to see how much corn she had broke. But she was still asleep and had no ear broke. So Hans rushed home and brought back a net bird fitted with bells he threw on Elise. But she continued to sleep. so Hans power went home, shut himself up and began to travailler.Finalement while he was getting dark outside, Sage Élise rose and the bells tinkling at every movement she made to sit up. she became frightened and began to wonder if well Elise Sage and thought, "Am I me or am- I can not I? . "And as she could not find the answer, she froze for a moment to think about the end, she said." I'll go home and ask Hans whether I am myself or if I'm not me; will certainly know him. "She rushed home, but the door was locked, so she knocked on the window and cried." Hans, is Elise in - Yes, replied Hans, is it?. "So she took more and more scared, and crying" Oh, God, so I am not me, "she knocked on another door, but the people, hearing the bells, came not open it, and she could not go anywhere. So she ran away from the village and from that day, no one has seen her.
The heavenly banquet	1958	767	French	A poor peasant boy one day to hear the church priest say that when we wanted to enter paradise, he had to walk right. He set off, always going straight ahead, over hill and dale, never turn away. At the end, his path led him in a big city and in the middle of a beautiful church where they celebrated the divine service. Seeing all this magnificence, he imagined that he had arrived in heaven, and, full of joy, he it arrêta.Quand the service was over, the sacristan told him to get out, but he replied: " no, I do not go out, I'm finally in the sky and stay there. "the sacristan went to the priest and told him that there were in the church a child who does not want to get out and imagined be in Paradise, "if he so believed, said the priest, we must leave it there." with that, he went with the child and asked him if he wanted to work. Little said yes and he was used to work, but he would not come out of ciel.Il therefore remained in the church; and as he saw the faithful kneeling worship a wooden statue of the Child Jesus, he imagined that this was the good God and told this image. "That you're skinny, my God certainly these people do not give you food! I will share my food with you every day." He then heard a voice saying to him: "Give to the hungry, and thou eat of me. "at the door of the church, a poor old woman held out her trembling hand to passersby. The child gave him half of his bread; then he looked at the statue, and it seemed to him that she was smiling; so he did every day, and the statue seemed contente.Quelque after he fell ill, and for eight days he did not leave his bed As soon as he could get up, he knelt to the child's feet Jesus. The priest, who followed him, heard him pray: "God, do not blame me if for so long I have not fed you; I was sick, I could not get up." As he left to knees, the priest asked him what he was doing. "Oh, my father, he said, this is what Jesus told the child:" I saw your good "will" and that is enough. Next Sunday it "will be you who will come with me to the heavenly feast." The priest thought that God commanded him to give communion to the poor little; So he prepared for the big day. On Sunday the child attended the divine service; but at the moment of communion, God reminded him and made him sit in heavenly feast.
The lighter	2002	562	French	A soldier was coming at a good pace on the road. One two, one two! backpack and sword side. He had been in the war and now he was going home. On the way he met an old witch. She was ugly! His lip hung down onto his chest. "Good evening, soldier," she said. "Your bag is great and your sword is beautiful, you're a real soldier. I'll give you as much money as you want." "Thank you, old woman," said the soldier. "You see that great tree?" said the witch. "It is entirely hollow. Climb to the top, you will see a hole, you go about will let slip to the bottom. I tie you a rope around the body to go back to you when you call me." "But what -what I will make the bottom of the tree? "" You take it for money, "said the witch. When you're at the bottom, you will find yourself in a large gallery illuminated with hundreds of lights. In front of you there will be three doors. You could open, the keys are over. If you enter the first room, you'll see a big dog sitting in the middle of a chest. He has eyes as big as saucers, but you do not care about that. I'll give you my blue checked apron that you will spread the floor, you seize hold of the dog and you shall put on my apron. Then open the trunk and you'll take as many pieces as you like. Those are copper ... If you like silver coins, you will go into the second room! A dog is sitting with eyes as big as mill wheels. Do you still not worried about that. Put it on my apron and take the silver coins as much as you want. But if you prefer the gold, I can give you in - and how! - you have only to enter the third bedroom. Do you still worried about the dog sitting on the trunk. This one has eyes as big as the Round Tower of Copenhagen and I assure you that for a dog, that is. Put it on my apron and do not be afraid, there you will do no harm. Take in the chest as much gold as you like. Parts "It's not bad at all this," said the soldier. "But what I'll have to give you to the old you? I suppose you want something." "Not a penny," said the witch. "Bring me the old tinderbox that my grandmother forgot the last time she went down into the tree." "Good," said the soldier, "attaches me the rope around the body." "That, and here is my blue checked apron. "the soldier climbed the tree, slid into the hole, and here, as the witch had said, in the gallery where shone hundreds of lampes.Il opened the first door. Oh! the dog who had eyes as big as saucers staring at him. "You're a good beast," said the soldier in the highly posing on the deck of the witch. He took as many copper coins he could put in his pocket, closed the trunk lid, put the dog over and entered the second bedroom. Brrr !! the dog who sat was, actually, eyes as big as mill wheels. "Do not look at me like that," said the soldier, "you could hurt yourself." He put the dog on the apron, but seeing in the trunk all these silver coins, he quickly threw in copper and filled his pockets and his bag of money. Then he went into the third room. But what a horrible sight! The dog's eyes that stood there were really great each as the Round Tower of Copenhagen and they turned in his head like wheels. "Good evening," said the soldier, raising his hand to his cap, because of his life, he n had seen such a dog and he examined it somewhat. But he soon pulled himself together, put the dog on the apron, and opened the trunk. God! ... that gold! He could buy all Copenhagen with it, all the sugar pigs confectioners and toy soldiers and whips and rocking horses worldwide. What a treasure! He glanced quickly all took silver and gold. His pockets, his knapsack, his cap and boots, it fills to the point of barely being able to walk. Well! he had money this time! Quickly he replaced the dog on the chest, closed the door and cried in the trunk of the tree: "Ski me old." "Do you have a lighter?" She asked. "Well, I had quite forgotten," he said, and went back to take it. Then the witch hauled up to the top and he is on the road with his pockets, his knapsack, his cap, his boots full of gold! "What are you going to make this lighter?" asked he. "That does not concern you, you have money, give me the lighter" "Taratata," said the soldier. "You gonna tell me now what you gonna make this lighter or I pull my sword and cut off your head." "No," said the old sorcière.Alors he cut his neck. The poor fell to the ground and remained there. But squeezed his money in the apron, made a bundle and threw it over his shoulder, put the lighter in his pocket and walked to the beautiful city ville.Une it was. He went to the best inn, demanded the best rooms, ordered his favorite dishes. Since he was riche.Le servant who cleaned his shoes says to himself as a man as rich, he had good old boots. But the next day the soldier bought new shoes and also suitable clothing. Then he became a distinguished gentleman. People only spoke to him of all that there were elegant in the city and their king, and his daughter, the beautiful princess. "Where can we see it?" asked the soldier. "You can not see it at all," he replied we. "She lives in a large copper castle, surrounded by walls and towers Only the King can enter her at will because it was predicted that his daughter marry a simple soldier. And King did not like it at all . "What I want to know! said the soldier, but he knew it was quite impossible.Alors he led a joyous life, went to the comedy, carriage rolled in the garden of the king, gave the poor a lot of money - and it wholeheartedly - remembering the past days and knowing how the poor have difficulty in having a few pennies. He was rich and well dressed now, he had many friends who all said about him: "What a charming man, what a true gentleman!" This flattered. But as he spent every day a lot of money and he never returned to his scholarship, the time came when there was almost nothing left to him. He had to leave the beautiful rooms, go stay in an attic under the roof, brushing his own shoes, get the darning needle. No friends no longer came to see ... too storey monter.Par a very dark night - it did not even have the means to buy a candle - he remembered that he had a tiny bit in his pocket and also the lighter found in hollow tree where the witch had revealed. He struck the flint lighter and when a spark, now the door opens. The dog with eyes as big as saucers before him. "Ordered by my master?" asks the dog. "What!" said the soldier. "This is a famous lighter it makes me have whatever I want. Bring me some money." Hop! this is the party animal and presto! Here the income range, in his mouth, a purse full of coins cuivre.Alors the soldier realized what he had miraculous lighter there. If he beat it once, it was dog sitting on the chest of copper coins that had, if he beat him twice, he was the one who kept the coins and he beat three times his lighter, it was the guardian of the gold coins that appear. Our soldier was able to go down in the most beautiful rooms, put her luxurious clothes. His friends recognized him immediately and even they had great affection for lui.Cependant one day, he said: "It is still a shame that we can not see this princess is said that she is so lovely.! what good if it must always remain trapped in the great copper castle roofs with all these tricks? is it really impossible for me the way? Where's my lighter? " He made a spark and the dog with eyes as big as saucers appeared. "It is true that in the middle of the night," said the soldier, "but I have a burning desire to see the princess." in a wink, the dog was outside, and a moment later, he was back with the princess lying on his back. She was asleep and she was so gracious in seeing her, everyone would have recognized that this was a real princess. The young man could stand it no longer, he could not help but give her a kiss for him, it was a real soldat.Vite the dog ran to bring the girl to the castle, but the next morning, as the king and Queen were having tea with her, the princess told them she had dreamed the night a dog and a soldier and the soldier gave him a kiss. "well, here's a story!" reine.Une said the old ladies of the court was ordered to ensure the following night at the bedside of the princess to see if it was really a dream, or what it could be! The soldier longed to see exquisite princess! The dog returned so the night went to get her, ran as fast as possible - but the old lady of the court had put big boots and she was running behind him as quickly. When she saw them disappear in the big house, she thought: "Now I know where it goes," and, with a piece of chalk she drew a great cross on the portal. Then she went to bed. The dog, coming back with the princess saw the cross on the gate and drew crosses on all the doors of the city. And that was very clever on his part; and the lady of the court could it most reconnaître.Au morning the king, the queen, the old lady and all the officers came out to see where the princess had been. "This, said the king as soon as . he saw the first door with a cross "No, this is my dear husband," said the queen, stopping in front of the second door. "But this is a cross - here's another," they all said it is useless to seek davantage.Cependant the queen was a shrewd woman, she knew many other things to ride in a coach. she took her large gold scissors and cut into pieces a piece of silk and sewed a nice bag that fills with fine buckwheat flour. She tied this scholarship on the back of her daughter and pierced a small hole in the bottom so that the flour will spread all along the way that would follow the dog returned princesse.Le even the night brought the princess on his back to the soldier who loved and wanted to be a prince po ur épouser.Mais the dog had not seen the spread flour on the way from the castle to the soldier's window. The next day, the king and queen had no difficulty to see where their daughter was. The soldier was seized and thrown into a gloomy dungeon Oh! there was dark! "Tomorrow you will be hanged," he was told. It's not a pleasant thing to hear, especially as he had forgotten his lighter to the hostel. Behind the iron bars of the small window, he saw the next morning people were hurrying out of the town to see him hanged. He heard the beating of drums, the soldiers marched in quick time. A shoemaker apprentice ran so fast that one of his slippers flew into the air and knocked the wall near the bars through which the soldier was looking at. "Hey, do not press you so much. Nothing will happen that I will be come. But if you will run to the hostel where I lived and bring me my lighter, I will give you four under. But speed. " The boy asked nothing better than winning four under. He took his legs to his neck, found the lighter ... Outside the city, we had prepared a gallows round which stood the soldiers and hundreds of thousands of people. The king, the queen sat on thrones and beautiful before them, judges and all conseil.Déjà the soldier had mounted the ladder, but as the executioner was about to pass him the rope around his neck, he asked the permission - always granted, he said in a death row before suffering his sentence - to express a very innocent desire, to smoke a pipe, the last in this world.The King would not refuse him and the soldier began beating his lighter: once, twice, three times! and hop! these are the three dogs: one who had eyes like saucers, who had eyes like mill wheels and the one who had big eyes each as the Round Tower of Copenhagen. "Now Prevent me from being hanged!" they cried the soldier. Then the dog jumped on the judges and all the council members, took them in their mouths, one by the legs, the other by the nose, threw them in the air so high in falling they smashed to pieces. "I will not tolerate," began the king. But the biggest dog and seized the queen and threw up in turn. The soldiers were terrified and the crowd shouted: "Little Soldier, you shall be our king, and you shall marry our lovely princess." The soldier is brought up in the royal carriage, and the three dogs frolicked before shouting 'bravo'. The boys whistled in their fingers, the soldiers presented arms. The princess was taken from his castle with copper roofs and became queen, which pleased him. The wedding lasted eight days, the dog sat and rolled very large eyes.
The glass coffin	1560	410	French	Let no one say that a poor tailor can not go far, nor achieve great honors! He just needs to knock on the right door, which is the main, to have the chance.Un day, a tailor apprentice of this kind, which was nice and clever and did turn companion, arrived in a large forest where he lost because he did not know the way. Night fell and nothing was left for him to look for a house in this horrible loneliness. He would have probably found a good bed on the soft moss, but the fear of wild beasts had not tormented, and finally he had to resolve to spend the night in a tree. He therefore sought a large oak tree, climbed on top and thanked God for having with his iron returns, otherwise it would have been carried away ed by the wind blowing over the tops of arbres.Au after a few hours spent in darkness not without fear and trembling, he noticed a short distance the brightness of a light; thinking there was perhaps an inhabited house, where he would be better than on the branches of a tree, he got carefully and followed the direction of the light. She led him to a small hut was made of reeds and woven rushes. He bravely knocked, the door opened and the clarity of the light filtering, he saw a little hoary old man who wore a coat made of parts of all couleurs.- Who are you and what do you want? asked he in a voice tonnante.- I am, he replied, a poor tailor that night has surprised here in the wilderness, and I urge you to welcome me into your hut until morning. - Go your way, replied the old man with a sullen tone, I have nothing to do with vagrants. Will also get you a abri.Là over, he tried to slip into his hut again, but the tailor caught him by the tail of his coat and begged so movingly that the old, which was not as bad that he wanted to appear, eventually soften and received his cottage where he gave him food, and he told him in a corner a layer quite convenable.Fatigué, the tailor did not need one the rocks, he slept peacefully until morning and would not even think to rise if a large noise does have frightened. Violent screams and roars went through the thin wall of the house. Hearing an unexpected courage, to tailor jumped up, put his clothes in a hurry and rushed out. Then he saw near the cabin a large black bull and a beautiful stag engaged in combat extreme violence. They rushed upon each other with such fury that the earth shook with their trampling, and the air resounded with their cries. Long time it was uncertain which of the two would gain the victory: finally the stag thrust his opponent gored; after which the bull sank, uttering a horrible roar and deer acheva.Le the tailor, who had watched the fight with astonishment, was still standing there when the deer rushed at him with all his momentum and before that he could flee without plucked ways with its huge horns. He hardly had time to think about what was happening because it was then a mad dash over hill and dale and through meadows and woods. He clung with both hands to the deer woods ends and abandoned to his fate, but he had quite the impression he flew. Finally the deer stopped in front of a rock wall and gently let the tailor down. More dead than alive, he took some time to it to regain consciousness. When he had somewhat recovered, the stag, which had remained motionless beside him, pushed its horns against a door that was in the rock, and that with such force that it opened at once . Flames gushed out, and thick smoke that hid the stag from his sight. The tailor did not know what to do or where to direct his step out of the desert and end up among men. While he was still undecided, a voice rose from the rock who told him, "Come without fear, it will happen to you no harm." Actually he hesitated, but driven by a mysterious force, he obeyed voice and, through the door of iron, he came in a vast room whose ceiling, walls and floor were made of polished slabs on which were engraved signs unknown to him. He looked at all this with astonishment and would go back again when he heard the voice saying to him. "Go on the slab in the middle of the room, and expect great happiness that you happen" His courage was so great that he obeyed the order. The stone began to give way under his feet, and sank slowly into the depths. When stopped and the tailor looked around him, he was in a room as spacious as the previous, but which aroused more interest and amazement. Within the walls was dug cavities which were placed transparent glass vases filled with colored alcohol or bluish smoke. On the ground, there were two large boxes of glass placed one in front of the other, which immediately aroused his curiosity. Approaching one of them, he lives inside a handsome structure like a castle surrounded by outbuildings, stables and barns, as well as a host of other things like that. Everything was small, but exceedingly carefully and elegance and seemed carved by a skilled hand with extreme precision. It would have looked, for a long time these wonders whether the voice was not heard again. She urged him to turn and look the other glass chest. What was his surprise to see a girl of great beauty! . She was lying as if asleep and her long blonde hair enveloped her like a precious mantle. His eyes were closed well, but his lively complexion and a steady movement ribbon under his breath, left no doubt that she was alive. The tailor admired the beautiful beating heart, when she suddenly opened her eyes and started his joy vue.- Good heavens! if she cried, my deliverance is coming! Quick, quick, help me out of my prison pulls the bolt of this glass coffin and I'll be delivered. The tailor obeyed without hesitation, and immediately she lifted the glass lid, came out of the coffin and ran into a corner of the room, and there, she wrapped herself in a large cloak. Then she sat on a slab, called the young man with her, and after tenderly kissed on the mouth, she said dit- My long desired, the sky in his goodness thee led to me to stop my suffering! The same day when they end, will be the beginning of your happiness. You're the husband heaven for me and you'll spend your life in a peaceful joy, loved by me and filled all earthly goods. Sit down and listen to the story of my life: I am the daughter of a rich count. My parents died in my childhood and in their last wishes was entrusted to my older brother with whom I was high. We loved each other so dearly and we are so alike in our tastes and ideas that we both decided never to get married and live together for the rest of our days. In our house, we never lacked company: neighbors and friends were many to visit us and we offer all the greatest hospitality. Thus happened there one night a rider came to the castle and asked us shelter for the night under the pretext that it was possible to reach the next village. We granted his request with ready courtesy, and during dinner we entertain the most charming way by his conversation and stories which he embellished. My brother took such pleasure in listening he begged to stay a few days with us, to which he consented after some protests. The night was well advanced when we rose from table and indicated a room to the unknown; as for me, my fatigue was such that I hurried to bed in my soft bed. Hardly was I asleep than I was awakened by the agreements in a soft, sweet music. Not understanding where it came from, I wanted to call my maid who slept in the next room, but to my amazement I felt a mountain oppressed my chest and I noticed that a force unknown had deprived me of speech, because I was unable to make any sound. At that moment, I saw the glow of the night the stranger enter my room, which was closed by two solidly locked doors. He approached me and said that thanks to the magical forces at his disposal, it was he who awoke to the sounds of the delicious music and that he now forced himself through all the locks to m offer and his heart and hand. But my repulsion for his magic arts was so great that I do not deigned to respond. He remained for some time motionless, probably in anticipation of a favorable decision; but as I continued to remain silent, he declared furiously that revenge and find a way to punish my pride, and this, he left my room. I spent the night in the utmost concern and I could not get to sleep that towards morning. When I awoke, I ran to my brother to tell him what had happened, but I found him not in his room and his servant told me he was out hunting at dawn in the company of the inconnu.J'eus immediately foreboding. I dressed quickly, ordered my favorite horse and, accompanied only by a servant, I rushed at full gallop toward the forest. The servant had a fall with his horse broke his leg and he could not follow me. I continued my journey without stopping and after a few minutes I saw the stranger coming towards me with a beautiful stag which he held in leash. I asked him where he had left my brother and how he caught that deer, I saw the eyes shed tears. Instead of answering, he burst into a loud laugh. That put me in a mad rage, pulled out a pistol and discharged it at the monster, but the ball bounced off his chest and hit my horse to the head. I was rushed to the unknown land and whispered something that made me lose consciousness. When I came to, I was in a deep glass coffin in the crypt. The magician reappeared and told me he had changed my brother into a stag, locked up, my castle and all its dependencies in the other glass chest after you have made tiny, and my people, turned into smoke, were prisoners in glass bottles. If I would now submit to his desire, it would be easy for him back in the primitive state: it would only open bottles and cases for any loose its shape. I did not answer him more than the first time. He disappeared and left lying in my glass prison where a deep sleep overcame me. Among the visions which passed in my soul, there was a comforting: that of a young man who came to deliver me. And today, opening his eyes, I see you and this is my dream come true. Help me to do what was still in the vision. To start, we need this wide slab chest where my castle is located. When she had dependents, the slab was raised with the maiden and the young man and passed into the upper chamber by opening the ceiling; from there they could easily reach the open. So the maid opened the lid, and it was wonderful to see how the castle, houses and outbuildings stretched and grew at breakneck speed to catch their natural dimension. They returned to the underground crypt and lifted up the slab loaded smoke filled vials. As soon as the girl was open, the blue smoke escaped and turned into living beings she recognized his servants and his people. His joy grew again when she saw her brother out of the forest in his human form: it was he who had killed the magician bull. The same day, she kept his promise and gave her hand to the lucky tailor before the altar.
The Deer indicator in water	4150	77	French	In the crystal of a fountain A Deer admiring himself once praised the beauty of their stocks, and could hardly suffer qu'avecque time his legs, he saw the object of which was lost in the waters. How much of my feet to my head! Was he seeing their shadows with pain: Most Highs coppice my forehead reaches the pinnacle; My feet do not make me a point of honor. While speaking thus, a bloodhound from the fact; He strives to ensure; In the forests he wins. Its wood, damaging ornament The stopping at every moment, Night at the office that makes him His feet, of which his life depends. He then retracts, and cursed these May Heaven him every year. We where the beautiful, we despise the useful; And the good we often destroyed. This Cerf blame her feet that make agile; He believes a wood that night to him.
The fox and the cat	4220	105	French	The fox and the cat, like beautiful little saints, if by going on pilgrimage. They were two real Tartufs two archipatelins, Two francs that Paw-made beaver, costs of travel, many a Crunchy poultry, bilking maint cheese, If indemnified to outdo. The road was long, and hence boring, To shorten the they disputed. The dispute is a great help; Without it we always sleep. Our pilgrims égosillèrent. Having played well, we spoke next. Fox finally the Cat said: You claim to be very clever: As you know as me? I have a hundred tricks to the bag. - No, said another, I have a ride in my wallet, but I maintain that saves nine. Them to recommence the fight at will, On that if not, both being well, A pack quieted the noise. Cat said to Fox: Dig into your bag, Friend: Search in your brain a sly ploy sure. For me, this is mine. At these words he climbed up a tree indeed. The other was a hundred unnecessary laps Entered percent burrows default hundred times put all the confreres of Brifaut. Everywhere he tried asylums, and it was all to no avail: Smoke appealed it, and Basset Hounds. Coming out of a Terrier, two dogs with nimble feet strangled the first leap. The expedients too can spoil a deal; It wastes time to choose, we try, we want to do everything. Do have one, but it is good.
The swimming dog.	7818	34A	French	One loses his property, and was deserved when one wants to take one of autrui.UN Dog crossing a river to swim, holding in his mouth a piece of flesh: he sees his image in the mirror of water, and , expecting to see another dog with another prey, he wants to rob him. But his greed was deceived: he let the prey he was holding and could not reach the one he coveted.
The dog who drops his for the shadow	4158	34A	French	Everyone is wrong down here. It is seen chasing the shadows So many crazy, we do not know most of the time the number. Au Chien mentioned Aesop must return them. This dog, seeing his prey in the water represented, for the left image and thought drowning; The river became agitated all of a sudden. At any sentence he returned to the banks, and had neither shade nor the body.
The juniper tree	449	720	French	There's this long, at least two thousand years, lived a rich man who was a woman of great beauty, honest and pious; they both loved with a great love, but they had no children and so they desire, and the woman prayed much, much, day and night to have a child; but she could not, no, she could not in their home avoir.Devant opened a courtyard stood a beautiful juniper, and once, in winter, the woman was under the juniper and peeling an Apple; his knife slipped and cut his finger deeply enough that the blood took a few stains in the snow. The woman looked at the blood before her in the snow, and sighed very strong in saying, in her sadness: "Oh, if I had a child, if only I had a ruddy child as blood and as white as snow! "as soon as she said this, she suddenly felt all light and all gay with the feeling that his wish would be realized. She went into the house and a month passed, the snow disappeared; a second month, and everything was green; third month, the earth was covered with flowers; a fourth month and in the forest, the trees were all thick and green branches crisscrossed almost without leaving day: the birds sang in crowds and all the wood echoed with their singing, the trees lose their flowers that fell on the ground; fifth last month, it was a day under the juniper and it smelled so good that his heart overflowed with joy and she fell to her knees, as she felt happy; then the sixth month passed, and the fruits swelled, big and strong, and the woman became quite silent; the seventh month past she picked the juniper berries and ate it all greedily, and she became sad and sick; at the end of the eighth month, she called her husband and said, weeping: "When I die, bury me under the almond tree." She felt a great consolation, felt again full of confidence and happy until the end the ninth month. Then she gave birth to a boy white as snow and as red as blood, and when she saw him, she was so happy she mourut.Son husband then buried under the almond tree and wept so many he was only the cry all the time. But the day came that he began to cry less strong and less often, and he does that sometimes wept over from time to time; then he stopped the crying altogether. A little time passed again, now that he's stopped crying, and then he took another femme.De the second wife he had a daughter; and it was a boy he had his first wife: a ruddy boy such as blood and as white as snow. The mother, whenever she looked at her daughter, loved many, many; but if she looked at the little boy, it flayed her heart to see him; he felt it prevented all, it was still there in the way she had in the legs continuously; and she wondered how to make all the fortune that turned to her daughter, she was thinking, driven by the Evil One, and she began to hate the little boy she kept chasing from one corner to the another striking here, pinching there, the abuser constantly, so that the poor little longer lived in fear. When he came back from school, he did not have a moment of tranquility. One day the woman was in the upstairs bedroom and the little girl went to join him in saying - Mother, give me an apple - Yes, my child! said her mother, choosing him as the most beautiful chest apple she could find. This chest, which they put apples, had a thick cover and heavy with a sharp lock, fer.- mother said the little girl, is what my brother did not have one too? The woman was annoyed, but she answered anyway: - of course, when he returns from école.Mais when she saw him coming back, looking out the window, it was really as if the Devil had possessed: she apple said it had given to his daughter by saying: "You must not have it before your brother." And she put it back in the chest, which she closed the heavy couvercle.Et when the boy was at the top, the Evil inspired his kind reception and kind words: "Do you want an apple, my son?" But his looks belied his words as she stared at him with ferocious eyes, so fierce that the little boy said, - Mother, you look so terrible, you scare me. Yes, I would like a pomme.Sentant he had to insist, she said: - Come with me! and bringing it to the big chest, she opened the heavy lid and said, Look! take your own apples as you like! The boy reached for the apple, and then the Devil pushed and boom! she pulled the heavy lid with such force that the child's head was cut and rolled in the middle apples rouges.Alors she was seized with terror (but only then), and thought, "Oh if I could away from me this! I did! "she ran into another room, opened a dresser to take a white scarf, then returned to the box, replaced the head on his neck, hugged the scarf for one can not see anything and the boy sat on a chair outside the door, with an apple in the small main.La Marlene, his daughter, came to find her in the kitchen and said, while turning a spoon in a pot she was holding on fire: - Oh! mother, my brother sat outside the door and it is white; he holds an apple in her hand, and when I asked him if he wanted to give me, he did not answer me. I'm afraid - Go again, said the mother, and he does not answer you, tosses him a good slap Little Marlene ran to the door and asked: "Brother, give me the apple, you! want? "But he was silent and she gave him a slap heartfelt, by putting all its small forces. The head rolled on the ground and the girl was so scared she started screaming, crying, and she ran, terrified all, to his mother: - Oh! mother, I tore the head of my brother! She was sobbing, sobbing endlessly, poor Marlene. She was inconsolable.- Marlene, my little girl, what did you do? said the mother. What a pity! But now keep quiet and not say anything, nobody knows it, since it is too late to change anything and we can do nothing. We will do stew, mother brune.La sauce fetched the body of the boy and cut small pieces to put in the gravy and cook stew. But the little Marlene did not get away and crying, crying and crying, and her tears fell into the pot, so it did not take to put salt.The father came home to eat, sat down and asked: "Where is my son?" the mother came to lay on the table a full pot of stew with brown sauce and little Marlene cried without being able to stop them. A second time, the father asked, "But where is my son - Oh said the mother, he went to the country with her great-aunt? There remain some jours.- But what will he do there ! over there asked the father and he left without even saying goodbye to me - he was so eager to go, replied the woman, he asked me if he could stay six weeks and I've allowed him . It will be there bas.- I feel quite sad, 'said the father; it's not good that he left without telling me he could still tell me goodbye "while speaking of.! so, the father began to eat; but he turned to the crying child and asked: - Marlene, dear, why are you crying? Your brother will come back soon. Then he turned to his wife: "0 woman, he said, good food what you have done Serve me another!." She refilled, but the more he ate, and he voulait.- give me, give-me, I will leave to person: it seems that everything is mine and I should revenir.Et he ate and ate until there remained nothing , sucking all the little bones, he threw as under the table. But the little Marlene got up and went to look in the bottom drawer of her dresser prettiest scarf she had a beautiful silk scarf, then, when his father had left the table, she returned to collect all the bones and ossicles, she tied his silk scarf to carry them out in tears sobbing. She went and laid his little burden on the grass, under the juniper; and when she had put there, his heart suddenly felt quite light and she wept more. Juniper began to move, spreading its branches and tightened together, then opening again and closing as someone who shows his joy at big hand gestures. Then there was suddenly like a fog that descended from the tree to the ground, and amid this fog was like fire, and the fire came a beautiful bird flew high in the air singing beautifully. When the bird had disappeared in the sky, juniper again like before, but the scarf with the bones was no longer there. The small Marlene then felt all light and happy, as if his brother was alive; then she went joyfully home, sat down and mangea.L'oiseau who had flown so high came down to land on the house of a goldsmith, and there he began to sing: My mother killed, my father ate me; My little sister took MarlèneA good of peinePour collect my bones jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soieQu'elle brought under genévrier.Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird that I L! goldsmith was at work in his studio, busy making a gold chain; but when he heard the bird singing on his roof, it seemed to him so beautiful, so beautiful that it rose hastily, lost a slipper on her doorstep and so ran to the middle of the street, a shod foot, the other sock, her big apron before him, still holding in his right hand his crimpers, and left the gold chain; and the sun shone bright on the street. So he stood there and looked at the beautiful bird which he said: - Bird, you can sing well! How beautiful it is! Sing it to me again, your piece - No, said the bird, I do not sing twice for nothing. Give me the gold chain, and I will sing encore.- Here, take the gold chain, it is yours, said the goldsmith, and now even sing me your beautiful once chant.L'oiseau came and took the gold chain with his right leg, stood in front of the goldsmith, and sang: My mother has killed me, My father ate me; My sis took MarlèneA good of peinePour collect my bones the jetésDessous table, and his scarf nouerDans soieQu'elle brought under genévrier.Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird that I am! and immediately he took off to go to land on the roof of the house of a shoemaker, where he sang: My mother has killed me, My father ate me; My sis took MarlèneA good of peinePour collect my bones jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soieQu'elle brought under genévrier.Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird am I! the shoemaker heard this song and ran in shirtsleeves at his door to look on his roof, and he had to get hold deva nt her eyes to avoid being blinded by the sun shining so strong. - Bird, said he, as you know sing He passed his door and went home to call his wife. "Woman, he cried he, come out a bit: there is a bird, look at him, this bird who knows so well sing!" He also called her daughter and the other children, and even his clerks and the maid and the valet, who came all the street and watched the beautiful bird singing so well and was so beautiful, with red and green feathers, and yellow around his neck: it was like pure gold ; and her eyes sparkling he looked like he had two stars in her head - Bird, said the shoemaker, now sings again your morceau.- No, said the bird, I do not sing twice for nothing; I need you to make me a gift.- Woman, said the shoemaker, up to the attic: the top shelf there is a pair of red shoes; apporte-les-moi.La wife went and brought the chaussures.- Here, this is for you, the bird! said the shoemaker. And now sings once fois.L'oiseau down and took the shoes with his left leg, and then he flew on the roof where he sang: My mother has killed me, My father ate me; My little sister took good MarlèneA the peinePour collect my bones jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soieQu'elle brought under genévrier.Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird that I am! and when he sang, he took off, clutching the chain gold in his right leg and shoes in his left, and he flew away, away, up a mill was spinning, tap-tap, tap-tap, tap-tap, tap-tap; and at the door of the mill sat twenty millers boys stung a wheel hammer, catch-hac hic-hac hic-hac while turning the mill, tap-tap, tap-tap, tap-tap. Then the bird went to roost in a lime tree and began to sing: My mother first tué.Un stopped and listened: My father mangé.Deux others stopped and listened: My sis took good MarlèneA peine.Quatre the others stopped in their turn to collect my bones jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soie.A now they were only eight to strike again: she has only struck portéCinq again, as genévrier.Il only one left who struck the hammer: Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird that I am the last, in turn, was also arrested and he even yet heard the end! .- Bird, he says, you sing well! Let me hear again what you sang, I did not entendu.- No, said the bird, I do not sing twice for nothing. Give me the millstone I will sing it fois.- You would have, of course, if it was all by myself, said the boy meunier.- If he sings again approved all the others, it is just as he has, and he has only the prendre.L'oiseau down from the tree and the twenty millers boys, with levers, lifted the heavy millstone hop ho! ho-hop! ho-hop! ho-hop! And the bird put his neck through the center of the hole, taking the wheel as a necklace with which he flew again on its shaft to sing: My mother killed me, My father ate me; My sis MarlèneA took much of my bones peinePour collect jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soieQu'elle brought under genévrier.Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird that I am! When he had finished, he spread his wings and s 'flew, and he had the gold chain in his right claw, and the pair of shoes in his left claw, and the wheel was around his neck. And he flew so far, far away, to the house of his father père.Le, mother and little Marlene are there, sitting at the table. And the father said: - It's funny how I feel great, filled with light - Oh! not me, said the mother, I feel overwhelmed as if about to burst a big orage.Petite Marlene is on his chair, crying and crying silently. The bird gives its final blows of wings, and when he lands on the roof of the house, the father said: - Ah! I really feel overjoyed and the sun is so beautiful: I think I see an old connaissance.- Oh! not me, said the mother, I feel oppressed and frightened all, I have teeth chattering, and in my veins it looks like there is fire! She feels so bad it tore her blouse to try to breathe and give air. And the little Marlene, in her corner, is crying, weeping, and held her apron before the eyes; and she cries so much that she completely wet his plate. The bird came to roost on the juniper; he sings: My mother told me tué.Alors mother covers his ears and close your eyes to see nothing or hear; but his ears are ringing and she heard as a terrible thunder in, his eyes burn and she sees like lightning dedans.Mon dad mangé.- Oh! mother, said the father, outside there is a beautiful bird that sings beautifully, and the sun shines beautifully heated, exudes a scent that resembles cannelle.Ma sis MarlèneA taken much of the small peine.La Marlene hides its head in her lap and cry more and plus.- I go out, said the father, I must see the bird any près.- Oh no, do not go! protested the mother. It seems that the whole house trembled on its base and it collapsed in flames! The man went outside and looked oiseau.Pour nevertheless collect my bones jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soieQu ' she wore under genévrier.Kywitt, Kywitt, beautiful bird am I! for the last notes, the bird deftly dropped the golden chain which came just get around the man's neck, just like a necklace it was very bien.- Look! said the man on the way, that's the gift that made me beautiful bird: this beautiful gold chain. And see how beautiful it is! But the woman, in her anxiety, fell full length into the room, his cap fell from his head. The bird, again singing: My mother tué.- Ah! cried the woman, if I were a thousand feet underground to not hear that! My father mangé.La woman fell me on the back, white as a morte.Ma sis Marlènechantait the bird, and the small Marlene exclaimed, "I will also go out and see what gift will make me the bird!" She stood up and took sortit.A good of peinePour collect my bones jetésDessous the table, and his scarf nouerDans soie.Avec these words, he threw the bird carried souliers.Qu'elle as genévrier.Kywitt, ! Kywitt, beautiful bird that I am the little Marlene felt everything became bright and gay for her; she put on the red shoes and new and began to dance and jump, so she was there well, returning all happy in maison.- Oh! she said, that I felt so sad when I came out, and now everything is so clear! It really is a wonderful bird than this, and it made me gift of red shoes - What no! that no! said the woman back to her and standing up, and his hair stood on his head like tongues of fire. For me, it's like the whole world is annihilated: I must so too, maybe I will feel less badly outside but as soon as she walked through the door, bang! the bird dropped the grinding stone on his head and put him into mush. The father and little Marlene heard the crash and went out to see. But what did they see? From this place stood a vapor ignited and burned amount as a jet of flame, and when that was gone, the little brother was there, took them both by the hand. And all three, full of joy, went back into the house, sat down to table and ate.
The Fox and the Crow	4032	57	French	Master Crow perched on a tree, Was holding in its beak a fromage.Maître Fox, enticed by the smell Said to something like this: "Hey, Hello Mister Corbeau.Que you are prettier than you seem! ! beautiful truth, if your ramageSe your plumage, You are the phoenix of these woods "at these words, the Crow is overjoyed;. And to show his beautiful voice, He opens his beak wide, lets dropped his proie.Le Fox grabs, and said: "My good sir, Learn that every flatteurVit the expense of those who listen. This lesson is well worth a cheese without doubt" the Crow, ashamed and confused, swore, a bit late, did take over there.
The Fox and the Crow	7941	57	French	Whoever loves the treacherous flatteries is usually punished by a lot of confusion repentance. A crow was caught on a window cheese and prepared to eat perched on the top of a tree. A fox saw him and began talking to him: "Your plumage, O raven, a sparkle! What beauty on your person and in your air! If you had the voice, no bird you would be higher. "But he, wanting to show his voice foolishly, let his beak fall cheese and cunning fox hastened the capture of its greedy teeth. Then the raven groaned at having been deceived.
The robber bridegroom	384	955	French	There was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter, and when she had become a beautiful girl he wanted it to be well equipped and well married. So he thought: - "That it happened acceptable gentleman and that he should find to his liking and I would give it gladly." Soon came a gentleman who appeared to be very rich and without the miller knew nothing of him, promised him his daughter. But the girl did not like him as a promised must love his promise and she did not trust him: every time she watched or whenever she thought of him, his heart was darkened. One day he told her: - "You are my promised visit and you never surrender!" The girl answered: - "I do not know where your house." .. The fiance announced: - "My home is in the dark forest. "She looked for evasions and explained that she could not find the way. The groom said: - "Next Sunday, you have to visit me, I already launched invitations, and so you can find your way, I will mark the path with ash." When Sunday came, as the young woman should take the road, anguish hugged him, and without knowing why herself, to mark her way she filled both pockets with lentils and peas. At the edge of the wood ash marked the path as she walked she threw on the ground right and left a pair of lenses at each step. The day passed quickly, until it was restored in the middle of the forest, where it was the darkest, there stood a solitary house that displeased him so much she seemed unfriendly and dark. She went, but no one was inside and a heavy silence reigned. Suddenly a voice called out: - "Go away in, going Does a young bride, you're in the house of a murderer." The girl looked up and saw that the voice was that of a bird was in a cage hanging on the wall. Again he said: - "Go away in, going Does a young bride, you're in the house of a murderer." The beautiful bride went from one room to another throughout the house, but everything was empty, no soul. Finally she entered the cellar, there stood an old woman swung her head .- "Do you can tell me if my fiancé lives here?" - "Alas, poor child," replied the old woman, "where you es- you into? this is the remains of a murderer. you claim to be the bride, to be married soon, but you marry her death. you see, here I had to fill a pot with water, when they have you in their power, they reduce you into pieces without mercy, they cook you and eat you because they are man-eaters. If I did not have mercy on you, and if I save you then you are not lost. the above, old led her behind a large barrel so that one can see .- "Behave like a little mouse," she said, "do not agitate you and do not move, or you are lost. That night when the thieves sleep, we fuierons, long ago I was waiting for an opportunity. "Hardly had he, the band returned to the house. They brought another girl with them. They had been drinking and did not hear her cries and plaintes.Ils gave him wine to drink, three glasses full, one of white wine, red wine and yellow wine glass that punctured his heart. Thereupon, they stripped him of his fine dress, laid him on the table, découpèrent her nice body into pieces, poured salt poor bride dessus.La shaking and flageolait behind the barrel when she saw how the promised destiny bandits. one of them noticed the 'golden ring that the poor girl was wearing the little finger but it does not remove easily left, he took an ax and cut the finger. but the finger flew up over the barrel and fell into the corsage the bride. the thief took a lantern to look for but could not find it. U No other said: - "Have you also looked behind the great cask?" But in this the oldest time of the tape belched, - "Come and eat, we will look tomorrow finger will not leave." The other s' exclaimed, "the old man because" they abandoned their research and sat down to eat. The old poured them a soporific in their wine, they soon collapsed in the cellar. They were snoring while sleeping. When the bride heard this, she came out from behind the barrel and had to step over the sleeping bodies that ranged in rows on the floor. She was scared, she did not want to wake anyone. But God helped him so she could make it through. The old woman came up to her and opened the door, and they walked away as fast as they could to the house of murderers. The wind had scattered the ashes, but the peas and lentils had taken root and was out and showed in the light of the moon chemin.Elles went all night until morning that they atteignissent the mill. Then the girl told the whole story to her father, as she had lived. When the day came when the wedding should be celebrated, appeared fiance. The miller had invited all his friends and acquaintances. As they sat at the table, each was asked to tell something. The bride was silent and said nothing. While the bridegroom turned to his bride: - "So my heart, know thou nothing tells a story?" She answered: - "I want to tell a dream I went alone into the forest and I arrived at last. in a house where there was no living soul but in a cage hanging from the wall there was a bird cried out - "go away in, going does a young bride, you're in . house of a murderer "" and he still cried once. "-" My treasure, it was only a dream "-" then I went into every room and all were empty. Everything was unfriendly in there; I finally went down to the cellar, where an old woman sat and nodded. I asked him: - "My husband lives there here?" she replied "Alas, poor child, you are here in the home of a murderer, your boyfriend lives here but he wants to kill you, cut you into pieces, cook you and eat you." - "My treasure, this n ' is a dream! "but the old woman hid me behind a huge barrel, but hardly had I hidden there that the thieves returned, dragging with them a young woman. They gave him three glasses of wine to drink, white, red and yellow burst his heart .- "My treasure, it was only a dream" - "There, they stripped him of his fine dress, her nice body découpèrent on a table and poured salt over .- "My treasure is a dream!" - "and one of the thief saw the two noticed a gold ring that the poor girl was the little finger but it does not remove easily left, he took an ax and cut the finger. But the finger flew up over the barrel and fell into my blouse. And here's the ring. "At this, she waved to assistance.Le thief during the narration became white as a sheet jumped and tried to run away, but guests pounced on him and delivered him neutralized the judge and the whole band.
Faithful John	55	516	French	There was once a king old who fell ill. Feeling that he was dying, he called Faithful John: it was his dearest servant, and was so called because the whole life he was loyal to his master. When it came, the king said: "My faithful John, I feel my end is approaching, I have to worry thinking that my son is still young; he will not always be lead; I shall not die alone if you promise to watch over him, to teach him all he needs to know, and be a second father to him, "I promise you," replied John, "of. not to abandon; I will serve faithfully, even if it cost me my life. "-" So I can die in peace, "said the old king." After my death, thou shalt see him all the palace, all rooms, halls , the underground with the riches that lie therein; only will let you do not enter the last room of the Grand Gallery, where the portrait of the princess Dome gold. For, if he sees that picture, he will feel an irresistible love for her that will make him run the greatest dangers. Task of the preserve. "Faithful John repeated his promises, and the old king, refreshed, rested his head on the pillow and expira.Quand we had put the old king in the tomb, John told the young successor that he had promised his father on his deathbed. "I'll hold, he added, and I will be faithful to you as I have been your father, even if it cost me my life." After the mourning was over, Jean said to the king: "It is time that you know your heritage. I'll show you your father's palace. "He took him everywhere, up and down, and showed him all the wealth that filled the splendid apartments in just omitting the house to the dangerous portrait. He had been placed so that when the door opened, we immediately noticed, and it was so well done that it seemed to live and breathe and that nothing in the world was so charming or more beautiful. the young king lives well that faithful John always walked past this one door without opening it, and asked him why. "it is," replied the other, "because there in the room something that would make you afraid. "I saw the whole castle," said the king, "I want to know what there is here," and he wanted to force open. Faithful John held him back and said, "I promised your father, to his deathbed, not to let you into the room. It might bring the greatest misfortune on you and me" the greatest misfortune replied the king is that my curiosity is not satisfied. I will not rest until my eyes have seen. I do not go by that you do hast opened to me. "Faithful John saw that there was no way to deny it, went the heavy heart and sigh a lot, look for the key . the great bunch When the door was opened, he went in first, trying to hide the portrait with his body; all was useless: the king, standing on tiptoe, over the shoulder but saw her. . seeing this girl so beautiful and brilliant gold and precious stones, he fell unconscious on the floor of the faithful John rose and fell on his bed, murmuring: "the unfortunate thing is done; good Lord! What are we becoming? "and he made him take a little wine to comfort him. The first word of the king, when he came to, was to ask what was this beautiful portrait." That is the princess the golden Dome, answered faithful John. "My love for her is so great," continued the king, that, "if all the tree leaves were tongues, they would not suffice to express it. My life now is its possession. You will help me, you are my faithful servant. "faithful John thought long about how it was appropriate to do it, because it was difficult to even appear before the eyes of the princess. Finally, he devised a means, and said to the king: "Everything that surrounds the princess is golden, chairs, dishes, tables, cups, and household furniture are five tons of gold in your treasury; it takes. entrust a goldsmiths for you they make vases and gold jewelry anyway, birds, beasts, monsters thousand forms; all this must please the princess We will get in. road with this baggage, and we will try to succeed. " The king summoned all the goldsmiths of the country, and they worked day and night until everything was ready. When everything was stowed on a ship, Faithful John took clothes dealer, and the king did the same, so that no one could recognize him. Then they set sail and sailed to the city remained the Dome of the Princess of faithful gold.The Jean arrived alone and left the king in the ship. "Maybe, he said, bring I the princess take care that everything is in order, that the golden vessels are exposed and that the ship is ready and celebrating." Thereupon he fills his belt several small gold jewelry, and went directly to the palace. He lives in entering the court a girl who was drawing water from a fountain with two buckets of gold. As she turned to leave, she noticed abroad and asked him who he was. "I am a merchant," he replied; and opening his belt, he showed him his goods. "What beautiful things!" if she cried; and placing her pails, she began to consider all other after each jewelry. "We must, she said, that the Princess all this way, you will buy it, she so fond of gold." And taking him by the hand, she took him up in the palace, because it was a maid. The princess was delighted to see the jewels, and she said. "This is all so well that I buy" But Faithful John said, "I am the servant of a rich merchant; everything you see here is nothing compared to what my master has in his ship, you will see the most beautiful works and more valuable. " She wanted to bring them, but said, "There's too much, it would take too long and too much space; your palate are not enough." His curiosity was all the more excited and finally she exclaimed: "Well, take me to the ship, I will go myself to see the treasures of your master." Faithful John took her to joyfully ship, and the king, seeing her, found her even more beautiful than her portrait; the heart leaped in her joy. When she boarded the king offered his hand; during that time, faithful John, who had remained behind, ordered the captain to sail at the moment and flee all sails. The king came down with it in the room and showed him one by one all the pieces of crockery gold, dishes, cups, birds, beasts and monsters. Several hours went, and while she was seeing everything, she did not notice that the ship worked. When she finished, she thanked the merchant and prepared to return to his palace; but arrived on the bridge, she realized that she was in the open sea, far from land, and the ship in full sail lashed. "I am betrayed if she cried out in his fright;! They take me have fallen into the power of a merchant I would rather die!?." But the king said, taking his hand: "I'm not a merchant, I am a king, and as good a family as yours If I have you removed by cunning, did assign to violence. my love. It is so hard when I saw your portrait for the first time, I fell unconscious on his back. " These words comforted the princess; his heart was touched, and she agreed to marry the roi.Pendant they were sailing on the open sea, the faithful John was sitting on the front of the ship, caught in the air three crows came flying towards him. He listened to what they said to each other, because he understood their language. "Well said the first he takes the princess of the Golden Dome" Yes, "replied the second," but he did not hold. "-" How? said third; she is sitting next to him. "What does it matter?" replied the first, "when they will land, will be presented to the king a red horse; he will mount it, but if he flees, the horse will start in the air with him, and we will never have their new." - "But," said the second, "there there's no resource?" - "There is one," said the first, "it is necessary that another person rushed on the horse and that, in its holster a pistol, she is stiff kills and preserve the King Who.. can know it? and whosoever does know it and tells would become stone from the feet to the knees. " The second Crow said in turn: "I know something even assuming that the horse be killed, the young King will still not have his bride when they come together in the palace, he will be shown on a flat.. beautiful bridal garment that will look fabric gold and silver, but it is really just pitch and sulfur; if King puts it, it will burn up the marrow "do did. -it therefore no resources? "said the third." There is one, "replied the second," there must be a person with gloves on seizes the garment and throws it into the fire. And burns, the king will be saved. But what good is that? Whosoever knows it and tells herself would become stone from the knee to the heart, "said the third, added." I know something more. Assuming burnt shirt, the young King will still not have his wife. If there is a wedding ball and the young queen is dancing, she will vanish suddenly and fall like dead; and it will be if someone actually did not fall immediately and does not suck him on the right shoulder three drops of blood he spit immediately. But he who would know this and would say would be turned to stone from head to foot. "After this conversation, crows resumed their flight. Faithful John, who had heard, remained since that time sad and silent. To be silent, it was the king's misfortune, but talk was his own loss last he said to himself: "I will save my master, had it cost me my life." at the shore, all happened. as the crow had predicted. A beautiful red horse was presented to the king. "Well, he said, I will go up to the palace." And he was going to mount it when faithful John passed him, rushed over, pulled the gun font, and shot the horse dead. the other servants of the king, who disliked faithful John, cried you had to be crazy to kill the beautiful animal that King But going up the king said, "Shut up, let him do;. this is my true, it probably its reasons for doing so "They arrived at the palace, and in the first room, the bridal garment was put on a dish. It seemed it was gold and . silver Prince was going to touch it, but faithful John pushed him away, and the stark gloves, threw it in the fire and burnt at the same time the other servants began to murmur. "See, they said -they, here he burns the bridal garment of the king "But the young king repeated again". He must have his reasons. Let him do it; this is my faithful. "We celebrated the wedding. There was a great ball and the bride began to dance in this time faithful John did not lost eyes. Suddenly he took her weakness and she fell like a Still backwards. throwing on it immediately, he raised and carried into the chamber, and there, when lying on the bed, he bent over it and sucked her right shoulder three drops of blood that he spat at the time she breathed again and recovered herself,. but the young king, who had seen and who did not understand the conduct of John ends up in anger and threw him in prison the following day. ., faithful John was condemned to death and led to the gallows As already mounted the ladder, he said, "Any man who can talk will die before its end; in will I right? "I grant you," said the king. "Well, I was wrongly convicted, and I have not ceased to be true." Then he told how he had heard the conversation on sea crows, and how all he had done was necessary to save his master. "0 my faithful John, cried the king, I pardon you. Bring him down." But at the last word he uttered, Faithful John had fallen lifeless: it was changed pierre.Le King and Queen were in great sorrow, "Alas said the king, such devotion was badly! reward." He ordered the stone statue in his bedroom, next to his bed Every time he saw her, he repeated, crying: "Alas, my faithful John, what can not I make you life!" After some time, the queen gave birth to two twin son she brought up happily and were the joy of their parents. One day the Queen was at church and the two children were playing in the room with their father, the king's eyes fell on the statue, and he could not help but to repeat with a sigh: "Alas! faithful John, what can not I make you life! " But the statue, speaking said, "You can, if you want to spend what you hold most dear." All I have in the world, "said the king," I sacrifice for you . "-" well, "said the statue, so I covered the existence, you have to cut the head to your two son, and you rub me all over with blood." The king turned pale on hearing this horrible condition; but thinking of the devotion of this faithful servant who had given his life for him, he drew his sword, and his own hand, he beat the head of his children and rubbed the stone with their blood. At the same time the statue revived, and faithful John appeared well rested before him. But he told the king: "Your devotion to me will have its reward." And taking the children's heads, he replaced them on their shoulders and rubbed the wounds with their blood; at the same time they came to life and resumed jumping and playing as if nothing had happened. The king was full of joy. When he heard the queen back, he hide Jean and children in a large wardrobe. When she entered, he asked, "Have you prayed to church?" - "Yes," she replied, "and I have constantly been thinking of faithful John, so unhappy because of us." - "Dear wife, he said we can give him life, but it will cost us one of our two son." The queen turned pale, and her heart sank; However, she said: "We owe this sacrifice because of his dedication." The king, delighted to see she had thought like him, went and opened the cupboard and brought forth Faithful John and the two children: "God be praised, he added, it is delivered, and we have our son! . " And he told the queen all that had happened. And they all lived happily together until the end.
The young giant	860	650A	French	A farmer had a son who was not bigger than the thumb; he grew no way, and in several years its size is not increased by a hair. ? One day the father went to the fields to plow, the little said, "Father, I want to go out with toi.- out with me said the father remains here; you would only hinder us out, and more could be well lose you. "But the little dwarf began to cry and to have peace, his father took it into his pocket and took him. When they arrived on the labor room, he sat on the edge of a freshly ouvert.Comme furrow they were there appeared a great giant came from the other side of the mountains. "? You see the big bogeyman said the father who wanted to scare his son, to make it more obedient; he comes to pick you up." But the giant, who had heard it, came in two steps to the groove, took the little dwarf and won without a word. The father, dumb with fear, did not even have the strength to cry. He thought her lost child, and do not see the hoped jamais.Le giant took him home; he nursed them himself, and the little dwarf suddenly took its growth; it grew and became strong in the manner of giants. After two years the giant went with him into the woods, and to reprove he said. "Do men gather thee wand" The boy was already so strong that it tore land a young tree with its roots. But the giant thought he still had progress to make, and the remmenant with him, he still nursed for two years. After this time, his strength had increased so much that he tore land an old tree. It was not enough for the giant: he still nursed for two years, after which he went to the woods with him and said: ". Seize yourself a reasonable size Stick" The young man snatched land the largest oak forest, which sounded horrible crunches, and such an effort was a game for him. "That's good, said the giant, your education is done," and he brought the piece of land where he had pris.Son father was busy plowing when the young giant approached him and said " well, my father, your son has become a man "The frightened peasant cried," no, you're not his son, I do not want you Go away en.- Yes, I am your. son. Let me work for you, I labourerai as well and better than sure.- no, no, you're not my son, and you do not know plowing.. Go away "But as he fear of the colossus, he left his plow and stood at a distance. Then the young man, seizing the instrument with one hand, pressed it with such force that the share sank deep into the earth. The farmer could not help shouting: "If you want to plow, do not push so before; it's been a bad boy travail.Alors the unharnessed horses, and hitched himself to the plow saying to his father: "Go home and recommend my mother to prepare me a hearty dinner; during that time I finish plowing the room. "The farmer back home, transmitted the recommendation to his wife As for the young man, he plowed the field who did four acres, by itself;. And then he harrowed dragging two harrows at once. when he finished, he went to the wood, tore two oaks he put on his shoulders, and suspending in a two harrows and the other two horses, he took it all in his parents so easily that a boot paille.Lorsqu'il came into the yard, his mother did not recognize him, exclaimed: "What is this giant ugly - this is our son, said the peasant-no, she said? our son is no more. We never had one so big; he was little "And turn to him again:" Go away, shouted it, we do not want you. "The young man did not say a word. He put his horse to the stable, gave them hay and oats, and made for them all that was needed. Then, when he had finished, he went into the room, sitting on a bench, "Mother, he says, I'm hungry; dinner is ready? - Yes, she answered, putting before him two large flat all full, which would have enough to feed them for a week, she and her mari.Le young man soon had eaten everything, and he asked if there had not. "No, this is all we avons.- It was to put me in appetite; I need something else." She dared not resist him, and began to fire a large pot full of bacon, that it served as soon as it was cooked. "That's right, he says, that's a bite to eat." And he swallowed whole, without its hunger was still apaisée.Alors he said to his father: "I see that there is no home enough to feed me. Get me one iron bar high enough that I did not break my knee, and I'll run the world. "the peasant was delighted. He hitched up his two horses to his wagon and brought to the blacksmith an iron bar so large and thick, that was all that the horses could carry. The young man took and ratch! he broke it over his knee like a straw and threw it aside. Father hitched four horses, and brought another iron bar they had barely hanging. But his son broke it again on his knee and said, "It is worth nothing yet; I will seek stronger." Finally, the father put eight horses, and brought a hitch that was carrying barely . When the son was taken in his hand, he broke off a little bit at the end and told his father: "I see that you can not get me an iron bar as it takes me I. 'm leaving you. "to run the world, he became a journeyman blacksmith. He arrived in a village where there was a stingy blacksmith, never giving anything to anybody and always wanting to keep everything to himself. He presented himself at his forge and asked him the book. The teacher was delighted to see such a strong man, he would spot a good hammer blow and earn good money, "How do you pledges asked, il.-Nothing him, the boy replied,? Only every fortnight, when you pay the other, i want to give you two punches as you are bound to receive. "the miser was delighted with the market, which spared his money. The next day, it was the foreign partner to the first hammer blow: when the master had brought the hot iron bar, he struck such a blow that the iron smashed and scattered; and the anvil was pressed into the earth so deep, we could never remove. The master angrily told him: "You can not do my business, you hit too hard What do you want me to pay you for the single hammer blow you gave - I only want to give you.? bunting, no more. "El gave him a kick that made him jump over four hay wagons. Then he looked for the biggest iron bar he could find in the forge, and taking his hand like a baton, he continued his route.Un little further, he came to a farm and asked the farmer if he did not need a valet master. "Yes, said the farmer, it misses me. You made me look like a strong fellow who already understood the work. But how do you pay for?" He replied that he did not ask pledges, but the power to give every year to the farmer three times that it agreed to accept. The farmer was delighted with this market because it was still a avaricieux.Le next morning, we had to collect firewood in the forest; the other servants were already standing, but our young man was still lying in bed One of them called out to him. "Get up, it's time; we go to the woods, you must come with nous.- Go ahead, 'he said abruptly, I'll still be back before you" The other went find the farmer and told him that his master servant was still in bed and did not follow the wood. The farmer told them to go still awake once and give him orders to harness the horses. But the valet master replied again: "Go ahead, I'll be back before vous.Il remained still in bed two hours after that time he got up, went to pick two bushels of peas, and made it a good porridge he ate quietly, then he harnessed the horses to drive the cart wood to get to the forest, he had to take a deep road;. first it was to spend his cart, then, stopping the horses, he came from behind and stopped up the road with felled trees and brush, so there was no way to pass, when he went into the forest, others were returning with their loaded carts. it said, "Come on, always going, I'll be home before you. "And without any further, he simply snatch two huge trees that fell on his cart, then took the way back. When he reached the barricades he had prepared, the others were there arrested and could not move. "well! he told them, if you had stayed like me this morning you would have slept an hour longer, and you do would not return later that evening. "And as his horses could not move, he unharnessed them, put them on a cart, and taking himself the tiller in his hand, he pulled it all as a handful of feathers. When he was on the other side "you see, he said to the others, as I shoot faster than you; . "And he went on his way without waiting for reaching the courtyard, he took a tree in his hand and showed it to the farmer, saying," Is it not a beautiful log "The farmer told his wife?: "This is a good servant; if it rises later than the others, he is back before them. "He served the farmer for a year. When the year was expired and the other servants received their wages, he also asked to pay for his. But the farmer, terrified of the prospect of blows to receive, earnestly prayed make him surrender, declaring that he would rather be his own valet, and do farmer in his place "no, he replied, I do not want to be a farmer. I am master servant and I want to remain such; but what has been agreed to be executed. "The farmer offered to give him whatever he would ask, but it was in vain; he always replied:" No. "The farmer, not knowing which way to turn, demanded a respite of fifteen days to find some loophole, the other consented So the farmer gathered all his men and asked advice After having thought long and hard, they said.. with such a master valet person was sure of his life, and he would kill a man like a fly. so they were of opinion that he had to do it down in the well, under the pretext of cleaning, and, once he was down, throw him on the head millstones that were deposited near, so kill him on board site.The pleased the farmer, and the master was about to valet . down into the pit When he reached the bottom, they threw him huge wheels, and they believed him head crushed, but he shouted from below: "Chase the chickens up there; they scratch in the sand and send me seeds in the eyes; I am blinded. "The farmer said:" Chou! cabbage! "As if he had chased the hens When the master valet had finished and it was reassembled." See, he said, my beautiful cellar. "It was the largest of the wheels that were around the valet master cou.Le always demanded his wages, but the farmer again asked him fifteen days of reflection. His people advised him to send the young man to the mill delighted to there grind their grain during the night, no one was still living out the next thing pleased the farmer, and the instant he ordered his valet to carry eight bushels of wheat to the mill and to grind. overnight because we needed it right away. the valet put two bushels of wheat in his right pocket, two in his left pocket, loaded four in a wallet, two in front and two behind, and so ballasted, he went to the mill. the miller told him we could well grind during the day but not at night, and those who were risky it were all found dead the next day. "I do not not die, I, he replied; go to bed and sleep on both ears. "And entering the mill, he meshed his corn as if it were a question of rien.Vers eleven o'clock, he entered the office of the miller and sat on the bench. But after a moment the door opened by itself, and he saw enter a large table on which rested their own dishes and bottles filled with good things, without appearing to make the person. the stools also lined up around the table, still no one appeared, but in the end the young man saw the fingers, and nothing more, which loaded the bases and escrimaient it with forks and knives as he was hungry. the dishes were smoking, it is also down at the table and ate his appétit.Quand he had finished dinner and the empty dishes announced that the invisible had also finished he distinctly heard you blew the lights, and they s' extinguished all at once, then, in the darkness, he felt on his plays something like a bellows. "If we start again, he said aloud, I put myself also." He, however, received a second, and then he replied. Donated bellows and made continued all night, and the young giant did not spare this game. At day everything stopped. Miller arrived and was surprised to find it still alive. "I really enjoyed myself, said the giant; I received bellows, but I'm made." The miller was full of joy, for his mill was issued; he wanted to give the giant a lot of money to thank him. "! Money said this, I do not want it; I have more than enough to me." And taking her bags of flour on his back, he returned to the farm and told the farmer that his commission was over and he wanted his farmer gages.Le was much frightened; he could not hold up, he came and went in the room and drops of sweat fell from his brow. For a breath, he opened the window; but before he had time to be wary, the master servant gave him a kick that sent out the window into the air, where he still got until we lose sight of the. Then the master butler told the farmer: "Your turn, the second shot will be for sure.- No, no, 'she cried, do not hit women!" And he opened the other window, because sweat also ran down his forehead; but the blow she received sent into the air even higher than her husband, because it was lighter. Her husband shouted, "Come with me," and she answered: "Come with me, you, I can not go there myself." And they continued to float in the air but failed to converge; and maybe there they float encore.Quant the young giant, he took his iron bar and resumed his journey.
The Lion and the Mouse	9051	75	French	A Lion asleep in his lair was awakened by a mouse running over his face. Getting angry he grabbed his leg and was about to kill her. Mouse, terrified, piteously asked him to spare. "I beg you, let me go," she cried, "and one day I will repay you for your kindness." The idea that a creature so insignificant can ever be able to do anything for him amused the Lion so much that he laughed aloud and let kindly leave. But the opportunity finally came for the mouse. The lion one day caught in a net that was placed there by a hunter, and his roar of anger ententant mouse recognized him and ran to the scene. Without further ado she began to gnaw the ropes of his teeth, and succeeded before long to release the lion. "Here !" said the mouse, "You have mocked me when I promised to pay you," but, you see, even a Mouse can help a lion "
The Lion and the Mouse	4069	75	French	It must, as far as can force everyone: We often need a smaller than itself. This truth two Fables authentic, long the thing in evidence abounds. Between the legs of a Lion A Rat left enough land to dizzy. The king of the animals, on this occasion, Montra what it was, and gave him life. This benefit was not lost. Anybody would have believed That Leo Rat had a deal? However it happened that at the end of The Lion Forest was caught in a snare, whose roars his will could undo. Sire Rat ran, and took both his teeth gnawed mesh That took all the work. Patience and length of time over Font neither strength rage.
The Lion, the Wolf and the Fox	4182	50	French	A Lion decrepit, gout, unable to do more, we Wanted to cure old age might find: allege the impossible to the Kings, it is abuse. This one from each species Manda of Physicians; so is all arts: Doctors at the Lion come from all sides; From all sides comes revenue donors. In the visits that are made, The Fox dispensation and stands closed and silent. The Wolf makes his court stew at sunset King his missing comrade; Prince just now Wants we go smoke Renard in his home, Let him come. It comes, is presented; And knowing that the wolf was it the case: I'm afraid, sir, he said, a report disingenuous, not to have me charged contempt To have deferred this tribute; But I was on a pilgrimage; And acquitted myself a vow made to your health. Even I have seen in my Travelers experts and scholars; they told the languor of which your Majesty feared rightly thereafter. You miss that heat: Along ages in you destroyed it: On Wolf flayed do you apply the skin Any hot and steaming; The secret is probably fine for the failing kind. Sir Wolf will serve you, Please, dressing gown. King tastes that opinion: It galls, one size, one dismembered Sir Wolf. The Monarch in supped, and his skin wrapped; Gentlemen courtiers, stop destroying you, Make your yard if you can not harm you. Evil goes to you fourfold good. The daubeurs turn have one or the other way: You're in a career where you will forgive anything.
The Wolf and the Stork	4087	76	French	Wolves eat greedily. A Wolf therefore being merrymaking If pressed, they say, Let it so thought losing life: a bone remained well before him in the throat. Happiness for this wolf, who could not scream, Near there goes a stork. He gestures; she runs. Here the Operator once in work. She took the bone; then for a good turn, she asked her wages. "? Your salary says Wolf: You laugh, my good gossip What's not encor lot of my throat To have removed your neck Come on, you're an ungrateful!?. Do not fall forever under my feet"
The Wolf and the Dog.	7869	201	French	That freedom is sweet! I will demonstrate in a few mots.Un well fed dog and a wolf extremely thin accidentally met. When, after being greeted, IIS were arrested: "Whence comes, I pray thee, said the wolf, you have the hair so shiny? What are you fed for taking so overweight? I am much stronger, I'm starving. " The dog replied bluntly: "My fate is yours, if you can get to my master the same services as me." "What services?" said the wolf. "Keep the door and defend against thieves the night his house." . - "For me certainly, I am ready for this: because now I have to endure the snow and rain in the woods where I lead a miserable existence How it is easier for me to live free of a roof and doing nothing, having to feed me plenty of food. " - "Come with me." Along the way, sees the wolf, instead of the chain, the dog's neck peeled "Where did this, my friend?" -. "It is nothing." - "Tell yet, I beg you." "As I look a bit bright, it binds me during the day so that when the sun shines, I sit and I watch once night falls. In the evening they let me go and I wander where I please. We brings me bread without my request;. my master gives me the bones of his table, people of the house I throw debris and stew leftovers that you never want to is how, without any trouble, my belly fills. " "Why, if it takes you fancy you to go somewhere, this is it lawful to you?" "Not TOUTA fact," the DOG "Enjoy therefore the property you lowing me, O dog. I would not even a kingdom, if I was not being free in my opinion."
The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids	45	123	French	There was once an old goat who had seven kids and loved as every mother loves her children. One day she wanted to go into the forest to bring something to eat, she gathered all seven and told them. "I have to go into the forest, my dear children Beware the wolf If he could get into home, you eat everything raw. this bandit knows acting, but he has a hoarse voice and black legs, this is how you will recognize. " - "Do not worry, Mom," answered the kids, "we will focus You can you go without fear.." The old goat bleated satisfaction and in alla.Peu after, someone knocked on the door shouting: "Open the door, my dear children, your mother is here and has brought something." But the kids knew the wolf in his rough voice. "We will open not to you," they crièrent-. "You're not our mother. Our mom has a soft, pleasant voice, and your voice is hoarse. You're a wolf!" The wolf went to the dealer and bought a large piece of chalk. He ate chalk and his voice became softer. He returned to the little house, knocked again and called out. "Open the door, my dear children, your mother is back and brought to everyone a little something" But while talking he laid his black paws against the window; the kids saw him and shouted: "We will open not you our mother has not black feet like you You're a wolf." And the wolf ran to a baker and said, "I hurt my leg, smear it to me with the dough." The baker rubbed her leg and the wolf still ran to the miller. "Verse white flour on my paw!" he commanded. The wolf wants to deceive someone, thought the miller, and he made ways. But the wolf said, "If you do not, I'll eat you." The miller was afraid and whitens his paw. Yes, people are well for the third time the wolf came to the door of the little house, knocked and shouted: "Open the door, my dear little, Mom is back from the forest and brought you something. " - "Show us your first leg," cried the kids, "we know if you are really our mother." The wolf put his paw on the window sill, and when the kids saw that they were white, they believed everything he said and opened the door. But it's a wolf came. The kids were terrified and wanted to hide. One jumped under the table, one in the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth in the kitchen, the fifth is shut in the cabinet, the sixth under the sink and the seventh in the clock. But the wolf found them and not dragged: he swallowed the kids, one after the other. The only one he did not find was the one hidden in the clock. When the wolf was full, he retired, lay on green meadow and endormit.Peu after, the old goat came from the forest. Oh, what a sad sight awaited him at home! The door wide open, the table, chairs, overturned benches, the sink was shattered, cover and bed pillows dragged on the ground. She sought her children, but in vain. She called them by name, one after another, but no one answered. It was only when she pronounced the name of the youngest a little thin voice was heard: "I'm here, Mom, in the clock!" She helped him out and the kid told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the other kids. Imagine how old she wept her cubs! Any unhappy, she left the small house and the kid ran after her. In the meadow, the wolf was lying under the tree and snoring in to shake the branches. The goat watched him closely and noticed that something was moving and struggling in his big belly. My God, she thought, and that my poor children that the wolf has eaten dinner, were still alive? The kid had to return home to fetch scissors, needle and thread. The goat sheared the belly of the monster, and soon the first kid stuck his head; she continued and the six kids came out, one after another, all safe because, in his haste, the greedy wolf had swallowed them entirely. What happiness! They embraced their dear mother against then gambadèrent as the tailor to his wedding. But the old goat said, "Come on, kids, bring stones as big as possible, we fourrerons in the belly of this ugly beast as it is still in bed and asleep." And seven kids rolled stones and farcirent in the wolf until it is full. The old goat sewed up the fast, so that the wolf did not notice anything and do not even budge pas.Quand he finally woke up, he got up, and as the stones weighed him in the stomach, he was very thirsty. He wanted to go to the well to drink, but as he swayed while walking, the stones in his stomach rumbled. He called out: "It growls, it roars, my stomach ton I swallowed seven kids, was it an illusion and nothing heavy large pierresles replaced?". He went to the sink, bent and purpose. The heavy stones pulled him under water and the wolf drowned miserably. The seven kids then ran and shouted: "The wolf is dead, that's the end of it!" and they began to dance around the well and the old goat danced with them.
The Master Cat or Puss in Boots	1992	545B	French	A miller left for all goods to three children he had, his mill, his ass, and his cat. The division was soon made, neither the notary nor the attorney was called. They would soon have eaten up all the poor patrimony. The eldest had the mill, the second the donkey, and the youngest had only last chat.Ce was inconsolable at having so poor a share: - My brothers, he said, could earn honest living by putting together; for me, when I have eaten up my cat, and I am myself a muff of his skin, I must die of faim.Le cat who heard all this, but which did not pretend, told him to a grave and serious air: - do not grieve, my master, you just give me a bag, and make me a pair of boots to go in the bushes, and you will see that you are not so bad that you shared croyez.Quoique the master of the cat did not make great background on it, he had seen him do so many cunning tricks to catch rats and mice: as when it was hanging by the feet or he was hiding in the flour to the death, he did not despair of being rescued in his misère.Lorsque cat had what he asked for, he booted bravely and putting his bag about his neck, he held the strings with his two forepaws and went into a warren where there were many rabbits. He put bran and lacerons in his bag, and extending as though he were dead, he waited for some young rabbits, not yet acquainted with the deceits of the world, came to shove in his bag for that there was mis.À sooner had he slept he had contentment; No rash and foolish young rabbit jumped into his bag, and the cat immediately master pulling the strings took him and killed him without miséricorde.Tout glorious of his prey, he went to the king and asked to speak to him. We took him up to the apartment of his majesty, when being entered, he made a low bow to the king and said: - Well, sire, a rabbit warren of the Marquis of Carabas (that was the name that it took her pleased to give his master), asked me to present his part.- Tell your master, 'replied the king, that I thank him, and that makes me plaisir.Une again he went to hide in a corn, still holding his bag open; and when there were two partridges inputs, drew the strings, and took both. He then went to present them to the king, as he had done the rabbit. The king received with pleasure the two partridges, and gave him to boire.Le cat went well for two or three months to wear from time to time the king of game hunting th of his master. One day he learned that the king was going to walk on the riverside with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the world, he said to his master: - If you will follow my advice, your fortune is made: simply swim in the river at the place I show you, then let me do so.The Marquis of Carabas did what the cat advised him to, without knowing what that would be good. In time he was bathing, the King passed, and the cat began to shout with all his might: - Help, help, that's Mr. Marquis of Carabas is drowning At this cry the king put! head in the door and recognized the cat that had brought him so many times in the game, he ordered his guards that should go quickly to the aid of the Marquis de Carabas.Pendant were drawing the poor Marquis river the cat approached the carriage, and told the king that time that his master was bathing, he had come from thieves who had taken his Abits, although he had cried thief all his might; funny hid under a big pierre.Le king immediately commanded the officers of his wardrobe to run and fetch one of his best clothes for the Marquis of Carabas. The king gave him a thousand caresses; and as the fine clothes he had given him his good looks (as it was beautiful, and well done in person), the king's daughter found him hard at will, and the Marquis of Carabas had no sooner it threw two or three looks very respectful and somewhat tender, she fell in love with the king folie.Le wanted him come into the coach, and it was the promenade. The cat, delighted to see his plan begin to succeed, marched on before, and having met farmers who were mowing a meadow, he said: - Good people who are mowing, if you do not tell the King that the meadow you mow belongs to the Marquis of Carabas, you shall be chopped as flesh pâté.Le king did not fail to ask the aucheux to whom the meadow they fauchaient.- it is the Marquis of Carabas, said -they all together, because the threat of the cat had made their peur.- You have a beautiful heritage, said the king to the Marquis of Carabas.- You see, sir, replied the Marquis, this is a meadow which never fails to report extensively all years.The master cat, which was still ahead, met with some reapers, and said: - Good people who are reaping, if you do not say that all this corn belongs to the Marquis of Carabas, you will all chopped as small as flesh pâté.Le King, who spent a moment later, vou read know who owned all the corn he voyait.-It is the Marquis of Carabas, replied the reapers, and the King was still pleased with the cat marquis.Le, who went before the carriage, lways said the same thing to everyone he met; and the king was astonished at the vast estate of the Marquis de Carabas.Le master cat finally arrived in a beautiful castle whose master was an ogre, the richest ever seen, because all the land where King had passed were the dependence of this castle. The cat, who had taken care to learn who this ogre, and what he could do, asked to speak to him, saying he did not pass so near his castle without having the honor of make him the révérence.L'ogre received him as civilly as an ogre, and had him reposer.- was assured, said the cat, you had the gift of change you in any kind of animal; For example you could transform yourself into a lion, elephant - This is true, replied the ogre suddenly, and to show you, you will see me become lion.Le cat was so scared of seeing a lion in front of ui, he immediately climbed into the gutter, not without trouble and danger, because of his boots, which were worthless to walk on tuiles.Quelques after, the cat saw that the ogre had resumed his form went down and confessed that he had been well peur.- was assured again, said the cat, but I can not believe that you had also the power to take the form of smaller animals, for example, you change in a rat, in a mouse; I confess that I like it quite impossible.- Impossible? replied the ogre, you will see, at the same time he changed himself into a mouse, which ran on the plancher.Le cat no sooner realized that fell on it, and ate it. However the king, who lives through the beautiful castle of the ogre, wanted to enter it. The cat, who heard the noise of the coach running over the drawbridge, ran to meet and said to the king - Y our Majesty is welcome to the hâteau of the Marquis de Carabas.- How, Marquis cried the king, the castle is still in you! It can do nothing finer than this court and all the stately buildings which surround it; see them in, please.The Marquis gave his hand to the young Princess, and followed the King who went first, and went into a large room where they found a magnificent collation, which the ogre had prepared for his friends who had come to see the same day, but did not dare enter, knowing the king was there. The king charmed with the good qualities of the Marquis of Carabas, as well as his daughter who was mad, and seeing the vast estate he possessed, said, after drinking five or six shots - It held that 'to you, Marquis, that you are my gendre.Le Marquis, making low bows, accepted the honor done him by the king; and the very same day married the Princess. The cat became a great lord and never ran after the eu mouse to play. * MoralitéQuelque great either avantageDe enjoy a rich heritage Coming to us from father to son, To the young people for the ordinary, Industry and expertise Valent better than property acquis.Autre moralitéSi the son of a miller, with such speed, Wins the heart of a princess, and will actually look with dying eyes, it is that the coat, mine and youth, to inspire tenderness, Do not ever indifferent ways.
The wonderful musician	75	151	French	There was once a musician who had a wonderful violin. This fiddler went a day alone in a forest, leaving his thoughts wander here and there; and when he no longer knew what to think, he said: "The weather starts to seem to me here in the forest, I want to ensure that happens to me a good companion." Consequently, he took his violin he wore on his back, and began to play a tune that woke thousand echoes in the foliage. There was no longer he played, when a wolf came stealthily behind the trees. "Heaven! That's a wolf! It is not there the companion I desire," thought the fiddler. However, the wolf approached and said, "Ah, dear musician, you play well could I not learn your art?" - "The thing is easy," said the musician, "it suffices to you to do exactly what I tell you." - "Oh, dear musician," said the wolf, "I will obey you as a scholar obeys his master." The musician bade him follow, and when they had gone part of the way, they came to an old oak tree that was hollow and split in two. "You see that tree," said the musician, "if you want to learn to play the violin, must thy fore paws into this slot." The wolf obeyed; but the musician quickly picked up a stone and struck with such force that both legs of the wolf, they dug into the slot, and that the poor animal had to remain prisoner. "Wait for me until I come back, said the musician." And he continued his route.Il had hardly walked for a few minutes, he began to think again: "Time seems so long in the forest, I'll try to get myself another companion." Consequently, he took his violin and played a new tune. There was no longer he played, when a fox came stealthily through the trees. "Ah, that's a fox," the musician said, "This is not the companion I desire." The fox came and said to him: "!. Oh dear musician, you play well I would like to learn that too" - "The thing is easy," said the musician, "it suffices to you to do exactly what I tell you." - "Oh, musician," said the fox, "I promise you obey you as a scholar obeys his master." - "Follow me," said the musician. When they had walked for a few minutes, they came to a path lined on both sides by tall shrubs. In this place, the musician stopped, grabbed one side of the road a hazel he bowed against earth, set foot on its summit; then the other side, he did the same with another shrub; after which, addressing the fox, "Now, comrade, it is true that you want to learn something, lay your left foot." The fox obeyed, and the musician fastened his paw to the tree on the left. "Fox, my friend," he said then, "now advance your right foot." The animal did not need to be told twice, and the musician fastened his paw to the right tree. That done, he let the two bushes that stood up suddenly, taking with them in the air the fox remained suspended and struggled in vain. "Wait for me until I return," said the musician. And he continued his route.Il soon began to think the third time: "Time seems to me here in the forest, I have to work to get me another companion." Consequently, he took his violin, and the agreements it drew resounded through the woods. Then came to light leaps, a hare. "Ah, that's a hare," says the musician. "This is not the companion I desire." - "Ah, dear musician," said the hare, "that you play well I would like to learn that too!". - "The thing is easy," said the musician, "it suffices to you to do exactly what I tell you." - "Oh, musician," replied the little hare, "I promise to obey you as a scholar obeys his master." They way together until they came to an open space where a poplar wood was. The musician tied levraut neck long rope he fastened to the tree the other end. "Now alert!, Little hare, run twenty times by jumping around the tree." The hare obeyed; and when he had done twenty times around commanded, had twisted the string twenty times round the tree, so the little hare was caught, and it was nice pull with all his strength, he only succeeded in bruising neck with the rope. "Wait for me until I return," said the musician. And he continued his route.Cependant force pulling, fidgeting, biting the stone and work in all directions, the wolf had come to restore freedom to her paws in the removing of the slot. Full of anger and rage, he went in pursuit of the musician that he promised to pieces. When the fox saw him running, he began to moan and scream with all his might, "Brother wolf, come to my rescue musician deceived me!". The wolf bowed both shrubs, broke the strings of a sudden tooth, and freed the fox who followed him, as eager to avenge the musician. They soon met the poor hare, they also freed, and all three began to pursue the enemy commun.Or, continuing his way, the musician had once more played his fiddle; for once he had more success. The agreements of sound reached the ears of a poor woodcutter, who, seduced by the soft music, gave up his work and, ax in hand, hastened to run towards the place whence sounds. "So finally the companion that I must!" said the musician, "for I was looking for a man, not wild animals." Then he began to play with so smoothly and so magical, that the poor man stood there as under the influence of a charm, and his heart leaped with joy. It is currently there arrived the wolf, the fox and the hare. The woodcutter had no trouble out that his comrades did not have the best intentions. Accordingly, it raised his glittering ax and placed himself before the musician, with a look that said, "Whoever wants to do well fiddler to stand on guard, because he will have to deal with me." Also the fear she seized the conspirators animals that ran back into the forest. The musician expressed his gratitude to the woodcutter in him still playing a melodious tune, then he walked away.
The Miller, His Son and the Donkey	4079	1215	French	The invention of the Arts is a birthright We must Apologue to ancient Greece. But this field can do so reap what latecomers are found to be gleaned. The feint is a land full of deserted country. Every day our authors will make discoveries. I mean you in a good trait invented enough; Formerly Malherbe to Racan was told. These two rivals of Horace, heirs of his Lyre of Apollo Disciples, our Masters, rather, if meeting a day alone and without witnesses (As they trusted their thoughts and their care), Racan begins: Tell -moi, please, you must know that the things of life, who by all its degrees have already passed, and that nothing should escape to this age, what do I resolve it? It is time that I think about. You know my, my talent, my birth. Should I establish in the Province my stay Take Job in the Army, or load to the Court? Everything in the world is mingled with bitterness and charms. War has its sweets, Hymen has its alarms. If I followed my taste, I know where to abut; But I have my family, the court, the people to please. Malherbe on this: Satisfy everyone! Listen to this story before I answer. I read in some places that Miller and his son, the old one, the other children, not smaller, but boy of fifteen, if I remember correctly, Were going to sell Ane, a some day fair. That he might be fresher and better throughput, we tied her feet were you suspended it; Then the man and his son wear it as a chandelier. Poor people, idiots, couples ignorant and boorish. The first who saw the burst of laughter. What a joke, he said, will play these people? The most ass of the three is not that we think. Miller knows his words to ignorance; He puts on his feet beast, and the fact scamper. The Donkey, who enjoyed strong the other way to go, Complains in his dialect. Miller does not care. He brought up his son, he follows, and adventure Spend three good merchants. This object displeased them. The older the boy cried as he could: Oh! Oh ! down, which is not to tell you, young man, which lead to Lackey gray beard. It was to follow in the old man to climb. - Gentlemen, 'said Miller, you have to settle. The child dismounts, and then the old man goes, When three girls the way, one said, This is grand'honte That we should see this tower and young son While this simpleton like a sitting bishop Done calf on his donkey, and thought to be wise. - It is not, says Miller, over at my age Calves: Go your way, daughter, and believe me. After many jeers after another returned, the man believed to be wrong, and put his son behind him. After thirty not a third party Finds still ramble. One says: These people are crazy, The Donkey can not; it will die under their blows. Hey what! and load this poor donkey! Have they no pity their old servant? No doubt that the Fair they will sell his skin. - By Jove, Miller said, is crazy brain Who says everyone happy and father. Let however, if by any means We shall overcome. They both descended. The Donkey, lounging, walking alone in front of them. A fellow met them and said: Is fashion What Baudet go at ease, and Meunier inconvenient? That the donkey or the master is doing to get tired? I advise these people to do enshrine. They wear out their shoes and keep their Ane. Nicolas on the contrary, for when he goes to see Joan, he mounts his beast; and the song says. Beautiful trio of Donkeys! Miller replied: I am Ane, it is true, I admit, I admit; But now that you blame me, it praises me; Let them say something or they would not say anything; I want do to my head. He did, and did well. As for you, follow Mars, or Love, or the Prince; Come on, run; abide in Province; Take wife, Abbey, Employment, Government: People will talk about it, do not doubt it.
The donkey	1372	430	French	There was once a king and queen who had everything they wanted, but they had no children. The queen was desperate, and every day and every night she lamented: - "I'm like a wasteland where nothing germinates." Finally Heaven heard his prayer; but when the child was born, he looked nothing like a man: it was a small donkey. When his mother saw him, she began to mourn the more, - Rather than a donkey as a son, she said, I prefer not to have children at all. We should throw it in the water, so that it be devoured by poissons.Mais King did not agree and said: - The good Lord gave it to us, so it will be my son and heir and after death he shall sit upon the throne and will crown the royale.Ils so were educating the little donkey their best, and it was growing well. He enjoyed life, had fun, played, but above all he loved music. Also in he went to a celebrated musician and asked him: - Teach me your art. I know play the lute as well as small toi.- Poor sighed musician. Your fingers are not made to play the lute; they are even too big, I fear that the strings do take not.But he could always say everything he wanted, the little donkey had decided to play the lute and did not yield. And he ended up getting there. He was so hard and so applied that he had learned to play as well as his maître.Un day, the donkey walked and came to a well. There he saw his ass's head reflected on the surface of the water. He was so saddened by what he had seen that he went in the world; he took with him his faithful companion. They had walked up hill and down dale, when they arrived in a kingdom where there was an old king. He had a daughter, but it was beautiful. - We'll stay over here, decided the small âne.Il knocked on the castle door and shouted: - A host is outside your door; open for it to enter! As the door would not open, the little donkey sat down, took his lute, and with his front paws, he played merveilleusement.Le porter, in charge of monitoring, eyes widened and ran tell the king: - Outside the front door of the castle, there is a small donkey, and he plays the lute as a great maître.- Just do it coming, asked the roi.Dès the donkey came with his lute in the hall, everyone laughed at him. Then they recommended him to go downstairs in the servants to sit and eat there. But the little donkey protested - I do not go out of a vulgar barn, I come from a noble family - If you're so noble, they said, will sit with the soldats.- No, refused it! donkey, i want to sit with the king roi.Le laughs, and as he was in good spirits, he acquiesça.- Heard, donkey, whatever you want: come here, near moi.Ensuite he asked: - and how do you like my daughter, donkey the donkey turned his head towards the princess looked at her from head to toe and said: - I like it a lot, I have never seen more belle.- Go girl so you sit next to her, said the pleasure roi.-, welcomes the little âne.Et he sat down near the Princess. Then he ate and drank with beautiful manners, noble proprement.Le donkey stood for a time at the court of the king. "There's nothing to do, he said one day, you have to come home." Sad and head down, he stood before the king and asked permission to leave. Now the king was accustomed to him and liked him enormously. So he began to question him: - What you got, little donkey? You look so sad! Stay with me, I will give you whatever you want. Do you want gold? - No, said the little donkey shaking tête.- Do you want jewelry, rare objects - No, merci.- Do you want half of my kingdom? - No, no .- If I knew what would make you happy, the king sighed. Do you want the hand of my graceful girl - Oh, yes, the little donkey nodded, her, I would vraiment.Et suddenly he was more gay, his good humor returned, for it was he most wanted. And then gave a magnificent wedding banquet. The night before the couple have been together in their bedroom, the king, wanting to make sure that the little donkey would continue to lead with still so many beautiful ways, ordered his valet to hide in their room .The newlyweds entered their bedroom. The groom then closed the lock, believing they were alone, he suddenly took off his donkey skin. He appeared before the bride as a handsome young prince.- Now you know who I am, he says, and you see also that I am not unworthy of toi.L'heureuse bride kissed and fell madly in love. But at dawn the young man put on his donkey skin. No one could suspect that the skin was hiding! And soon, the old king arriva.- Well, well, the little donkey is already up! if he cried. You are probably sad, if he turned to his daughter, that he could not marry a real young man - No, father, I love him as for me it is the most beautiful in the world; in my life, I want lui.Le king was surprised, but his valet ran and told her tout.- It is still not possible! wondered the Stay roi.- So that night in their room, you'll see everything with your own eyes, advised the valet. And I still have another idea. Take his skin and throw it into the fire. It only remains to show him in his true apparence.- Very good idea, says roi.Le evening, when the newlyweds slept, he slipped like a shadow in their bedroom, he approached the bed and in the moonlight he saw a handsome young man sleeping peacefully. The skin was removed ass down. The king won and did turn out a big fire, and then he made discard skin. He personally saw to it that she was reduced to ashes. And as he wanted to know how the little donkey would react stolen, he stayed awake all nuit.À dawn, as soon as he woke up, the young man stood up and tried to slip back into his ass skin; but he looked in vain. He was horrified and he cried with a voice full of horror: - It remains for me to flee He left the room, but the king is attendait.- Where are you, dear son! the he called out. What do you want to do? Stay here: you are a fine young man and I will not let you go. I'll give you right now half of my kingdom, and after my death, you will be the master of the country while entier.- Provided that this good start bodes good end, said the young homme.Le old king gave him half of kingdom, and when he died the following year, the young king became master of the country entirely. And after the death of his father, he also inherited the native kingdom. He lived so majestically.
Little Red Riding Hood	250	333	French	There once was a little girl that everyone liked him, especially his grandmother. She knew that undertaking to make her happy. One day she gave her a little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would ever wear any other. So, we called him Red Riding Hood. One day, her mother said, "Come here, Red Riding Hood, here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine holder them to your grandmother, she is ill and weak, she did delight; be quick,. before it gets too hot. and when you're on the road, be wise and do not deviate you from your path, otherwise you would break the bottle and your grandmother will get nothing. and when you get home she does not forget to say "Hello" and will not pry into every corner. "" I'll do it right, "said Little Red Riding Hood to her mother. The girl said goodbye. The grandmother lived out in the middle of the forest, half an hour from the village. When Little Red Riding Hood entered the woods, he met the wolf. But he did not know it was an ugly beast and the feared not. "Hello, Red Riding Hood," said the Wolf. "Hello, Wolf," says Red Riding Hood. "Where are you going so early, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "At my grandmother's." - "What have you got in your basket?" -. "Cake and wine Yesterday we made baking, and it will be good for my grandmother to strengthen It.." - "Where your grandmother live, Little Red Riding Hood?" - "Oh, a good quarter hour from here in the forest His house is under the three large oak Underneath, there is a hazel hedge, you know!..?" said Little Red Riding Hood. The Wolf says: "This is a very young and very soft food, a real treat It will be even better than the old me I need to skillfully take to catch them all!.!" He accompanied part of the way and said: "Red Riding Hood, see these beautiful flowers around us look Why do not you I feel you do not even listen as birds sing beautifully.?. you walk as if you were going to school, while everything is so beautiful here in the forest! "Little Red Riding Hood opened her eyes and when she saw how the sun's rays danced it, then of through the trees, and how everything was full of flowers, she thought, "If I brought my grandmother to a beautiful bouquet of flowers, it will be very pleased if it is still early and I'll be in. 'hour." She left the path into the woods looking for flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she said: "Further, I see one more beautiful," and she went and dug ever deeper into the forest. The wolf ran straight to the house of the grandmother. He knocked at the door. "Who is here?" - "It's Little Red Riding Hood who brings you cake and wine." - "Just press the latch," said the grandmother. "I'm too weak and can not get up." The wolf pressed the latch, and the door opens without a word, he approaches the bed of the grandmother and swallows. He puts on his clothes, put her cap, lies down in bed and pulls the rideaux.Pendant this time, Little Red Riding Hood had been chasing the flowers. When the girl were so many that she could hardly wear them, she suddenly remembered his grandmother and took the road to get to her. She was very surprised to see the door open. And when she entered the room, it seemed curious that she said: "God, as I am fearful now And yet, usually I'm so glad to be with me. Grandmother!" She exclaimed: "Hello!" But no answer. She approached the bed and drew the curtains. Grandmother was lying there with her cap pulled low over his face. It looked odd. "Oh, grandmother, as you have big ears." - "All the better to hear you!" - "Oh, grandmother, as you have big eyes!" - "The better to see you!" - "Oh, grandmother, as you have big hands!" - "The better to hug you!" - "But, grandmother, as you have a horribly big mouth!" - "The better to eat you with, my dear!" Just the Wolf had he uttered these words, he jumped out of bed and swallowed poor Riding Hood Rouge.Lorsque the wolf had his fill, he went back to bed, fell asleep and began to snore loudly. A hunter was just passing the house. He said: "As this old woman is snoring I have to see if she needs something!". He enters the room and when it happens in front of the bed, he sees that it's a wolf who is lying there. "Ah, it's you, villain!" he said. "That's a long time since I seek." He is preparing to fire when suddenly the idea came to him that the wolf might have eaten the grandmother and it might still be possible to save it. He does not shoot but took scissors and starts to open the sleeping wolf's belly. Hardly had he given some scissors he sees the Red Riding Hood. Some blows over and the girl jumped out and cried, "! Ah, as I was afraid As it was dark in the belly of the Wolf" And now the grandmother out in turn, can barely breathe. Little Red Riding Hood is fetched some large stones. They fill the belly of the Wolf. When it woke up, he tried to run away. But the stones were so heavy that he fell down and were happy mourut.Ils all three: the hunter skinned the wolf and carried him home. The grandmother-ate the cake and drank the wine that Little Red Riding Hood had brought. It is found in all exhilarated. Little Red Riding Hood, however, was thinking: "I will never leave my way to take a walk in the forest, when my mom will not allow me." It is said that yet another time, when Little Red Riding Hood brought again the cake to her old grandmother, another wolf spoke to her and get her out of the way. But she knew better and kept walking straight. Arriving at her grandmother, she told him quickly that the wolf had come to meet him and he had wished him good, but he had looked at her with eyes so bad: "If I had not on the highway, it would have eaten me! " you added it. "Come," said his grandmother, "we will close the door and although the padlock that he can not come here." Soon afterwards the wolf knocked on the door and shouted: "Open to me, Grandma it's me, Little Red Riding Hood, who brings you cookies!" But both were silent and opened the door points. Head-Gray then made several times around the house on tiptoe, and, finally, he jumped on the roof, decided to wait until the evening, when Little Red Riding Hood would come out to take advantage of the darkness and engulf. But the grandmother saw what he was her intentions. "Take the bucket, my child," she said to Little Red Riding Hood, "I cooked sausages of yesterday, and you will carry the cooking water in the large stone trough in front of the entrance to the House." The Little Red Cap carried so many buckets that, finally, the trough was full. Then the aroma of sausage caressed the nose of the wolf onto the roof. He leaned so stretching the neck, at the end he slipped and could not stop himself. He slipped from the roof, fell into the stone trough where he drowned. Cheerfully, Little Red Riding Hood went to his house, and no one gave him any harm.
Little Red Riding Hood	1991	333	French	There was once a small village girl, the prettiest creature who was able to see; his mother was crazy, and her grandmother even crazier. This good woman had a little red riding hood, which suited her so well that everybody called Riding Hood rouge.Un day his mother had cooked and made cakes said: - Go see your mother-like door great, because I was told that she was ill; holder her a cake and this little pot beurre.Le Little Red Riding Hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother, who lived in another village. Passing through a wood she met comrade wolf, who had a great desire to eat; but he dared not, because of some woodcutters who were in the forest. He asked her where she was going; the poor child, who had not it dangerous to stop to listen to a wolf, said: - I'm going to see my grandmother and carry her a cake with a little pot of butter mother sends him .- House does far? said the loup.- Oh! yes, said Little Red Riding Hood, is beyond the mill you see everything there, over there, at the first house village.- Well, said the wolf, I want to go see; I myself am going through this path one, you and by that way, and we'll see that soon there sera.Le wolf ran with all his might by the way was the shortest, and little girl went by the longest way, amusing himself by gathering nuts, running after butterflies, and making bouquets of small flowers she rencontrait.Le wolf was not long in arriving at the home of the grandmother; it strikes: knock, Who's there toc.- - This is your daughter Little Red Riding Hood, said e wolf-in against making his voice, which brings you a cake and a little pot of butter mother sends you? .The good grandmother, who was in his bed because she was somewhat ill, cried out: - Pull the bobbin, the bobinette cherra.Le wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened. It fell upon the good woman and devoured in no time, as there were more than three days since he had eaten. Then he closed the door and went to bed in the bed of the grandmother, waiting for Little Red Riding Hood who some time later knocked at the door: knock, toc.- Who is Little Red Riding Hood, which hearing the big voice of the wolf, was at first afraid, but believing her grandmother had a cold, answered: - This is your daughter, little red Riding Hood, which brings you a cake and a little pot of butter that my you envoie.Le mother cried wolf him a little softening in his oix: - Pull the bobbin, the bobinette cherra.Le little red Riding Hood pulled the bobbin, and the door ouvrit.Le wolf, seeing her come in, said by hiding in bed under the covers: - put the cake and the little pot of butter upon the stool, and come to bed with me.The little red Riding Hood undressed and will put in the bed, where she was very surprised to see how her grandmother was in her nightclothes; She said: - Grandmother, you have big arms - the better to kiss you, my fille.- Grandmother, you have great legs - It's better to run! my enfant.- grandmother, you have big ears - the better to listen, my enfant.- grandmother, you have big eyes - the better to see my enfant.- grandmother, you have great teeth - This is for you manger.Et by saying, wicked wolf fell upon Little red Riding Hood, and mangea.MoralitéOn see here that young children, especially young fillesBelles, well made and nice, Font badly hear all kinds of people, and it is not strange, If it be so that the wolf eats. I say wolf, because all wolves are not of the same kind: It is a gracious mood, Quietly, without bitterness and without anger, Which private, self-indulgent and sweet followed youth demoisellesJusque in homes, into the lanes; But unfortunately ! who knows these sugary wolves Of all the wolves are the most dangerous.
The small peasant in heaven	1598	802	French	He died after a poor pious peasant came to the door of paradise. Meanwhile died a rich, rich lord who also ascended to heaven. St. Peter arrived with his keys, opened the door and ushered the Lord; but probably he had not seen the peasant, because it left him outside and closed the door. The farmer heard the joyous reception that heaven was to richard with singing and music. When the noise had subsided, St. Peter returned and bed finally get the poor man. It was expected that his entry song and music going again. But all remained quiet. He was received with a good heart, the angels went to meet him; but no crew. He asked Peter why music was not for him and for the rich, and if bias existed in heaven and on earth. "No," replied the saint, "you are also dear to us that no other and you will taste, like that which has just entered, the joys of paradise, but you see, poor peasants like you, it between here everyday, while rich, it does not come a every hundred years. "
Little Louse and the small chip	286	2022	French	lived together, stood together their small house and brewing beer in an egg shell. One day the little louse fell in and burnt herself. The little flea began to cry bitterly. The small room door wondered: "Why are you crying so small chip?" -. "Because the louse has burnt herself" the little door began to creak a little broom in the corner said: "Why you and creaking, little door?" - "How could I not squeak The little louse has burnt herself, the little flea is weeping!". The little broom began to shake in all directions. A little cart passed by and said, "Why are you troubled, and, little broom?" - "How can I stay up The little louse has burnt herself, the little flea is weeping, The little squeaky door to outdo!." So the little cart said: "I will run," and she began to run wildly. She passed by the dump and sweepings asked him, "Why art thou so, little cart?" - "How could I not darken The little louse has burnt herself, the little flea is weeping, The little squeaky door to outdo, the broom is sweeping, sauve qui peut!" The sweepings then decided: "We will burn all our strength," and they caught fire immediately. The small tree next to the dump asked, "Well, sweepings, and why do you burn?" - "How could we not burn The little louse has burnt herself, the little flea is weeping, The little squeaky door to outdo, the broom is sweeping, stampede The cart can darkens slicing through the air, "the little tree said." So I'm shaking, "and he trembled to lose all its leaves. A little girl, who was passing by with a pitcher of water in hand, wondered, "Why are you trembling so little tree?" - "How could I not tremble The little louse has burnt herself, the little flea is weeping, The little squeaky door to outdo, the broom is sweeping, stampede The cart is dark! slicing through the air, the sweepings burning in fire of hell "and the little girl said." Then I'll break my pitcher, "and she broke it. The little spring from which ran the water, asked: "Why do you breaks your pitcher, little girl?" - "How did not I break it The little louse has burnt herself, the little flea is weeping, The creaking door to outdo, the broom is sweeping, stampede The cart is dark! slicing through the air, the sweepings burning in a fire enfer.Et the little tree, the poor, from foot to head it shakes. "" Oh, "said the spring," then I'm going to overflow, " and she began to overflow. And in the water everything was drowned, the girl, the little tree, the filth, the cart, the little broom, the little door, the small chip and the little louse, all of them were.
Tom Thumb	1996	327B	French	There once was a woodcutter and a woodcutter who had seven children, all boys. The eldest was only ten years old, and the youngest were only seven It is surprising that the woodcutter has had so many children in so little time. but his wife was hasty and was not one to less than two fois.Ils were very poor, and their seven children inconvenienced them much, because none of them could still earn a vie.Ce that vexed them again is that the youngest was very delicate and said nothing; taking for stupidity which was a mark of the goodness of his mind. It was very small, and when it was born, it was hardly bigger than the thumb, which was that we called the little Poucet.Ce poor child was the scapegoats of eason and always wrong he was given. However it was the end, and the wisest of all his brothers, and he spoke little, he listened beaucoup.Il came a very unfortunate year, and famine was so great that these poor people resolved to rid themselves of their enfants.Un evening that the children were asleep, and the woodcutter was by the fire with his wife, he said, with a heavy heart pain: 'you can see that we can not feed our children; I can not see them starve before my eyes, and I am determined to carry the wood lose tomorrow, which will be easy; because while they will enjoy fagoter, we have only to escape without them we voient.- Ah! cried the woodcutter, much could you carry yourself losing your children Her husband had beautiful represent him their poverty, she could not consent; She was poor, but she was their mother. However having seen what pain that he would oir them die of hunger, she consented, and went to bed in pleurant.Le Tom Thumb ouit everything they said, because having heard in his bed they spoke of business, he got up slowly, and had slipped under the stool of his father to listen without being seen. He went back to bed and did not sleep the rest of the night, thinking of what he had to do. He rose early and went to the edge of a stream where he filled his pockets with little white pebbles, and then returned home. They left, and Tom Thumb discovered nothing of what he knew to his frères.Ils went in a forest very thick, where ten paces away we did not see each other. The woodcutter began to cut wood and children to pick up the trifles for fagots. The father and mother, busy seeing to work, gradually moved away from them, and then fled suddenly by a small path détourné.Lorsque these children were alone, they began to scream and cry all their strength. The etit Thumb let them cry, knowing where it would return to the house; because walking had dropped along the way the little white pebbles he had in his pockets. He said, therefore: - Fear not, my brethren; my father and my mother have left us here, but you remènerai well at home, follow me seulement.Ils followed him, and he led them to their home by the same way they came in the forest. They first ventured in, but they went all against the door to hear what their father and said mère.Dans the moment the woodcutter and the woodcutter arrived home, the lord of the manor sent them ten crowns that it owed them there were long, and they hoped to nothing. It gave back their life, for the poor people were starving. The woodcutter sent his wife to the time of slaughter. As there was long since she had eaten, she bought three times more meat than enough for dinner for two. When URENT filled, the woodcutter said: Alas! Now where are our poor children? They would make good food for what we have left here. But also, Guillaume, that thou hast wanted to lose; I told us that we should repent. What are they doing now in this forest? Alas! my God, the wolves have perhaps already eaten! You are very inhuman to have lost and your children.The lumberjack impatiently at the end because it repeated more than twenty times that they would repent and that she had said. He threatened to beat her if she was silent. It's not that the woodcutter can be even more upset that his wife, but she broke her head, and that was the mood of many other people who love strong women who say well, but find it very intrusive those always dit.La woodcutter was in tears: - Alas! where are my children now, my poor children She said once so high that children who were at the door, heard it, shouted together: - Here we are, here we She ran quickly open them! the door and told them in the kissing - How glad I am to see you, my dear children! You are very tired, and you have hunger; Pierrot and you, as you muddy here, just as I will débarbouille.Ce Pierrot was her eldest son she loved more than any other, because it was a bit Rousseau, and she was a little rousse.Ils sat down to table, and ate with an appetite that was a pleasure to father and mother, to whom they told their fear had in the forest talking almost always together. These good people were delighted to see their children with them, and this joy lasted as long as the ten crowns lasted. But when the money was spent, they fell in their first heartbreak, and resolved to lose them again, and not Anquer their coup, to lead them far beyond the first fois.Ils could not talk about it so secretly that they were not heard by the Tom Thumb, who made his account out of trouble as he had already done so; but though he had risen early in the morning to go pick up small stones, he could not deal with them because he found the house door double-locked. He knew what to do when the woodcutter having given them each a piece of bread for their breakfast, he thought he could use his bread instead of stones in the throwing of crumbs along the roads where they pass; So he hugged his father and mother poche.Le led them in the place of the forest thicker and darker, and when they were there, they won a red herring and left there. Tom Thumb did not grieved much because he believed easily find his way by means of his bread he had sown wherever he passed; but he was greatly surprised when he could not find in one thrown into the; the birds had come and all mangé.Les So here much afflicted because as they walked, the more they got lost and disappeared into the forest. Night came, and there arose a great wind that made them terrible fear. They believed not hear from all sides that screams Lloups who came to them for food. They dared not talk almost dizzy. There came a big rain the pierced to the bone; they slipped at every step and fell in the mud, where they fell all muddy, not knowing what to do with their mains.Le Tom Thumb climbed to the top of a tree to see if he could discover nothing; having turned his head in every direction, he saw a glimmer like a candle, but that was far beyond the forest. He descended from the tree; and when he was down, he saw nothing; it grieved him. However, having walked some time with his brothers the side he had seen the light, he saw her coming out of bois.Ils finally arrived at the house where was this handelle, not without many fears, often because they were losing view, what happened to them whenever they descended in some funds. They ran into the door, and a good woman opened them. She asked them what they wanted; Tom Thumb told her they were poor children who were lost in the forest, and wondered Bedrooms charity. This woman seeing them all so cute began to cry, and said: - Alas! my poor children, where are you from? Do you know that this is the house of an ogre who eats little children - Alas! Madam, replied Tom Thumb, who was trembling with all his strength as well as his brothers, what shall we do? It is of course the wolves of the forest will surely eat us tonight, if you do not want to retire you. And that being so, we prefer either the ogre who eats us; perhaps he will pity us, if you will in the prier.La wife of the ogre who thought she could hide are her husband till morning, let them in and led them to heat with a good fire; because there was a whole sheep on the spit for dinner on the ogre.Comme they began to heat up, they heard hitting three or four blows on the door: it was the ogre returning. As soon as his wife had them hide under the bed and opened the door. The Ogre first asked if dinner was ready, and if we had taken the wine, and immediately sat down. The sheep was still bleeding, but it seemed to him that better. It smelled right and left, saying that he felt the flesh. - It is necessary, said his wife, whether the calf that I have to dress, you sentez.- I smell fresh meat, I tell you again, said the Ogre, looking at his wife through, and there is something here that I do not hear pas.En saying, he rose from the table and went straight to lit.- Ah, he said, so that's how you want to deceive me, cursed woman ! I do not know what it takes I will eat you too; well take you to be an old fool. That's the game that comes good about ogres to treat three of my friends who have come to see me these days ici.Il pulled them from under the bed one after the other. These poor children knelt and asked forgiveness; but they had to do the most cruel of all the ogres, who far from having pity already devoured the eyes, and said to his wife that this would be fond of pieces when they have done a good sauce. he went to a large knife, and approaching these poor children, sharpened it on a long stone he held in his left hand. He had already grabbed one when his wife said: - What do you do at this hour? You will not have enough time tomorrow Shut up, 'said the ogre, they will be more mortifiés.- But you still have much meat there,' said his wife; Here a calf, two sheep, and half a pig - You're right, said the ogre; Give them a good supper, so they do not lose weight, and will lead them coucher.La woman was thrilled with joy, and brought them a good supper, but they could eat as they were terrified. For the ogre, he began to drink again, delighted to have something so entertaining his friends. He took a dozen strokes more than usual; which gave him a little in the head, and forced him to go coucher.L'ogre had seven daughters, who were still children. These small ogresses all had the strong beautiful complexion because they ate fresh meat like their father; but they had little gray eyes, quite round, hooked nose and a very large mouth with long teeth acute strong and far removed from each other. They were not very wicked; but they promised a lot, because they already biting small children to the Ucer sang.On brought them to bed early, and they were in September in a double bed, each with a golden crown on his head. There were in the same room another bed of the same size; it was in that bed that the wife of the ogre began sleeping seven boys; after which she went to bed with her mari.Le Tom Thumb who noticed that the daughters of the ogre had golden crowns on their heads, and fearing he should take the ogre remorse do not have them slaughtered that very evening, got up to the middle of the night, taking the cup of his brothers and his own, he went quietly put on the head of the seven daughters of the ogre, after having removed their gold crowns and put it on the head of his brothers and his own, so that the ogre took them to her daughters and daughters for the boys that he wanted to kill. The thing is successful as he had thought; because the ogre being awake at midnight was sorry to have delayed the next day he could carry the day; So suddenly he threw out of bed, and taking one large knife: - Let's see, he said, how are our little funny; do not make two fois.Il went up groping in the room of his daughters and approached the bed where were the boys, who were all asleep, except Little Thumb, who was afraid when he felt the hand of the ogre who felt his head as he fumbled those of all his brothers. The ogre, who felt the golden crowns: Really, he said, I was going there a fine work; I see that I drank too much yesterday soir.Il then went to bed with his daughters, which felt that the beanies boys - Ah here they are, he said, our fellows! working hardiment.En saying, he cut the throat without hesitation his seven daughters. Very pleased with this expedition, he went back to bed with her that femme.Aussitôt Tom Thumb heard the Ogre snoring, he woke up his brothers and told them to dress quickly and follow it. They slowly descended into the garden, and jumped over the walls. They ran most of the night, still trembling and not knowing where they are being awakened allaient.L'ogre told his wife: - Go away upstairs to dress these little funny yesterday soir.L ' ogress was astonished of the goodness of her husband, not doubting the way he meant it the habillât, and believing that he ordered him to go and dress, she went upstairs where she was very surprised when it saw its seven girls murdered and swimming in their sang.Elle began to faint (because it is the first ship that are almost all women in such meetings). The Ogre, fearing his wife was too long to do the work which he had charged, went upstairs to help him. It was no less surprised than his wife when he saw this horrible spectacle.- Ah! what have I done? if he cried. They ayeront me, unhappy, and just heure.Il immediately threw a water hotpot in the nose of his wife and who returns: - Give me quickly my seven-league boots, he dit- it, that I may go the attraper.Il took the field, and after running a long way from all sides, he finally entered the walking path where these poor children who were only a hundred yards from the house their father. They saw the ogre who went from mountain to mountain, and crossing the rivers as easily as he would have made any stream. Tom Thumb, who saw a hollow rock near the place where they were, there was hide her six brothers and shoved it also always looking at what would become the ogre. The ogre who was very tired along the way he had done unnecessarily (as the seven-league boots tired their strong man), wanted to rest, and by chance he sat down on the rock where the little boys s 'were cachés.Comme he could no longer tired, he fell asleep after sitting a while and came to snore so frightfully that the poor do hildren were no less fear than when he held his great knife to cut their throats. Tom Thumb in was less afraid, and said to his brothers to flee quickly to the house while the Ogre slept very well, and they do item might set troubled him. They believed his advice, and soon reached the house.The Tom Thumb came near the ogre tugged his boots, and began immediately. The boots were very large and very wide; but as they were fairies, they had the gift to expand and to apetisser according to the leg of one who shod them, so that they also found just at his feet and legs as if they had been made for lui.Il went straight to the house of the ogre where he found his wife crying with her daughters égorgées.- Your husband told him Tom Thumb, is in great danger; because it was taken by a band of thieves who have sworn to kill him if he gives them all his gold and all his money. In the time they held the dagger to his throat, he perceived and requested me to come to warn you of the state it is, and tell you to give me all he brave , without retaining anything, because otherwise they will kill without mercy. As the press something much, he wanted me to take his seven-league boots that here for diligence, and also so that you do not believe that I am a good woman affronteur.La, very frightened, immediately gave him all that it was, for this ogre did not fail to be very good husband, though Mangeat small children. Tom Thumb is therefore responsible for all the riches of the ogre went back to the house of his father, where he was received with much joie.Il are many people who do not live with agreement of that circumstance, and who claim that Tom Thumb never made this flight to the ogre; in truth, he had not made aware to take his seven-league boots, because he was using that to run after small children. These people sure know from good authority, and even for drinking and angel in the house of the woodcutter. They ensure that when Tom Thumb had shod boots of the ogre, he went to court, where he knew we were at a loss of an army that was two hundred miles away, and success of a battle that had been given. He went, they say, the king, and told him that if he wished, he would bring him news from the army before the end of the day. The king promised a large sum of money if he came to the end. Tom Thumb brought news that same evening, and the first race having made known, he won everything he wanted; because the king paid him very well for carrying his orders to the army, and countless ladies gave him everything he wanted to hear from their lovers, and this was his biggest gain.Il was some women who loaded the letters to their husbands, but they paid him so bad, and it was going to so little, that he deigned to put into consideration what he earned from this side là.Après making for some time the étier mail, and have amassed a lot of good, he returned to his father, where he can not imagine the joy that was to see him again. He put his family at ease. He bought new creation of offices for his father and his brothers; and thus it establishes all, and perfectly made his court the same temps.MoralitéOn does afflicts point of having many children; When they are all beautiful, well made and very great, and a shining outside, but if one of them is low, or is silent, we despise, it is mocked, he was plundered; Sometimes, however, is that little brat who will delight the whole family.
The iron stove (the furnace)	1208	425A	French	At the time when people still practicing magic, a witch old bewitched a royal prince and forced to live in a huge iron stove located in the forest. The prince remained there for many years because nobody knew him free. One day a princess wandered in the woods and did not know how to return home. She wandered for nine days between the thick trees, and finally arrived at the iron stove. Then she heard a voice ask: - Where are you from? Where do you want to go? - I'm lost and I do not know how to get home. And the voice of the stove said: - I'll help you and you can quickly go home, if you promise to do what I ask you. I too am a prince and more noble than you, and I want to marry you. The royal daughter panicked. - My God, what would I do with an iron stove? she thought, but wishing above all quickly go home, she promised the stove to do whatever he would ask. And the voice said: - You come back here with a knife and you creuseras a hole in the cast. And a guide appeared and escorted her home without a word. At the castle, everyone welcomes the return of the princess. Old King fell on his neck and kissed him warmly. His daughter, however, was very upset and she said in a sad voice: - Oh, my dear father, if you knew what I had to endure! I never managed to get out of this deep and thick forest if I had not arrived in a cast iron skillet that helped me. However, I had to commit myself to come back to him to release him and marry him. The old king nearly fainted. He was devastated especially since it was his only daughter. Finally, they decided to send in the forest the miller's daughter instead of the princess. They accompanied him to the edge of the forest, gave him a knife and asked him to dig a hole in the stove. She dug tirelessly for twenty-four hours, but without any effect. At dawn we heard from the iron stove: - It seems to me that the day has dawned. - I have the same impression, replied the girl. I think I hear turn the mill of my father. - Oh, you're so the miller's daughter! Task back from where you came and send me the princess! The girl went and told the king that it was not what we wanted to in the forest, it was the princess that was waiting. The old king was afraid, and the princess began to cry. But there was another girl in the castle, the daughter of the swineherd, and she was even more beautiful than the miller's daughter. They decided to give her some money for her to go into the forest instead of the princess. They accompanied him to the forest and then for twenty-four hours, she dug melting unabated. But she managed to scrape the lower fragment. At dawn, she heard the voice of the stove: - It seems to me that the day has dawned. And the girl replied: - It seems to me too, I seem to hear the horn of my father. - Oh, so you're the daughter of the swineherd! Get out immediately and send me the princess! And tell her that if she does not come, everything will be as I promised. The whole entire kingdom will be destroyed, and it will not remain a single stone standing. The Princess listened to tears, but it was no use to whine. So she said goodbye to his father, took a knife and walked to the iron stove in the depths of the forest. Once there, she began to scratch and cast seemed to melt itself in his hands. And two short hours later, she had already managed to dig a small hole. She looked in the stove and saw a handsome young man in a shiny suit, embroidered with gold and set with precious stones. He really liked it and his heart was hot for him. She kept digging until the hole is large enough that the prince could get out. He said: - You belong to me and I belong to you. You're my girlfriend because you saved me. And he wanted to take her to his kingdom on the spot, but the princess wanted to see his old father. The prince did not oppose it, but asked him not to say more than three words to his father and then join immediately. The princess went home - but she spoke more than three words. And the iron stove disappeared, flew away over glass mountains and sharp swords, but the prince was not inside it was released. The princess bade farewell to her father, took some money for the road and went to find the prince in the forest. But she did not find her. She looked for nine days, and she was exhausted and hungry, because she did not know how to eat. At dusk, afraid of wild animals, she climbed a small tree to spend the night. And around midnight, she saw a faint light in the distance. "I find may help" she said. She came down from the tree and went towards the light. She came to a small cottage, old and stooped, all covered with grass. "Oh, where did I get, poor me?" Sighed the princess. She cast a glance inside, but she saw only frogs, small and large. Then she also saw a beautiful table laden with wine and roast meat, and plates and silver bowls. So she took her courage in both hands and knocked on the door. And the chubby frog croaked in response: Hurry, green frog, So big but so alert, Hop hop! Begone Learn about our house, will host. Then came a frog jumping and opened the door. And when the visiting the crosses, all the frogs kindly welcomed. - What are you doing here? they asked. Where are you from and where are you going? The princess told them that he had arrived; she had not kept his promise and had said more than three words when talking with his father and the cast iron skillet with Prince had disappeared. She also told them she had decided to seek the prince over hill and dale until she found him. And the old chubby frog said: Hurry, green frog, So big but so alert, Hop hop! Go quickly, the large box, well hidden. Bring it to me at full speed, Let not languish princess! The Grenouillette went hopping and brought a large box. Then the frogs gave the princess to eat and drink and led to a sumptuous bed, which seemed to be made of silk and velvet. The princess went to bed, commended himself to God and fell asleep. In the morning she got up very early. The old toad gave her three needles taken in the larger box and emphasized that without them it would not go far, since it would take a large glass mountain, three sharp swords and a great lake. If she succeeded, she would find her beloved. She advised him to take good care of needles and two other objects that she would give it; a plow wheel and three nuts. The princess went with all items offered frogs. When she came to the glass mountain, smooth as a mirror, she began to push the needles at each step behind her and then before it, advancing in doing so until it had passed the other side. Then it chooses a place to hide his hands and tried to remember the good. Soon after, she came to the three sharp swords and then went up on the wheel of the plow to the cross. Finally, she reached a large lake. She crossed the swimming and finally came to a beautiful castle. She went and asked the work saying she was very poor and she needed to work to survive. She knew, in fact, that the prince she was released from the iron stove in the deep forest lived in this castle. They engaged him as assistant cook, for little pay. The young prince had chosen meantime another bride and intended to marry her, because he was convinced that the princess had released was already long dead. In the evening, the princess and washed the dishes, having finished his work in the kitchen, she reached into her pocket to remove the three nuts received the old frog. She broke the first to be able to eat the kernel, but it was his surprise when she saw, instead of the fruit, a beautiful princess dress. When the bride of Prince heard this, she came to the kitchen help and tried to buy him at any cost. In any case, such a dress, she said, was not made for home. The maid said no, she would not sell unless the bride let her spend a night in the Prince's room. In this case, it might have immediately. The bride accepted because the dress was beautiful and she did not beautiful. At night, she told her fiance - This crazy little kitchen definitely wants to sleep tonight in your bedroom. - If you, it does not bother you, I have nothing against, he said. But the bride made her drink a glass of wine in which she had put a sleeping pill. The assistant cook went to the prince's room, but he slept a sleep so deep that she failed to wake him. She spent the night crying and lamenting: - I delivered you from the wild forest and the iron stove. I researched you and to meet you, I climbed a glass mountain, three sharp swords crossed and crossed a huge lake - and now that I'm here, you do not mean the same to me! The valets placed behind the bedroom door heard all night crying and wailing of the girl and the next day they said to their master. In the evening, after washing the kitchen floor, the princess opened the second nut. The dress that was inside was even more beautiful than the last. As soon as the bride of the prince saw her, she wanted to buy it at any price. But the assistant cook refused the money and asked again to be able to spend the night in the Prince's room. But the bride poured again a sleeping pill in the glass of her future husband and the Prince slept and therefore could not hear anything. The girl cried all night lamenting: - I delivered you from the wild forest and the iron stove. I searched for you and find you I climbed a glass mountain, three sharp swords crossed and swum across a huge lake - and now that I'm here, you do not even know! The next day the footman behind the door, heard again the cries of the girl went and told everything to their master. When, on the third night, the princess, having washed up, snapped the last nut, a pure gold dress, and more charming than previous shone inside. As soon as she saw her, the bride wanted to acquire it at any price. But the girl refused again and asked for the third time to spend the night in the bedroom of the prince. This time the prince was careful and secretly poured the drink with the sleeping pill. And when the tears princess began to call: "My beloved, I saved you from the deep forest and cast iron stove ..." The prince jumped out of bed and said: - This is you my real bride, you belong to me and I belong to you. And then, that night, they went in a coach. When they reached the huge lake, they crossed the boat and they crossed the sharp swords riding on the wheel of the cart and go to the other side of the mountain glass they helped the three well hidden needles . Finally, they arrived at the old thatched cottage and when they entered inside, she turned into a sumptuous castle. The frogs turned into princes and princesses and all together they rejoiced when the prince married the princess. They settled at the castle, which was much greater than that which was born the princess, and as the old king was bored alone, they departed seek and took him with them. So the young couple together ruled the two kingdoms and lived happily until the end of their days.
The Rat Town and Country Mouse	4044	112	French	Formerly the city of Invita Rat Rat fields, one very civil way, A reliefs of Ortolans. On a Turkish rug Covered found himself placed. I suggests life What did these two friends. The feast was very honest, Nothing was missing at the feast; But somebody disturbed the party while they were in the process. At the door of the room they heard the noise: The city scoot Rat; His comrade follows. The noise stops, we withdraw: Rats campaign immediately; And the city saying: Let us complete our entire roast. - That's enough, said the country; Tomorrow you will come with me: It's not that I pride myself of all your king of feasts; But nothing can stop me: I eat at leisure. Farewell; fi fun That fear can corrupt.
The Fox and the Stork	4053	60	French	Compere Fox began one day expenses, and held a dinner gossip Stork. The feast was small and without much primer: The gallant for any task, Had a thin gruel; he lived frugally. This brew was served by him on a plate: The stork with a long beak could not catch crumb; And the funny lapped was all in a moment. To avenge this deception, For some time there, the Stork requests. "Willingly, he said, because with my friends I make no ceremony." At the appointed hour, he ran to the house From the Stork her hostess; Loua strong politeness; Found it cooked to dinner: Mostly good appetite; Foxes do not miss the point. He rejoiced at the smell of meat Getting small pieces, and he believed fond. They served to embarrass him, in a long neck vase and narrow mouth. The beak of the stork could be okay; But the muzzle sire was another measure. He had to return empty stomach at home, Ashamed as a fox would have taken a Hen, Shaking tail, and wearing down the ear. Misleading, it is for you that I write: Expect to reciprocate.
The fox and the stork	7936	60	French	Do harm anyone; but if someone offends you, you need to return the favor, as we are committed fable.Un this fox, they say, the first invited a stork to dinner and served it on a dish boiled clear that, despite hungry, she could not taste absolutely. The stork in turn invited the fox and served him a mince in a bottle. She introduced her beak and is satisfied as she did to her guest torture of hunger. As he vainly licked the neck of the bottle, the bird kept him traveler, they say, this language: "You have to suffer with patience what we gave ourselves the example. "
The fox and the cat	716	105	French	It chanced one day that the cat in a wood, met the fox. "It is clever is full of experience, thought the cat in the light, it is a great character in the world, respected because of his wisdom." Also he approached with great amabilité.- Hello, dear Mr. Fox, how are you? Health is good, I hope. And in these times of high prices, how do you cope? The fox, puffed a haughty arrogance, consider the cat from head to toe and from head to foot, wondering for a while if he was going or not give an answer to this insolent animal.- Hey, you, miserable Licking Whisker, kind of funny, kind of grotesquely spotted Harlequin kind of down-and-hungry mouse hunter, what that it takes you? And where do you permit you to come ask me as familiarly from me? Who you think you so unhappy? What do you know? How many arts do you know? What resources - I do not have a single, modestly replied chat.- Really? And what? did renard.- When the dogs start chasing me, said the cat, I can climb a tree and sauver.- me And that's all? dropped the fox with disdain. Know that I am the master of trickery by hundreds and I, above, a whole bag of tricks! You move me to pity, here! Come with me and I'll show you how we defeated chiens.Au midst of this came a hunter who had four dogs with him. The cat quickly jumped on a tree and took refuge at the very top, in the last branches, where he stood hidden in the feuillage.- Open your bag, fox lord Open your bag, this is the time! cried the cat from his arbre.Mais dogs had already taken and held ferme.- Whoa, lord fox! again cried the cat, you are entangled in your hundreds of tricks; but if you had been able to climb like me, you would have remained your life!
The Fox and the Grapes	4089	59	French	Certain Gascon Fox, others say Normand, almost Dying of hunger, saw the top of a trellis apparently Ripe grapes, and covered with a ruddy skin. The gallant would have done willingly a meal; But as there could reach: "They are too green, he says, and good for cads." Did he not better than complain?
The Fox and Grapes.	7836	59	French	Some Fox, starving, coveted grapes hanging from a high trellis. He jumped with all his might, but there could reach. "They are not mature, and I do not want to pick them while they are green," said he, in allant.Ceux despise what is above their reach, should take this example for them.
The frog king or Iron Henry	8	440	French	In ancient times, when he could still be useful to make wishes, there lived a king whose daughters were all beautiful. The youngest was so beautiful that the sun, which, however, as seen, wondered each time he lit his face. Not far from the king's castle, there was a large, dark forest and in the forest under an old lime tree, a fountain. One day it was very hot, the royal child went to the wood, and sat on the edge of the cool spring. And as she was bored, she took her golden ball, threw it into the air and caught it; it was his game favori.Il happened that the ball of gold, instead of returning to her hand, fell to the ground and rolled right into the water. The princess watched her, but the ball disappeared: the well was so deep that we could not see the bottom. The girl began to cry, to cry louder and louder; she was inconsolable. As she moaned and someone shouted, "Why are you crying, princess, so hard a stone was let soften in?" She looked around to see where the voice came from and saw a frog out of the water tended his big ugly head. "Ah, it's you, old romper" she said, "I cry my golden ball that fell in the fountain." - "Shut up and do not cry anymore," said the frog, "I'll help you but what will you give me if I bring you back your toy.?" - "Whatever you like, dear frog," she replied, "my clothes, my pearls and diamonds, and even the golden crown that I wear on my head." - "I want neither your pearls, or your diamonds or your crown But if you agree to love me, if you take me as a companion and comrade games, if I may sit at your table. beside you, eat your plate, drinking from your cup and sleep in your bed, if you promise me this, I plunge to the bottom of the source and you will make your ball. " - "Yes," she said, "I promise you whatever you want provided that you found me my ball." She said: She lives there in the water with his and croaks. How would the companion of a human being? When the frog had obtained her promise, she put her head under the water and sank shortly afterwards reappeared holding the ball in his mouth. She threw it on the grass. Regaining his beautiful toy, the king's daughter was ecstatic. She picked it up and ran. "Wait! Wait!" cried the frog. "Take me! I can not run as fast as you!" But it served him with nothing to push his' Coâ! Coâ! Coâ! ' as hard as she could. The girl was not listening. She hastened to go home and soon was forgotten the poor frog. It remained for him to plunge into the next little fountain, like the little princess was at table, eating his nice plate of gold, with the king and all the people of the Court were heard - plop! splash! splash! splash! - something that climbed the marble staircase. Then knocked on the door and a voice said: "Princess, youngest, open me!" She rose from the table to see who was there. When she opened it, she saw the frog. She quickly shut the door and went back to his place. She was very scared. The king saw that her heart was pounding and said, "What are you afraid, my child Is there a giant outside the door who would come looking for you?" - "Oh no," she replied, "it's not a giant, but a nasty frog." - "What does you that frog?" - "Ah, dear father, yesterday as I was on the edge of the fountain and I was playing with my golden ball, it fell into the water because I was crying loudly, frog me the!. has reported. and as she asked me insistently, I promised her that she would become my wife. But I did not think she would come out of its water. and now she's out there and wants to come with me . " Meanwhile, the second time we knocked on the door and a voice said: "Princess, youngest, Open to me Do not you know that more qu'hierAu edge of the fountain fraîcheTu promised me Daughter of the King? the youngest, Open to me! " The king said, "What you have promised, you must do Go and open." She got up and opened the door. The frog hopped into the room, always on his heels, to her chair. There she stopped and said: "Take me with you!" The princess hesitated. The king ordered him to obey. When the frog was installed on the chair, she asked to get on the table. And when she was there, she said, "Approach your little golden plate, we will eat together." The princess did what we wanted, but it was still bad heart. The frog ate heartily; on the princess, each bite was left through the throat. In the end, the frog said, "I have eaten to satiety, and now I'm tired Lead me in your little room and prepare your silk bed; we go to sleep.." The king's daughter began to cry; she was afraid of the icy touch of the frog and did not dare touch it. And now she was going to sleep in her pretty clean bed! The king became angry and said: "You have no right to despise the one who helped you when you were in grief." The princess grabbed the frog between two fingers, went to his room and put it in a corner. When she was in bed, the frog jumped to the bed and said, "Take me, or I'll tell your father." The princess got angry, grabbed the frog and threw all his strength against the wall: "That way you sleep, ugly frog!" But when the animal fell to the ground, it was not a frog. A prince with beautiful eyes looked full of friendship. This was done according to the will of the father of the princess. He became his beloved companion and husband. He told her that a wicked witch had cast a spell on him and the only princess could liberate. The next day they would leave both for his kingdom. They fell asleep and in the morning when the sun rose, there arrived a carriage drawn by eight white horses. They had white plumes on their heads and their harnesses were gold. At the back stood the servant of the young king. It was the faithful Henry. He had so much grief when he saw his lord turned into a frog that he had bandaged chest three iron for his heart would burst no pain. The car was to take the prince in his kingdom. Faithful Henry had him ride with the princess, and sat back to back, happy to see his master released the wrong sort.Quand they had traveled for some time, the prince heard creaking behind him as if something broke. He turned his head and said, "Henry, is the hitch that breaks its chains?" "Oh no, Lord, this is not the car, but my heart one of ceintures.Car j '! I had so many peineQuand you were in the fountain, Transformed into ugly frog! " Twice again, along the way, they heard creaking and the prince still believed that the car broke. But it was only the circles of iron faithful Henry, happy to see his lord delivered.
wren	1638	221	French	Formerly, each had its own significance and importance. When the front-hit a blacksmith echoed on the metal, he sang: "! I forge, I forge, boom, boom, boom" when the plane creaked a carpenter, he encouraged to work constantly repeating "a squeak by here, a creak here and there, they are all for you!" and when the wheels of a mill turning, they echoed: "God forbid, lapping, clapotas that God keeps us clack, ! clack "When the miller was a trickster, the wheels of the mill running were initially very polite and asked:" who's there, who's there? "and then answered themselves:" This is the miller it is the miller. " And in the end they kept saying: "It flies like a magpie, you will have a half-bag of an eighth." Formerly, the birds also had their own language and everyone understood them, while today their chirping is for us a twittering, a chatter, a shout or a whistle or, in the best case, music without words. One day, the birds decided to elect their king, because they would live without master. A little bird was not however agree, because he lived freely and wanted to die too freely. It was the lapwing. It fluttered and chirped all distraught: - Where do I fly, where do I go? Finally he decided to live apart, sat at the edge of an isolated swamp and never joined the others. The birds wanted to consult before taking their decision and, one morning in May, they left their forests and fields for all to gather. There were eagles, finch, owl and quail, the lark sparrow and, in short all those that existed and it would be tedious to list them all. Also presented the cuckoo and hoopoe, nicknamed the sacristan of the cuckoo, because we always hear a few days before it. To the meeting also arrived, hopping, a small bird, which did not even have a name and mingled with others. Due to a combination of circumstances the moorhen who knew nothing of the planned election, was very surprised by all these people. She began to cackle: "What What?" But reassured the cock immediately shouting: "It's a rally!" Then he explained to his favorite hen this was coming, then he began to boast - They invited the hero! And me too! The General Meeting decided that she would elect king that which fly the highest. A frog hidden in a bush and heard croaked a warning cry "Why cry? What crazy idea" because it thought that such elections could bring only tears and hassle. A crow's nevertheless forced to shut up and croaked that there would be no noise, everything would like clockwork and that the competition would be "very beautiful, very beautiful!" The birds gathered decided they would leave all at the outset that no can shout seeking an apology: "I surely could fly higher still but nightfall prevented me." When the departure was given, all the birds together headed skyward. Clouds of dust went up in the fields, they heard an intense buzzing, flapping wings, soufflements and whistles and, at first glance, one would think that any big black cloud rose into the sky at full speed . Small birds were soon out of breath and took the delay. Then, unable to continue, they descended to the ground. The larger birds held out longer, but none could equal the eagle, who mounted so high, and again and again, and he could almost put out the eyes of the sun. When he saw that the others could not follow him, he said: "! Why climb higher still, since it is clear that the king is me" and he slowly descended to the ground . The birds began to cheer soon: - It is you who will be our king, because none of us could climb as high as you! - Except me, cried the little bird without a name. Indeed, he had hidden before the start of the race between the breast feathers of the eagle and therefore not tired, he flew off and went up so high that he could see the good Lord sitting on his heavenly throne. Having reached this incredible height, he folded his wings, descended to the ground and cried hissed: - I am the king! I am the King! King, that's me! - You, our king? cried the angry birds. You have succeeded thanks to trick and cunning! And on the spot, they made another condition of election: the king would be one that can penetrate deeper into the earth. It was really funny to see the goose beat the grass with his broad chest! And if you saw the rooster trying to dig a small hole in the ground! The most cruel fate, however, was reserved duck who jumped into a ditch and sprained both legs. He managed to get out limping and hardly joined a nearby lake lamenting: - My God, what a debacle, what a sad sight! The tiny bird found until a hole dug by a mouse. He slipped in and heard with his small voice: - I am the king! I am the King! King, that's me! Other birds chirped so even stronger than before: - You, our king? You do not think nevertheless that we will swallow your dubious strategy, kind of wimp! And they decided to imprison him in the hole there and starve. They entrusted the guard at the owl which they recommended that for anything in the world, he should let the rascal out if he wanted to stay alive. Night fell. Birds tired from their long flight began to return home to find there their wives and children, and to lie down. The owl alone remained standing by the hole and motionless, he stared at his huge eyes. However, he too was won by fatigue. "I can still close one eye, he said, since I also monitors with the other. He will watch and will not allow this infamous Wren escape." So he closed one eye and watched intently the hole with the other. The naughty little bird tried to escape and he stuck his head out of the hole, but the owl came quickly and was obliged to return immediately. Shortly after, the owl opened his eyes closed and shut the other, intending to repeat this maneuver all night. But once, closing an eye, he forgot to open another, and scarcely had he closed eyes he fell asleep. The little bird is being very quickly realized, came out of the hole and ran. Since then the owl can not go out in daylight, because the birds would throw themselves on him, would fly him in feathers and would see him in all colors. This is why it only comes out at night, full of resentment, it hunts mice. He hates them because they dig holes horrible. But the little wren prefers not to show too because it does not want to risk his head by letting catch. He is hiding, sneaks into the hedges and sometimes, when it really feels safe, he shouts: - I am the king! I am the King! The king is me In the other birds laugh shouting - Wren, Wren, you hide in the hedges! All the birds were happy not to have to listen to the wren; but it was the lark happiest. This is why it rises towards the sky in the early spring sunshine and Grisolle: What joy, Earth is beautiful, what happiness to live on it.
The white snake	165	673	French	There is now a long time lived a king whose wisdom was known throughout his kingdom. One could not hide him anything, he seemed to catch in the air news about the most secret things. But he had a strange habit: every lunchtime, while the large table was served and there was nobody in the room, his faithful servant brought him some food. But this dish was covered, and the servant himself did not know what it contained; nobody else will know, because the king lifted the lid and began to eat only when alone. For a long time it happened so. But one day the servant, not knowing resist his curiosity, took the dish in her room and carefully closed the door behind him. He lifted the lid and saw a white snake in the dish. It smelled good and he wanted to taste it. No longer, he cut off a piece and brought it to her mouth. But hardly felt it the song on his tongue he heard chirping in the window. He came, listened and realized that it was the sparrows who told what they had seen in the fields and in the forests. Having tasted the snake had given him the ability to understand the language of animaux.Ce day, precisely, the queen lost her most beautiful ring, and suspicion fell on the servant who had the confidence of the king and was allowed to go everywhere. The king summoned the rudoya and threatened to condemn him if he did not unmasked the culprit before the next morning. The young man swore he was innocent but the king would not listen and dismissed. The valet, scared and worried, down into the courtyard where he began to wonder how he could do to get away. There were, on the edge of the stream, ducks were sitting chatting in low voices while smoothing their feathers with their beaks. The valet paused to listen. The ducks were counted where they had waded that morning and what good things they found room and one of them complained: "My stomach heavy because I accidentally swallowed a ring that was under the queen's window. " The valet immediately grabbed, carried it into the kitchen and said to the cook: "Bleeding the duck, it's bad enough fat." - "Okay," replied the cook in the weighing. "He was not lazy and he fed well; it was a long time to expect that the put in the oven." It bled and found, by emptying it, the queen ring. The valet could easily prove his innocence to the king. It found that he had hurt his faithful servant and tried to repair his injustice; So he promised the young man a favor and give it the highest honorary position at court, the valet choisirait.Le servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse and money for the road because he wanted to leave to discover the world. So he set off as soon as he received what he asked. One day he passed by a pond where three fish, which were caught in the reeds were suffocating. It is said that fish are dumb, and yet the servant heard their complaint, saying they did not want to die so miserably. The young man took pity on them; he dismounted from his horse and put the three prisoners in the water. They again began to wriggle with delight, put out the head of the water and shouted: "We will not forget that you have saved us and you turn deserves another." The He rode on and suddenly felt to hear a voice from the sand trampled by her horse. He listened and heard the king ants lament, "Oh, if people wanted to do a little more attention and held their clumsy animals away this stupid horse tramples with his heavy clogs my poor servants!" The young man immediately pulled away and the king of the ants shouted: "We will not forget you and turn deserves another!" The path led him into the forest where he saw a crow and a raven mother father throwing all their little nest. "Go away, scoundrels," they croassèrent, "we come to feed you are already big enough to get you to eat alone!" Small poor, who waved to the ground by flapping its wings, chirped: "! How could we, poor little we are, provide for us as we do not know even fly we'll starve!" The young man immediately came down from his horse, pierced him with his sword and gave the Ravens for young people to have enough to eat. Small approached and, after filled, shouted "! We will not forget you and you turn deserves it a day" The valet was now forced to continue his journey on foot. He walked and walked and after a long walk, he arrived in a city whose streets were densely populated and lively. Suddenly a man came riding and announced that it was seeking a husband for the Princess Royal, but whoever wants to marry should pass a difficult test and if he failed, he would pay with his life. Many contenders were already tried it and all had perished there. But the young man when he had the opportunity to see the princess was so dazzled by her beauty that he forgot all the dangers. He presented himself as a suitor before the roi.On immediately took to the sea and cast in her eyes a gold ring into the waves. Then the king ordered him to return the ring from the bottom of the sea, and added: "If you emerge from the water without the ring, you reject the waves constantly until you perish." All complained and the young man went away. Standing alone on the beach, valet wondered what he was going to do, when suddenly saw three fish to approach him. It was the fish which he had saved my life. The middle wearing fish in its mouth a seashell he laid at the feet of the young man. It took him, opened it and found the gold ring. Happy, he took it to the king, rejoicing in advance of the award. But the king's daughter was very proud and, as soon as she learned that her suitor was not of his rank, she despised him and demanded he receive a new trial. She went down into the garden and, with her own hands, she poured in the grass ten sacks of millet. "You'll have to pick up that millet" She ordered, "that these bags are filled before sunrise! And not one grain must not fail!" The young man sat down in the grass and wondered how he was going to fulfill this new task. Finding no solution, he sat sorrowfully awaiting dawn and death. But as soon as the first rays of sun lit up the garden, he saw before him the ten sacks of millet filled to. They were arranged next to each other and not a grain was missing. The king of the ants came the night with thousands of his servants and grateful ants had gathered all the millet with infinite care and had filled the bags. The princess herself down into the garden, and was amazed that her suitor had fulfilled its task. Do not know yet still control his heart full of pride, she said: "He was able to pass both tests, but I will not be his wife so that he will not bring me an apple from the Tree of Life . " The young man did not know where pushing such a tree, but he decided to walk to where his legs would carry him, without much hope of finding the tree in question. He crossed three kingdoms and came one night in a forest. He sat at the foot of a tree to rest a little when he heard a rustling in the branches above his head and a golden apple fell into his hand. Meanwhile, three crows landed on his knees and said, "We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starvation We heard you were in search of the golden apple and that's why we have. crossed the sea and went to the end of the world where the Tree of Life to bring you this apple. " The young man, joyful heart, took the way back and gave the golden apple to the beautiful princess who could not shirk. They cut the apple of life in half, ate together and, at this moment, the heart of the princess was kindled love for the young man. They loved each other and lived happily to a ripe age.
The Tailor in Heaven	336	800	French	One day it was great weather up there, God wanted to browse the gardens of heaven. He took with him all the saints and all the apostles, leaving the custody of Paradise to St. Peter, with orders not to let any one else during his absence. Peter placed himself at the door and did sentry. Soon someone hits; Peter asks: - Who's there, and what do you want? A small voice answers: - I am a poor but honest tailor who beg you to let the entrer.- Yes really, says Peter, honest as the thief who deserves the gallows, because you have the crooked fingers, and cloth your practice is often stuck. You pénétreras point in the sky! Besides the good God is absent, and forbade me to open before retour.- Pray! Be merciful, says the tailor, I walked so long that my legs are all bruised; it would be impossible to return to me now. If you agree to let me in, I promise to take charge of all the unpleasant works: I will carry the children, I will wash their handkerchiefs, I'll clean the benches on which they have played, and above the market I mend their clothes. Saint Peter let himself touch and opened the tailor; but it was agreed that it would be held motionless behind the door, to avoid being seen by the Lord would return when the promenade. But our man had no sooner entered, he could not contain his curiosity, and began to travel all over the ciel.Il beat out many beautiful seats, among which stood a throne solid gold. It is on this throne that God sits down to to see everything that happens on terre.Le tailor stops first petrified with admiration. He longed to rest a moment, and gold sièége the more trying than any other. In the end, that can hold no more, he crossed degrees and takes the sommet.Or at the moment, even, he sees everything that was down here; and, among other things, he notices an old woman busy washing the edge of a stream, and, believing being seen anybody, stole two précieux.A clothing that view, the tailor became so angry that it took a gold topped stool and threw from the sky over the old rogue! But as soon as he wonders how he can put the stool in his place, and gliding sheepishly down from the throne, he runs his seat behind the door, with the most confit air monde.Quand the Lord came with his escort, he saw not first the tailor; but it was no sooner on his throne, he noticed the absence of tabouret.- Where is the stool? asked he to St. Pierre Pierre.Saint surprised replies that he knows rien.-You let someone enter, takes good Dieu.Et the apostle confesses that he received a poor tailor who stands hidden behind the door. The Lord advanced our man, and asked if he took the stool - I agree, my God, answers it. He adds believer well be justified: - In a fit of anger honest, I launched against an old woman who stole two expensive clothes near a ruisseau.- Men false and violent, says the Lord, that so your justice and you dare complain of divine justice. If I judged you as you judge others, how many times do I would have not hit, unhappy tailor, and how many times I would have launched the sinners of the world all the stools of Paradise! Fortunately for you all, Mercy seat with my throne with Justice. Get out of the sky, unworthy mortal to stay there, and remember that I only belong punishment and pardon.Pierre had to tailor to the living room door of the elect, and like the latter, whose shoes were tattered feet were all swollen with blisters, he took a stick that gave him the apostle, and walked, not without difficulty and without regret, to Purgatory, where souls who still have sins to be expiated, await date of issue.
The life time	1687	173	French	When God had created the world and wanted to measure all creatures the time of their life, the ass came and asked, "Lord, how many times shall I live - Thirty years, replied the Lord, that you should he? ! - Oh Lord, retorted the ass, it's a very long time Think of my tiresome existence carrying heavy loads from morning to night, carrying bags of wheat to the mill for others eat bread. , being encouraged by the blows and kicks! Subtract so part of that time. "God took pity on him and gift him of eighteen years. Comforted, the donkey left and the dog came. "How long will you live, asked God Thirty years is too long for the ass, but thou shalt be satisfait.- Lord replied the dog, is, this your will? so think like I need to run, my feet would bear the not as long. and when I will have more voice to bark or teeth to bite, that to me will remain other than to drag me from one corner to another and growl? "God saw that it was right and took him twelve years. The monkey comes next. "You probably want to live well thirty years, said the Lord, you do not need to work like the donkey and the dog, and you're always in a good humeur.- Oh Lord replied it, it seems so be it, but the truth is quite different. When mashed millet rains from heaven, I have no spoon. always me do fun tricks and making faces so that people laugh and if they give me an apple and I bite, it is rotten. sadness lurks so often behind mirth! I do not endure for thirty years. "God made it through ten years. . Human beings finally arrived, gay, fresh and healthy, he asked God to count his time "You shall live thirty years, said the Lord, is it enough? - What short period cried humans! . when I built my house and the fire will burn in my hearth, when I have planted trees that blossom and bear fruit and that I will think of rejoicing of my life, would I die? O Allah prolongs my time .- I give you the eighteen years of the donkey, said God.- It is not enough, said the humain.- you will also be the twelve years of DOG no assez.- Well, then God says, I still give you the eighteen years of the monkey, but you will have no more. "the man went away, but he was not satisfied. Thus the human being lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years, they pass quickly; it is healthy, gay, he works with pleasure and the existence glad. Then come the eighteen years of the donkey, during which he is charged with a burden after another: he must carry the wheat that feeds others, the blows and kicks are the reward for his loyal service . Then come the twelve years of the dog, he then dragging from one corner to another, grumbles and has no teeth to bite. And when those years have passed, the ten years the monkey come to conclusion. So the human being no longer has a clear mind, it is curious things and the kids make fun of him.
The old Sultan	459	101	French	A peasant had a faithful dog called Sultan. Now the poor Sultan had become so old that he had lost all his teeth, so that it was impossible to bite. It happened one day as they sat outside their door, the farmer told his wife: - Tomorrow a gun rid me of Sultan because the poor beast is no longer able to travel to the smallest service. the farmer took pity on the animal unhappy - it seems to me that after we have been useful for so many years and have always resulted in good faithful dog, he has earned for his old age to find with us the bread of invalid. - I do not understand you, 'said the peasant, and you calculate badly: do you know so that he has no teeth in its mouth, and that, therefore, it has ceased to be for thieves an object of fear? It is time for us to discard it. It seems to me that if we made good services, he, however, was always well fed. Based poor animal quitte.Le, warming himself in the sun not far away, heard this conversation that touched him so closely, and I leave you to imagine if he was frightened. The next day was to be his last day! He was a devoted friend, his lordship wolf, which he hastened to, the following night, telling the sad fate which he was threatened. - Listen, friend, said the wolf, do not despair as well; I promise to get you out of trouble. I have an excellent idea. Tomorrow morning the first hour, your master and his wife will go back their hay; as they have no one at home, they will take with them their little boy. I noticed that every time they go to the field, they place the child in the shade behind a hedge. Here's what you have to do. You lie in the grass with the small, like to watch over him. When they are busy with their hay, I get out of the wood and I will come stealthily steal the child; then you élanceras you with all your speed after me, as if to tear me my prey; and, before you have run too long for a dog to your age, I will let my booty that you will bring to the scared parents. They will see in you the savior of their child, and recognition plead their harmful way; From that moment, however, you will enter in favor, and now you do not miss more than anything. The invention pleased the dog, and everything went according to what was agreed. We may judge cries of terror that drove the poor father when he saw the wolf running away with her little boy in the mouth! we also judge his joy when the faithful Sultan told him his son! He stroked her back bare, he kissed her forehead mangy, and in the outpouring of gratitude, exclaimed: - Woe to him who would advise never to snatch the smallest haired my good Sultan! I mean that as long as he lives, he is home Bread invalid, which he so bravely won! Then, turning to his wife - Gretel, he said, the course quickly at home, and preparing for this faithful animal excellent mash; since it has no teeth, it must be spared the crusts; have care to remove the bed my pillow; I mean that in the future my good Sultan have no other berth. With such a system, it is not surprising that Sultan became the moral chiens.La dean of this tale is that even a wolf can sometimes give useful advice. I do not yet committed all dogs go to ask the wolf counsel, especially if they have no teeth.
Buffalo Leather Boots	1886	952	French	A soldier who is afraid of nothing must also not worry about anything. Such was the soldier of this story, which had just been demobilized; as he knew nothing and learned nothing which might serve him earn his bread, he went simply and began to beg. He owned an old cloth coat against the elements, and he was also shod in high leather boots of buffalo, he could keep. One day he went, cutting through fields without caring the least paths or roads, intersections and bridges, and it ends up being in a large forest without knowing where he was . In seeking to identify, he saw, sitting on a tree stump, someone well dressed who wore the green costume of hunters. The soldier came and shook hands, then sat familiarly in the grass next to him, the legs allongées.- I see, he said to the hunter, you wear thin boots famously waxed; but if you were always up hill and down dale like me, they would not stand a long time, it is I who say to you! Just look at mine: it is the buffalo and it holds up, even if they serve long! After a moment, the soldier gave debout.- I'm too hungry to stay there longer, he said. But you, old Bellesbottes, what is your direction - I do not really know, 'replied the hunter, I lost my way in the forêt.- You're in the same situation as me, then,' said the soldier. That like attracts like, as they say. We will not leave, but look for the right way together! The hunter smiled slightly and they traveled to retain until nightfall. We will not come out of the forest! exclaimed the soldier. But I see there a light, one will find enough to eat, no doubt. Let's go! They arrived at a solid stone house and knocked on the door. An old woman came ouvrir.- We are seeking a camp for the night and something to put us under the tooth, said the soldier; my stomach is as empty as an old tambour.- Do not stay there! they advised the old woman. It is a house of thieves, a den of bandits, and you have better to do, is to go away before they return. If you are here, you are lost! - Oh! things are not so terrible as that, replied the soldier. For two days I did not eat anything, not one bit. Perish here or go starving in the forest, it changes nothing for me. I prefer to go! The hunter did not follow him, but the soldier grabbed him by the sleeve and pulled him saying, "Come on, brother, we're not dead yet either!" Compassionate, the old woman told them .- "Go hide behind the stove, I will make you pass the remains, if any, when they are asleep." they had barely fit in their corner when the bandits, twelve in number, made broke into the house and ran to the table demanding to body and cries supper. The table was already set and the old brought them a huge roast, the bandits feasted. But when the smell of delicious food tickled the nostrils of the soldier, there could no longer hold. - I go! he said to the hunter. I set down with them and I eat! Can not attendre.- You gonna get us killed! said the scout, holding him by the bras.Mais the soldier had deliberately coughing loudly and bandits, hearing let go of knives and forks to rush behind the stove, where they found them both. - Ha ha! my fine gentlemen, we hide in the corners? and what are you doing here? you were sent to spy? It's good, you'll soon know how flat is in a good bare branch - Hey there! a little ways, what the hell! exclaimed the soldier. I'm starving, so give me first to eat! After, you will do what you please. The bandits were amazed and chief spoke - At least you, you're not afraid of anything! All right, we'll feed you and you will die first après.- We'll see, 'said the soldier recklessly, while al-lant and sat down to work boldly of the knife into the roast. Come and eat, old Bellesbottes! he threw his companion. You have to be as hungry as me. The roast is famous, I assure you! Even at home, you do not eat the best! But the hunter stayed away and refused to eat, and the soldier went there with a good appetite, watched with amazement by the bandits who called themselves "There is no lack of nerve, that one!" - This is nicely Well! said the soldier when he had emptied his plate. Now, it would also a good drink, and good bottle is overdue! The leader felt pretty good mood to do it again this fun and he called to the old woman: "Monte us a bottle of the winery But the good, eh, you understand?" It was the soldier he -even who uncorked the bottle, making fart cap resounding way, then he passed, bottle in hand, near the hunter, which he whispered. "Take care, old boy, you'll now see beautiful Look carefully: I will raise my glass to the health of the whole gang sacred!" Whereupon he turned, raised his glass above his head and declaimed - "to your good health to all but mouth wide open and his right arm raised!" and he took a solid gulp. He had barely said these words that the bandits all remained frozen like statues, mouth open and right arm drawn up. I'm sure you have many more tricks in your bag, said the hunter saw that, but that's fine. Now come, let us in! - Whoa, my older brother, it would be premature retirement! replied the soldier. The enemy is defeated, we still need to pick our booty. You see, they are all frozen solid, and amazement held their mouths open; but they can not move without my permission. So come, eat and drink quietly, since the table is served. The old woman had to climb them another bottle from the cellar, and the soldier agreed to leave the table after eating at least three days. Dawn was already announced. That, he says, it is time to break camp; but for failing to run out in steps and risers, we're going to be told by the old the shorter path to go to the city. Once there, the soldier went to find his former comrades and told them: - I discovered there, in the forest, a terrier-gi bier bracket. You come with me, we picked the house at! Then he turned to his friend and said the hunter - You come also with nous.- you must lanes flapping, our birds, when the facts have paws! After placing his men around the bandits, the soldier took the bottle, drank a good shot, then raised his glass and said joyeu-versa. "To your good health to all!" Instantly, the bandits regained the use of their members and could move, but the soldiers were quick to throw them to the ground and tie their hands and feet with good strings. Then the soldier ordered them to throw them all like bags in a cart and said, "And now, straight to jail!" Before they left, however, the hunter took a male escort to share and he made another re-ommendation particulière.- My old Bellesbottes, said the soldier, we could happily take the enemy by surprise and although we feed on his back. Now it remains to us to rest on the rear and follow the train while quietly. Approaching the town, the soldier saw that it was crowded to the doors and everyone was pushing for joy waving green branches; Then he saw that the whole guard, in full uniform and in working order, advanced to their rencontre.- What does it mean? if he wondered, turning to the chasseur.- So you do not know the king, long absent from his kingdom, there is back today? he replied. And they all came to the accueillir.- But the king, where is he? I do not see it, 'said the soldier. - Here, the hunter replied. I am the king and I did announce my return. He then opened his green hunter jacket that everyone could see her royal apparel, she hid. For once, the soldier jumped, fell to his knees and begged him to forgive him for having behaved as he did, in his ignorance, treating it as an equal, and in all these affublant disrespectful nicknames. The king held out his hand and said: - You're a brave soldier and you saved my life. Never again you will not be in misery, I'll take care. And if it takes you sometimes want to enjoy a slice of roast as enjoyable as the lair of the bandits, you will have just to come to the palace kitchens. But before raising your glass to the health of anyone, it will still need you to come ask me for permission first!
The two companions on tour	1018	613	French	Mountains do not meet, but men meet, and often the good with the bad. A shoemaker and a tailor found themselves on the same road by making their tour of the country. The tailor was always a nice gay man and a good mood. He saw coming on his side the shoemaker, and, recognizing his trade to the package he was carrying, he mita sing a little song mocking Perce a subtle point; Tire strong tone wire, Jinx it well in its length, your Hunting vigueur.Mais nails with the shoemaker, who did not understand the joke, took a look as if he had drunk vinegar; one would have thought he would jump at the throat of the tailor. Fortunately the little man said, laughing and showing him his flask: "Come on, it was to laugh, a drink and swallow your bile." The shoemaker drank a great feature, and the air of his face seemed to come back little beautiful. He handed the bottle to the tailor, saying: "I made honor For this thirst and the thirst to come Would you we were traveling together Willingly, said the tailor, provided we go..? in some big city where the book is missing pas.- it is also my intention, said the shoemaker in small places there is nothing to do; people go barefoot "And they drive. together, walk as both roi.Tous the dogs had more time to lose that money to spend. In every city they entered, they visited the masters of their trades; and as the little tailor was nice and cheerful, with nice pink cheeks, happy we gave her the book; often under the door, the boss's daughter gave him a kiss take over the market. When he found himself with his companion, her purse was still the best-stocked. Then the cobbler always grumpy, still stretched its mine muttering: "There is the chance for rogues." But the tailor was only laugh, and he shared everything he had with his comrade. As soon as he felt two ring in his pocket, he would serve the best, and gestures of joy blew the glasses on the table; it was in him lightly won lightly dépensé.Après having traveled for some time, they came to a great forest through which passed the road to the capital of the kingdom. We had to choose between two paths, one offering a length of seven days, the other two days of walking; but they knew neither one nor the other what was the shortest. They sat under an oak and took counsel on the course to take and the amount of bread it was appropriate to take. The shoemaker said, "We must always push the precaution as far as possible; I will take bread for seven jours.- What the tailor said, dragging on his back bread for seven days as a workhorse A grace! God, I do not bother me the money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, but in hot weather bread dries out and moldy My clothes do not go below the ankle. I do not take such precautions. and besides, why do we not would fall on the right path? Two days of bread, that's enough. "Each of them had its allowance, and they set off the small bonheur.Tout was quiet in the forest as in a church. We heard neither the wind nor the murmur of streams, or the birds singing, and the thickness of the foliage kept the sun. The shoemaker said not a word, bent under his load of bread, which was the perspiration on his black and dark face. The tailor, however, was of the good humor; he ran in all directions, whistling, singing a few songs, and he said. "God in his heaven, must be happy to see me so gay" The first two days passed thus; but the third, as they did not see the end of their road, the tailor, who had consumed all his bread, felt his spirits vanish; however, without losing heart, he resumed his good luck and God's grace. At night he slept under a tree with hunger, and he got up the next day she was not appeased. It was the same on the fourth day, and while the shoemaker dined, sitting on a fallen tree trunk, the poor tailor had no alternative but to look to. He asked her a pittance; but the other replied with a sneer: "You who was always so gay, it's good that you know a little misfortune Birds that sing too early in the evening the hawk crunches.." In short he was pitiless. the morning of the fifth day, the poor tailor did not have the strength to rise. Just if in exhaustion, he could utter a word he had pale cheeks and red eyes. The shoemaker said, "You will have a piece of bread, but only if I'll die you eye droit.Le unhappy, forced to accept this terrible market to preserve his life, wept in both eyes for the last time, and offered to his executioner, which pierced his right eye with a knife. the tailor then remembered what his mother used to say in her childhood, when she whipped for having caught stealing some tidbit: "you have to eat as long as we can, but also to suffer what we can not prevent. "When he had eaten the bread that cost him so dear, he got to his legs and consoled his misfortune still thinking there would enough with one eye. But on the sixth day hunger returned, and her heart fainted quite He fell in the evening at the foot of a tree, and the next morning, weakness prevented him from getting up he felt death coming shoemaker said,... "I want to have you and pity still give you a piece of bread; but for this I'll die you eye you have left. "The poor little man then thought of lightness that was because of all this, and he asked God for forgiveness and said:" Do what you will, I shall suffer it takes. But remember that if God does not always punished on the hour, however, it will come a time when you will be paid the harm you do to me without my having deserved. In my happy days, I shared with you what I had. In my profession eyes are needed. When I shall have more and more that I can sew, it will be necessary that I ask alms. At least when I'm blind, do not leave me here alone, because I would die of hunger. "The shoemaker, who had driven God out of his heart, took his knife and put out his left eye. Then he gave him a piece of bread, and handed him the end of a stick, he brought him back sleeping lui.Au the sun, they reached the edge of the forest, and in front of a gibbet. the shoemaker led her blind companion to the foot of the gallows, and, abandoning there went his own way. the unfortunate slept overwhelmed with fatigue, pain and hunger, and spent the night in deep sleep. at daybreak he awoke not knowing where he was. There were two sinners hanged on the gallows, with crows on . the first hung their heads began to say: "Brother, do you sleep - I am awake, replied the other.- Do you know, 'said the first, the dew that fell on the gallows that night we would make? the blind to see that in baigneraient eyes? If they knew more than recover his sight, he thinks he lost for ever. "The tailor, hearing this, took his handkerchief and rubbed it on the grass until it was wet with dew, and licked empty cavities of his eyes. Immediately that the hanging had predicted came true, and orbits filled with two sharp eyes and clairvoyants. the tailor was soon to see the sun rise behind the mountains. on the plain before him stood the great capital with its magnificent gates and hundred spiers topped with crosses gleaming. he could now count the leaves of trees, follow the flight of birds and dancing flies he pulled a needle from his pocket and tried to slip;. seeing that succeeded perfectly, his heart jumped for joy there. fell on his knees to thank God for his mercy and do his morning prayer, not to mention those poor sinners hanged on the gallows and tossed by the wind like bell swing. her sorrows were away from him. He took his pack on his back e t off again singing and sifflant.Le be first he met was a dark bay colt grazing free in a meadow. He grabbed the mane, and he went up top to get to the city; but the colt begged him to let the "I'm too young, he said, you have nice being a little light as a feather suit, you would break my back; let me run up . that I am stronger A time will come perhaps when I can you in récompenser.- Go then, replied the tailor; as well I see you're a little jumper "And he gave her. a bit of a whip on his back; the colt began to kick joy and rush through fields, jumping over hedges and fossés.Cependant the tailor had not eaten since yesterday. "My eyes, he said, have found much sun, but my stomach did not find any bread. The first thing just about edible I meet will spend." At the same time he saw a stork s' seriously advanced in the meadow. "Stop him he cried, grasping a paw; I do not know if you are good to eat, but hunger leaves me no choice; I will cut off your head and make you rôtir.- Garde thee well, said the stork. I am a sacred bird useful to men, and no one ever hurt me Leave me life, I'll scratch yours it may be another fois.- well, then, said . the tailor, save thyself, gossip with long feet "stork took flight and slowly rose into the air in dangling his legs." what is all this going to be he said,? I increases hunger and my stomach hollow this time, the first being that comes to hand to me is lost. "at once he saw two little ducks were swimming on a pond. "They really come about, he thought; and typing a, he would wring his neck. But an old duck which was hidden in the reeds, ran to him with open beak, and begged with tears to spare her young. "Think, she told him, the pain of your mother, if you were given the blow of death.- Be quiet, said the good little man, I will not touch it." And he put on the water that the duck had pris.En turning, he saw a large tree hollow half, around which were flying wild bees. "here I am rewarded for my good deed, he told himself, I'm going to enjoy honey." but the queen bee, coming out of the tree, told him that if he touched her people and to her nest, it would feel instantly pierced by a thousand stings; if, instead, he left them alone, the bees could to accommodate him more tard.Le tailor lives even though there was nothing to do on this side there. "Three dishes empty and nothing in the fourth, he thought, this is a sad dinner." He crawled, exhausted from hunger to the town; But as he entered at the stroke of noon, the food was ready in hostels, and he had only to sit at the table. When he finished, he traveled the city in search of work, and he soon found in good conditions. As he knew his job thoroughly, he was soon to become known, and everyone wanted to have his new coat of how the little tailor. His fame increased daily. Finally, the king appointed him tailor the cour.Mais see how we find ourselves in the world. The same day his former comrade the shoemaker was appointed shoemaker of the court. When he saw the tailor with two good eyes, his conscience was troubled. "Before he seeks revenge on me, he thought, I must it tends a trap." But often sets traps to others to do it yourself. In the evening, after work, he went secretly to the king and said, "Sire, the tailor is a proud man who boasted of finding the golden crown that you have lost for so longtemps.- J ' 'd be very glad, said the king, and the next day he summoned the tailor before him, and ordered him to bring the crown, or to leave the city forever. " Oh! thought the tailor, there are the rogues who promise they can not keep. Since this king stubbornness to require of me more than a man can do, I can not wait until tomorrow and I will decamp from aujourd'hui.Il made his pack; but coming out of the gates, he had the grief turn your back on this city where everything had succeeded. He walked past the pond where he had made friends with the ducks; the old duck that he had left his small was standing on the shore and smoothed its feathers with its beak. She recognized him immediately and asked him where did this air of sadness. "You do not'll be surprised when you know what happened to me," replied the tailor; and he told him his case "Is this say cane;.? we can help you The crown fell just at the bottom of this pond;. in a moment we will have reported on the edge. Stretch out your handkerchief to receive it. "she plunged into the water with his twelve children, and, after five minutes she was back and swam in the middle of the crown that she supported with her wings, while young , arranged all around, helping to wear with their beaks. They arrived at the edge and laid the crown on the handkerchief. You would not believe how beautiful it was: it sparkled in the sun like a million carbuncles. The tailor wrapped it in a handkerchief and carried it to the king, who, in his joy, passed him a gold chain around cou.Quand the shoemaker saw that the attempt had failed, he thought of another expedient, and went to the king: "Sire, the tailor fell in pride; he boasts to reproducing wax while your palate with everything in it, inside and out, the furniture and the rest." the king come the tailor and ordered him to copy in wax all his palace with everything in it, inside and out, the furniture and the rest, warning him that if he did not come in at the end and s he just forgot a nail on a wall, it would send end his days in a dungeon souterrain.Le poor tailor is said, "This is going from bad to worse; they ask me the impossible." he made his bundle and left the ville.Quand he arrived at the foot of the hollow tree, he sat looking down. Bees flying around it; the queen asked, seeing him so low head, he did not torticollis "No, he says, it is not that evil takes me." and he told him that the King had request.Some bees began to buzz them, and the Queen said, "go home and come back tomorrow at the same time with a large towel; everything will be fine." He went home, but the bees flew the palace and entered through the open windows to browse around and look at everything in great detail; and, hastening to return to their hive, they built a palace in wax with such rapidity that we could have seen rising visibly. By the evening all was ready, and when the cutter arrived the next day, he found the magnificent building that awaited him, white as snow and exhaling a sweet smell of honey, without wanting a nail on the wall or in a tile roof. The tailor wrapped it carefully in the towel and carried him to the king, who could not return admiration. And he set the masterpiece in the great hall of the palace, and the tailor rewarded by the gift of a large stone house of size.The shoemaker does not consider himself beaten. He went a third time to the king and said, "Sire, he returned to the tailor's ears that had always tried in vain to dig a well in the courtyard of your palace, and boasted to them squirt a jet of water up like a man and crystal clear "the king summoned the tailor and said. If tomorrow there is not a fountain in the courtyard as didst touted in the same court you my executioner shorten the head. "The unfortunate tailor won without delay the gates of the city, as this time it was her life, her tears streaming down the cheeks. He walked sadly, when he was accosted by the foal to which he had granted freedom, and who had become a beautiful dark bay horse. "This is the moment arrived, he said, where I can show you my gratitude. I know your difficulties, but I will draw you in; gets on me only; now I wear two like you without disturbing me. "The tailor took courage, he jumped on the horse, which galloped immediately to the city and entered the palace courtyard He made three turns at a gallop, lightning fast, and in the third he stopped short1 Au.. same moment they heard a terrible cracking; a divot was cut like a bomb and jumped over the palace, and sends a jet of high water like a man and horse pure crystal; sun rays s' were playing in sparkling. King. seeing it, he was overwhelmed with astonishment ,; he took the tailor in his arms and kissed her before all the rest world.But good little man was not of long duration . the King had several girls more beautiful than the others, but no son shoemaker the wicked went a fourth time with the king, and said: "Sire, the tailor is not folded his pride. now he boasts that, when he wants, you will bring a son from the air. "The king summoned the tailor, and told him that if he gave him a son in a week, he would give him his eldest daughter in marriage." The reward is honest, thought the tailor, one can be satisfied; but cherries are too high; if I go up to the tree, the branch will break and I fall to the ground. "He went home and sat cross-legged on his workbench, to think about what he should do." It's impossible cried at last, I have to go away; Here there is no rest for me. "He made his bundle and hurried out of around the city.In through the meadow, he saw his old friend the stork, who was walking far and wide as a philosopher, and occasionally stopped to consider to close some frog she ended up swallowing. She came up to him to wish him good morning. "well! She said, there you are backpacking, you then quits the city? "The tailor told the embarrassment the king had set him, and complained bitterly of his fate." Do not hurt you for so little, she replied. I will bring you business. I brought enough small children2; I may well, for once, make a little prince. Go back to your shop and keep quiet. Today in nine days, be at the king's palace; I myself find my side.The little tailor went home, and on the appointed day he went to the palace. A moment later the stork has arrived at wing and knocked on the window. The tailor opened it, and gossip with long legs entered cautiously and seriously advanced on the marble pavement. She held in her beak child beautiful as an angel, who held out her little hands to the Queen. She put him on the knees, and the queen began to kiss and press it against his heart, it was so joyeuse.La stork before leaving, took his bag was on his shoulder and presented to the Queen. It was topped cones filled with candy of all colors, which were distributed to the little princesses. The eldest was not because it was too big, but it was given to the husband nice little tailor. "It is, he said, as if I had won the jackpot in the lottery. My mother was right to say that with faith in God and happiness are always successful." The shoemaker had to make shoes that were used to tailor to his prom wedding and then drove him to the city of defending him will never return. Taking the path of the forest, he returned to the gallows, and, overwhelmed by the heat, anger and jealousy, he lay at the foot of the gallows. But as he went to sleep, the two crows perched on the heads hanged threw themselves on him with loud cries and put out his eyes. He ran like a madman through the forest, and there must be starved, because since that time, no one has seen and has heard from him.
The twelve brothers	85	451	French	There was once a king and queen who lived together in harmony. They had twelve children, but they were twelve boys. One day the king said to the queen: - If the thirteenth child you promise me is a girl, the twelve boys shall die, that the inheritance of their sister is considerable, and the whole kingdom belongs to him. So he built twelve coffins which are filled with chips; then the king had them transported in a closed cabinet, which he gave the key to the queen, telling her not to tell anyone. However, the mother was suffering from violent grief. The youngest of her son, whom she had named Benjamin, saw his sentence and said: - My good mother, why are you so sad? - Dear child, said she, I must not tell you. But the child will not let him rest, she would have led to the mysterious room, and she had showed him the twelve coffins ready filled with shavings - My beloved Benjamin, said she, your father has had these coffins for your eleven brothers and for you, because if I put in a little girl, you all must die and be buried there. And as she wept, children tried to comfort her, saying: - Do not cry, we will save ourselves to death. The queen said: - Go into the forest with your eleven brothers, and one of you is being held constantly sentry on the top of the highest tree, looking towards the castle tower. I will take care of them a white flag if I put to a boy, and then you can return safely; if instead I become mother of a daughter, I will hoist a red flag as blood; then make haste to flee far away, and that God protects you. When the queen had given his blessing to his son, they went into the forest. Each had its tower watchman do for the safety of others by climbing to the top of the highest oak and taking from there, his eyes fixed on the tower. When eleven days had passed, and that was to ensure Benjamin, he saw that a flag was being raised, but it was a red flag as blood, which proved they were all to die. When he announced the news to his brothers, they were indignant and said, - Will he says that we all to suffer death for a girl? We swear to take revenge! Wherever we find a girl, her red blood shall flow. That said, they went together to the bottom of the forest, and the thickest point, they found a small miserable hut, deserted. And they said - This is where we want to secure our home and you, Benjamin, as you are the youngest and weakest, you will remain at home and you chargeras household us, we will go hunting to we get food. So they went into the forest and killed hares, wild deer, birds and pigeons; then they took to Benjamin who had to prepare and cook to appease their hunger. Thus they lived for ten years in the forest; and this time they seemed short. But the girl's mother had given birth had become great beauty was remarkable, and she had on the forehead a gold star. One day it was the great washing, she noticed among the clothes twelve men's shirts, and asked his mother: - Who owns these twelve shirts, because they are far too small for father? The queen replied with a sigh: - Dear child, they belong to your twelve brothers. The girl continued: - Where are my twelve brothers? I never heard of it. The queen replied: - Where are they! God knows they are wandering about the world. So, taking with it the girl, she opened the mysterious room, and showed him the twelve coffins with the shavings, and their funeral cushions. - These coffins, said she, were destined for your brothers; but they escaped from the house before you were born. And she told him everything that had happened. Then the girl said: - Do not cry, dear mother, I want to go looking for my brothers. So she took the twelve shirts, and just walked in the middle of the forest. She walked all day and arrived in the evening to the poor hut. She entered and found a young boy, who said: - Where are you from, and where are you going? To which she replied: - I am the daughter of a king, I am seeking my twelve brothers, and I want to go until I find them. And she showed him the twelve shirts which belonged to them. Benjamin lives well while the girl was his sister; he said - I'm Benjamin, the youngest of thy brethren. And she began to weep for joy, and Benjamin also; and they embraced with great tenderness. Benjamin began to suddenly say: - Dear sister, I must warn you that we have sworn to kill all the girls that we would meet. She replied: - I will willingly die, if my death can make my brothers what they have lost. - No, 'said Benjamin, you do not have to die; Place yourself behind the tank until the arrival of eleven brothers, and I will soon come to agree with me. She stood behind the tank; and when it was night the others came from hunting, and their dinner was ready ... And as they were eating, they asked: - What is it again? Benjamin replied: - Do not you know anything? - No, they resumed. Benjamin added: - You went into the forest, I remained at home, and yet I know more than you do. - Tell us then, they cried. He answered - promise me first that the first maiden who meets us shall not die. - We promise, they cried all, tell us so. Then said he: - Our sister is there. And he pushed the bowl, and the king's daughter stepped into his royal robes, and the golden star on her forehead, and she shone with both beauty, finesse and grace. Then they all rejoiced, and embraced. From that moment, she stayed home with Benjamin and helped him in his work. The eleven went into the forest and caught game, and deer, birds and pigeons, and brought to the house the products of their hunting, Benjamin and sister preparing for the meal. She picked up the wood that was used to cook the provisions, sought the plants that were to hold their place of vegetables and placed on the fire, so dinner was always ready when the eleven brothers came home. It also kept order in the little hut covered coquettishly bed with white sheets, so the brothers lived with her perfect union. One day, Benjamin and his sister prepared a very nice dinner, and when they were all together, they sat down to table, ate and drank, and were all very happy. There were around the cabin a small garden, where twelve lilies were. The girl, wanting to make a pleasant surprise to his brothers, plucked the twelve flowers to the their offer. But hardly had she picked the twelve flowers the twelve brothers were changed into twelve ravens flew over the forest; and the house and garden vanished at the same time. The poor girl was therefore now all alone in the wild forest, and as she looked around her with dread, she saw a few steps an old woman said: - What have you done, my child? Why not to have left the twelve white flowers? They were thy brothers, who are now transformed into ravens forever. The girl said, crying: - Does there exists not a means to deliver them? - Yes, replied the old woman, but there is worldwide one, and it is so difficult that it can not serve you; because you should not say a single word or smile once during seven years; and if you utter a word, missing only one hour in the seven years, and the word that you have spoken will kill your brothers. Then the maiden in her heart: "I want to deliver my brothers all strength" Then she set off seeking a high rock, and when she had found, she went up, and began to spin, with well careful not to talk and laugh not the point. It happened that the king was hunting in the forest; This king had a large greyhound, received running to the foot of the rock at the top of which the girl was sitting, began to jump round about and barking greatly by drawing up at her. The King came by and saw the beautiful princess with the golden star on her forehead, and was so delighted with her beauty that he asked her if she would not become his wife. She did not reply, but made a little sign with the head. Then the king went himself on the rock, carried her down, placed her on his horse, and so returned to his palace. There were celebrated the nuptials with so much pomp than joy, though the young mute should remain engaged and unsmiling. When they had lived happily together for a couple of years, the king's mother, who was a wicked woman, began to slander the young queen, and say to the king: - It is a miserable beggar that you brought at the Palace; who knows what impious tricks she against you! If it is really dumb she could laugh at least once; he who does not laugh have bad conscience. The king would not first credence to these insinuations, but her mother repeated them so often, adding evil inventions that eventually persuaded, and he condemned his wife to death penalty . So we lit in the courtyard a huge bonfire, where the unfortunate were to be burnt alive; the king stood at the window, eyes in tears because he had not stopped loving her. And as it was already linked strongly against a pillar, and the red tongues of fire licking at his clothes, he found himself in that same moment of the seven years of trial; suddenly there was in the air a beating of wings, and twelve ravens, who ran their rapid flight that side, came down around the young woman. Hardly had they touched the earth they were her twelve brothers, who had him as their deliverance. They dispelled the smoldering embers, extinguished the flames, untied the links garrottaient their sister, and covered it with kisses. Now she dared to speak, she told the king why she had been silent for so long, and why he had never seen her smile. The king was pleased to find innocent, and now they lived together happy and united until death.
The ducats fell from heaven	1461	779	French	There was once a girl whose father and mother were dead. She was so poor that she had neither room nor bed to lie; she had only the clothes she had on the body, and a small piece of bread a charitable soul had given her; but it was good and pious. As she was abandoned by everyone, she set out to guard the good Dieu.Sur her way, she met a poor man who said, "Alas I'm so very hungry Give me some! to eat." She handed him her entire piece of bread while saying: "God will come and help!" and kept walking. Later, she met a crying child, saying, "I'm cold in the head, give me something to cover me." She took off her cap and gave it to him. Farther she saw one that was frozen for lack of camisole and she gave him hers; Finally, a last asked her skirt, she gave him too. The night came, she came to a wood where another child asked him a shirt. The pious girl thought: "It is pitch dark, no one will see me, I can give my good shirt," and she gave encore.Ainsi she no longer had anything. But at the same time the stars of the sky began to fall, and the ground they changed into beautiful shining ducats and, although she had taken off his shirt, she had a brand new, the finest linen. She picked up the ducats and was rich for life.
The fairies	1993	480	French	There was once a widow who had two daughters; the eldest resembled her so strong and mood and face, that which saw saw the mother. They were both so disagreeable and so proud that we could not live with them. The youngest, who was the very picture of her father for sweetness and honesty, it was with the most beautiful girls ever seen. As people naturally love their own likeness, this mother doted on her eldest daughter, and at the same time had a great aversion for the younger. She made her eat in the kitchen and work cesse.Il had among other things that the poor child should go twice a day to draw water in a large half-mile of the house, and she rapportât a pitcherful . One day she was at this fountain, there came to her a poor woman who prayed to give him dà-boire.- Yes, good mother, said this pretty soon fille.Et rinsing her pitcher, she drew the water the most beautiful part of the fountain and presented it to him, holding up the pitcher that she might drink more aisément.La good woman having drunk, said: - You are so beautiful, so good and so honest, I can not help but make you a gift (because it was a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor woman of the village, to see how far would the honesty of this girl). I give you for gift, 'said the fairy, that every word you speak, you will come out of the mouth or a flower or a stone précieuse.Lorsque this beautiful girl arrived at home, her mother scolded her for staying so long at the fontaine.- I beg your pardon, my mother said that poor girl, for having delayed so longtemps.Et, saying these words, he went out of her mouth two roses, two pearls, and two large diamants.- What do -I there? said his mother very surprised; I Kings it comes out of his mouth pearls and diamonds! Where does this girl? (This was the first time she called his daughter). The poor child naively told him everything that had happened to him, not without throwing endless diamants.- Really, the mother said, I've got to send my daughter. Here, Fanchon, see what comes out of the mouth of your sister when she speaks; seriez- do not you glad to have the same gift? Simply go to draw water from the fountain, and when a poor woman will ask you to drink, give him good honnêtement.- I would be nice to see, replied the brutal, go to fontaine.- i want you to go, 'said the mother, and just heure.Elle went, but always growling. She took the finest bottle of money that was in the house. She had no sooner arrived at the fountain she saw coming out of the wood a beautifully dressed lady came and asked him to ory. It was the same fairy who had appeared to her sister, but had taken the air and dress of a princess, to see how far would the dishonesty of this fille.- Did I come here, said the proud brutal, to give you drink? Exactly I brought a silver flask expressly to give drink to Madame! I am of the view: to drink even if you voulez.- You are scarcely polite, 'said the fairy, without getting angry. Well ! since you are so disobliging, I give you for gift that at every word you speak, you will come out of the mouth or a snake or a crapaud.D'abord his mother saw him she cried: - Well well ! my daughter? - Well! my mother replied the brutal, throwing two vipers and two crapauds.-O Heaven! cried the mother, what do I see here? It was his sister who is involved, it paiera.Et me immediately she ran to beat. The poor child fled and went to save the rochaine forest. The king's son who was returning from the hunt met her and seeing her so beautiful, asked her what she did there alone and she had to pleurer.- Alas! sir, that's my mother has turned me out of logis.Le the king's son, who lives out of his mouth five or six pearls and as many diamonds, begged her to tell him where it came from him. She told him the whole story. The King's son fell in love, and considering that such a gift was worth more than all we could give her in marriage to another, took him to the palace of the king his father, where he épousa.Pour sister she became so hated that her own mother drove her from her home; and unhappy, having run well without finding one who would receive it, went to die at the corner of a wood. * MoralitéL'honnêteté costs of care, and wants a bit of complacency, but sooner or later it has its reward, And often the time we think about the less * Other moralitéLes diamonds and pistoles can lot of minds. However sweet parolesOnt encor more strength and are of greater price.
New clothes of the emperor	2057	1620	French	There are many years lived an emperor who loved him more than all the new clothes that he spent all his money to be well dressed. He did not care for his soldiers, nor theater, nor of his walks in the woods, were it not for the shows of his new clothes. He had a costume for every hour of every day of the week and while they usually say of a king he is on the board, it was always said of him! "The emperor is in his wardrobe" In the big city where he lived, life was gay and every day many strangers came. One day came two swindlers who claimed to be weavers and be able to weave the finest stuff that one could imagine. Not only the colors and pattern seraint exceptionally beautiful, but the clothes which were made possess the surprising property of being invisible to those who were not suitable for their duties or were simply idiots. "It would be valuable clothing , "says the emperor. "If I had to like, I could find out which of my subjects, not befitting its functions and separate the intelligent fools! I must immediately make me build this stuff!" It gave the two swindlers an advance on their work and they began to ouvrage.Ils settled two looms, but they pretended to work because there was absolutely no thread on the loom. They demanded the finest silk and the most precious gold they took them and restèrenet their empty looms until well into the night. "I'd like to know where they stand with the stuff !, "says the emperor. But he felt uncomfortable with the idea that it is invisible to those who are stupid or evil in their function. He said he had nothing to fear for himself, but preferred to send someone else to see how it was happening. Everyone in the town knew the exceptional qualities of the cloth and all were eager to know how their neighbor was unfit or stupid. "I'll send my honest old minister to the weavers," says the emperor. "It is best able to judge the pace of the stuff;! It is of great intelligence and nobody does better work than him" Old and good minister therefore went into the studio where the two swindlers sat working at their empty looms. "God forbid !," thought the minister, opening his eyes. "I cant see anything!" But he took care of the dire.Les two swindlers invited him to approach and asked him if it were not there in fact a nice pattern and beautiful colors. Then they showed him an empty business. The poor old minister opened his eyes even more, but he still saw nothing, since there was nothing. "My God, thought he, am I stupid? I never would have thought and no one should know! Am I unfit for my job? No, it does not need me to tell that I can not see the stuff. "well, what do you think ?," asked one of the weavers. "Oh, it's lovely, all that has pklus pretty !," replied the old minister, looking through his glasses. "This pattern and these colors! I will not fail to tell the emperor that this appeals to me! "" We welcome !, "said the two weavers. Then they named the colors and discussed the reason. The old minister listened carefully to get himself talk when it would return to the emperor. and that's what he fit.Les two swindlers demanded even more money, more silk, and more gold for their weaving They had all things in their pockets and nothing about the business, but they continued, as they had done so far, to pretend travailler.L'empereur soon sent another honest official to see where and when was the work the cloth would soon be ready and came to the man what had happened to the Minister.. he looked and looked again, but there was nothing about the job, he could see nothing "is not where a beautiful piece of cloth ?, "he asked the two swindlers, showing him and his expliq uencing the beautiful grounds which simply did not exist "I'm not a fool, said the official. it would be that I do not agree with my position? It would be rather strange, but I must not let it show! "And he praised the cloth, which he had not seen, and he expressed joy that gave him the colors and wonderful pattern. "Yes, it is entirely made wonderful !," he said to empereur.Dans the city, everyone was talking of the magnificent cloth, and the Emperor wanted to see with his own eyes as that she was still on the loom. Accompanied by a host of dignitaries, including the Minister and the officer, he went to the two crooks, who were busy weaving without any wire. "is not it beautiful? , "said the two officials who had already come." Your Majesty admires the patterns and colors! "Then they pointed the finger an empty business, imagining that others might see something." How !, thought the Emperor, but I see nothing! It's horrible! Am I a fool? Do I not made to be emperor? It would be the most terrible thing that could ever happen to me. "" Beautiful, beautiful, perfect, he said finally, I give my highest approval! "He nodded as a sign of satisfaction and looked profession empty, but he was careful to say that he saw nothing All members of the suite who had accompanied him looked and looked again;. but as for the rest, nothing appeared to them and all said as emperor "This is really beautiful!" Then they advised the Emperor to wear these beautiful clothes for the first time on the occasion of a great festival to be held very bientôt.Merveilleux was the word we heard on the lips, and all seemed to be happy. the emperor decorated each of the swindlers a cross of knight they put in their buttonholes and gave them the title of gentlemen tisserands.La night before the morning of the party, scammers remained at work r with sixteen candles. All the people could realize the harm they gave themselves to complete the clothes of the emperor. The weavers pretended to remove the fabric on the loom, cut in the air with big scissors, sewed with needles without son and finally said, "Look, the emperor's new clothes are now complete! "" Look, Majesty, here are the pants, this jacket, this is the coat! " And so on. "It's as light as a spider's web; we almost think that nothing on the body, but that's the beauty of it!" "Yes, yes !," all said courtiers, but they could not see anything, because there was nothing. "Your Imperial Majesty does she have the badge kindness to take off her clothes so we can put her new there in front of the large mirror! "the Emperor took off all her beautiful clothes and scammers did as they donned him each piece of new clothes that apparently had just been sewn. The emperor turned and looked back in the mirror. "God! Like this, you well. Which pictures, what colors," exclaimed everyone. "Those who have to carry the canopy over your Majesty opening procession arrived, "said the master of ceremonies." I'm ready, "said the emperor. "Is it going to me? And he still turned once before the mirror, because he had to pretend to contemplate his well Chamberlains costume.Les devaitn who wear behind the court mantle groping their hands . the floor, pretending to catch and raise lagging they went and made as if they held something in the air; they do not want to risk that one remarquât they could do nothing voir.C'est and the Emperor went before the procession under the beautiful canopy, and all who were in the streets or in their window saying: "the emperor new clothes are wonderful! What coat with train beautiful as it spreads with splendor! "Nobody wished to appear that he saw nothing, since it would have shown that he was unable to function or simply a fool. No new coat of the Emperor had been so successful "But it does not suit at all !," founded fear child in crowd "hear the voice of innocence !," said the father.. and each whispered to his neighbor what the child had dit.Puis the whole crowd cried out, "But it does not suit at all!" the Emperor frisonna because it seemed to him that the people were right but he said: "Now I have to hold out until the end of the procession." and the procession went on and the chamberlains continued carrying a train that was not there.
The crumbs on the table	1807	2075	French	The cock once said to his hens.. "Do not be afraid and come with me in the kitchen We picorerons bread crumbs on the table Our mistress is not at home, she went to visit someone 'a." - "No, no, no," the little dogs, "you know that we always severely punished." - "But come, therefore, tried to persuade the rooster, since it will not know anything!" And she never gives us anything good to eat. But the hens repeated: "No way, we have no wish to go with you." But the rooster insisted until, finally, they went there, they went up on the table and carefully picorèrent any crumbs to the last. At this time, the hostess came home, grabbed a stick, swept the table and fought to make their flying feathers. And when they were back at the house, chickens blamed the cock: "Cot, cot, co-o-t See, co-co-com-well you were wrong!" And the rooster laughed: "Co-co-co-rico Has anything happened, but I knew in advance!?!"
Musicians of Bremen	260	130	French	A man had a donkey who had faithfully served for many years but whose strength was exhausted, so he grew daily more unfit to work. The master thought of strip him of his skin; But the donkey, seeing that the wind was blowing the wrong side, escaped and took the road to Bremen: "There, he said, I can become a town musician." As he had some time market, he met on the way a hunting dog that was barking like a tired from a long running animal. "What have you yapping so, comrade? 'He said." Oh, "replied the dog," because I am old, I weakened myself every day and I can not go hunting, my master wanted to knock me; so I took the key of the fields; but how would I do to earn my bread? "-" Well, "said the donkey," I am going to Bremen to do me a musician of the city, come with me and make yourself also receive in music . I will play the lute, and you can beat the drum. "The dog agreed, and they went their way together. A short distance away, they found a cat lying on the road and making a sad face as a three-day rain." Qu 'is it that bothers you, old frieze-mustache? "said the donkey." we are not in a good mood when you fear for his head, "said the cat," because I get older that my teeth are worn and I prefer to remain lying behind the stove and purr than to chase after mice, my mistress wanted to drown me; I saved time, but now what to do and where to go "-" Come with us to Bremen? you hear you very well for night music, thou shalt us as a musician in the city. "The cat tasted the advice and went with them. Our wanderers passed soon before a court, the door of which was perched a cock shouting from the top of his head, "you pierce us the bone marrow," said the donkey, "what have you screaming like that?" -. "I announced the good weather," said the cock, "because today is the day when Our Lady washed children's shirts Jesus and where it needs to dry; but as tomorrow, Sunday here we get to dinner, the mistress of the house has no mercy for me; she told the cook that I be made into soup, and tonight it will let me cut the neck. .! I also shouted with all my breath while I'm still breathing "-" Good "said the donkey," red crest that you are, come rather to Bremen with us; you will find anywhere better than death at least: You have a good voice, and when we make music together, our concert will be an excellent way "The rooster found the proposal of its taste, and they went on all four. ensemble.Ils could not reach the city of Bremen on the same day they arrived at night in a forest where they intended to spend the night the donkey and the dog lay down under a large tree, the cat and the rooster climbed it,. and even the rooster took flight to go to roost at the very top, where it would be safer. Before going to sleep, as he cast his eyes to the wind, it seemed to him that he saw in the distance a small light, he shouted to his companions that there must be a house not far, because we saw a light "If it is so," said the donkey, "just scrub and walk in haste that side. because the inn is not to my taste "The dog added." Indeed, with few bones some meat does not displease me "So they made their way towards the point whence the light. soon they saw shine brighter and grow, until finally they arrived in front of a house robbers perfectly illuminated. The donkey, as the biggest, went to the window and looked inside the house. "What do you see there, Dapple?" he asked the rooster. "What I see?" said the donkey, "a table laden with food and drink, and robbers sitting who are having a heart â joy." - "It would be our business," said the rooster. "Yes, certainly!" said the donkey, "ah, if we were there!" They began to dream about the way to make to chase the robbers; Finally, they showed themselves. The donkey stood first in putting his feet in front of the window, the dog climbed on the back of the donkey, the cat climbed onto the dog, the rooster took flight and landed on the cat's head. This fact, together they began their music with a shout. The donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock crowed and then they rushed through the window in the room by pushing the tiles were shattered. The robbers, hearing this appalling noise, got up with a start, not doubting that returning might enter the room, and all fled terrified into the forest. Then the four companions seated themselves at the table, contrived of what was left, and ate as if they had a fasting mois.Quand the four musicians had finished, they put out the lights and looked for a house to rest, each by its nature and its convenience. The donkey lay down on the manure, the dog behind the door, the cat on the hearth near the warm ashes, cock on a joist; and as they were tired from their long walk, they soon fall asleep. After midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that there was more clarity in their home and everything seemed quiet there, the captain said, "We should not have let us and yet rout," and he ordered one of his men to reconnoitre what was happening in the house. He found he was sending while resting; He went into the kitchen and tried to turn on the light; so he took a match, and as the bright eyes and flamed cat seemed to him two coals, he approached the match so it took fire. But the cat did not intend mockery; he fell on his face and scratched swearing. Seized with a horrible fear, the man ran to the door to escape; but the dog was lying there, jumped on him and bit him in the leg; as he was in the yard next to the manure, one untied him a violent kick with its hind feet, while the rooster, awakened by the noise and felt quite brisk, cried from the top of the joist "Kikeriki" The thief ran at full speed to his captain and said, "There are in our house a hideous witch who stained on me and scratched his face with her long fingers in front of the door is a man armed with a knife which he nicked the leg in the courtyard stands a black monster that knocked me out of a heavy blow, and the roof top is asked the judge shouted: 'Bring that rascal! ' Also did I set out to slip away. " Since then, the robbers did not dare to venture into the house, and the four musicians of Bremen partook so they wanted to get out.
Small Angled	9937	425A	French	There was once a king and queen who had two daughters: one called Aurora and the other Twilight. Dawn, who was the prettiest, had all the preferences of his parents and they liked much better than its sœur.Quand the two princesses were great and of marriageable age, the King and Queen gave a magnificent ball where were invited all the princes and lords of the surroundings. In the beginning of the evening all the young people asked to dance with Dawn because she was the most beautiful; as she was not friendly, they danced once with it; but they could not get tired of the company of Twilight, who had so much grace and spirit at the end of each ball hastened around her, and the beautiful Aurora remained almost seule.Le king was sorry this preference, and he resolved to rid this night of Twilight, that his admirers were forced to woo Aurora. At the end of the ball, he brought her and said: - My daughter, you'll leave at once to see the fée.- your godmother But, father, 'she replied; it is dark night, I will be afraid all alone on the roads, and I'm tired. Let me expect demain.- No, said the king, must you leave immediately; I'll give you the road to a basket of food, and one of my squires you escortera.Crépuscule mounted his horse and squire accompanied. *** When they had come a long way, Twilight was tired having danced, told his driver: - I'd like to get some sleep because I can not plus.Elle dismounted, and as they were in a forest, the rider picked up the foam to make a bed the princess, and put his head under the basket to provisions to serve him well oreiller.Quand she was asleep, the squire, whom the king had appointed to mislead his daughter, mounted his horse and fled to galop.En waking Dusk was very surprised to find himself alone in the middle of the forest; she called his driver, but it was far away and could not hear his cries. Throughout the day she tried to find his way, but the evening came before she had managed to get out of the forest. When she was hungry, she ate its provisions basket, and nightfall, she climbed a tree to see if it does not perceive any light; but she saw nothing born, and for fear of wild beasts, she remained in the tree until day.The next day she walked again to try to get out of the forest, but she could not find the end; evening she went back into a tree to try to find some light in the distance; . But she saw the point, and, sorry again that the day before she spent the night on the tree *** On awaking in the morning, she saw in the distance something shining; she took her basket and set off; more it approached, the more it became bright; it seemed like a fireworks of all colors and so bright that she had difficulty in regarder.Elle finally came to a beautiful castle crystal; she remained amazed to consider and she exclaimed: - Ah ! Castle beautiful She knocked on the door; but nobody opened the door; she knocked a second time and saw nothing; but the third time she heard a little noise and small voices speaking as a musique.À through the crystal door, she saw coming twelve small Angled - they were cute little people who were not higher than the elbow. Six small Angled raised the Clanche and six pulled the door inside for ouvrir.- Let me get into your castle, they said Twilight; I am the daughter of a king, and I lost in the forêt.- Enter replied the small Angled and come ask our mistress permission to stay in elle.Elles made it through a long succession of apartments, and before brought their mistress; it was a beautiful White Cat who said: - I am willing to receive you in my castle, but on condition that you will not seek to get out and you never désobéirez.- me I promise, replied Crépuscule.La white cat, who thought that the princess was hungry, ordered to serve a meal, and small Angled went to get everything I needed to eat: there were four who supported flat on their backs, three who carried a bottle of wine, and two who brought a glass. And with the White Cat, there were many other small Angled waiting his ordres.Crépuscule sat down, and when she had eaten at his ease, the White Cat asked if she was bien.- Ah ! Yes, madam, replied elle.- Well, every day will be served you well; Now, I'll show you my jardin.Elle led her into a large enclosure where the finest trees were located we could see and flowers of all kinds: - You see, said the White Cat, my garden is large ; you can stroll around at your leisure and gather flowers and fruits; only I forbid you to approach the pond we see out there. If you disobey me, I would know, and you will not be long before you in repentir.Crépuscule assured that she would keep well, and every day she was walking in the garden. Sometimes *** yet she could s 'help looking toward the pond, and the very thought that it was a prohibited place made him want to go; but it osait.Un day as the White Cat was traveling, Dusk down to the garden as usual, and walking there, she found herself, without really thinking, not far from the room of water.- Ah! she thought, I'll see today, since I'm so close; there is here that small Angled that are occupied in the castle, and the White Cat will know rien.Elle approached the pond, and when she was on the edge she saw lily pads which moved; a green snake out of the water and came to stand next to elle.Elle was afraid and stood back; but Snake said softly: - Beautiful princess, are you afraid of me? Do not worry, I will do you no harm. I beg you, do not go away and keep talking to me there so long that I could not talk with anyone Dusk was reassured by these words: she remained, and even longer, to speak with the Serpent . She finally realized it was time to leave, and she said: - Goodbye, Green Snake, he must go home; I am only too remained with you.The Snake begged her to come back another time, and when she had gone, he went back to his étang.Au when Twilight came home the Crystal Castle, White Cat appeared before her: - where you from, miss? asked, her elle.- From a walk in the garden, said Crépuscule.- Yes, said the White Cat, you have the garden; but despite my defense, you went to the edge of the pond. For your punishment is going to dive into a milk bath bouillant.Aussitôt small Angled ran; in an instant they undressed poor Twilight, and put in a boiling bath milk which loudly did bake; but they did not long left there, and when she was withdrawn, they nursed the their best and it was soon to be guérie.Crépuscule had again promised the White Cat not to return to the pond; but despite herself, she often thought of the Green Snake; one day that the White Cat was not in the castle, she could not resist the urge to see him, and she went over the edge of the pond. She saw the green serpent that was lying on the grass; He had lost weight well, and he said in a mournful voice: - Beautiful princess, I thought you had abandoned me, and I had the good chagrin.- No, replied Twilight, I often thought about you, but I have been so punished seeing you than I dared revenir.Elle still forgot to talk to the snake, and when she returned to the castle, the white Cat stood before her and said in a voice irritated - You disobeyed me yet, despite your promises; this time you will be immersed in oil bouillante.Les small Angled Twilight undressed and put her up to the neck in a bath of boiling oil and then they carried her to her room and nursed their mieux.Cette once it was a long time to heal one day she was alone, she heard a rustle, and she saw her appear before the green Snake, leaner even than habitude.- I am very ill, he said, but if you wanted to marry me, I guérirais.Crépuscule liked the green Snake, but she could not decide to take it for mari.Tous day he came to see her and asked her if she would marry him; but every day she refusait.Il end up not coming because he was too ill to crawl up to the castle. While Twilight, which was cured, decided to return to the edge of the pond, despite threats that the White Cat had made to him. She saw her poor Snake green that was dying and could barely move; she had so much pity to find in this condition she said: - I'll marry you when you want, if you can guérir.Aussitôt Green Snake ceased to be ill; Twilight returned to the castle, fearing to be punished; but when the white pussy saw her, she did not even gave him a reproach. *** The White Cat Small Angled ordered to prepare everything for the wedding. There were hundreds of men and women in the crystal castle, and they employed it in their mieux.On invited many people, kings and queens among them the Twilight parents and the beautiful Aurora. The wedding day was a Twilight dress color of the vault of heaven and a crown of stars that the Serpent had given him. She set off in this beautiful dress to go to the chapel, and green snake crawling next to her. All the guests were saying - What a shame that such a beautiful princess to have a husband snake However, entered the chapel, and the bishop who was to bless the marriage asked the Snake if he would marry the princess! he hastened to say yes. The bishop then asked if she would take Dusk Green Snake for his legitimate époux.- Yes, replied elle.Dès she had spoken the word, instead of the Serpent who was at his side, was as beautiful prince that one could see; Small Angled attending the wedding immediately resumed their natural size and white pussy became a beautiful princess. She had been transformed along with small Angled who were lords and ladies, and green snake was a king powerful that a fairy had condemned to remain in that form until he found a girl who was willing to marry lui.Il there was great rejoicing in the crystal Castle, superb food and a dance where everyone entertained and danced his beautiful mieux.La Dawn found a husband among the princes who had been turned into small cubits everyone was happy, and Twilight and her husband had only happiness for the rest of their days.
Small knots	1490	1451	French	There was once a girl, pretty as a heart but idle and disorderly. When she sometimes began to spin and fall on a small knot in the wool, she immediately tore the whole bunch and threw to the ground. His servant was a hardworking girl and picked this wool, patiently unraveled and finely spun to weave cloth and make a pretty dress. The lazy girl was a young groom and their wedding approached. The day before the wedding, we danced around the house and the girl danced worker breathlessly. And the bride threw Well, well, as the servant knows entertaining, in my wool dress that suits him to perfection! The bridegroom heard this and asked what they meant. The beautiful explained that the maid had woven the fabric of her dress with wool she herself had thrown. As soon as she had said, the groom realized that his fiancee was lazy. He left her, courted the working girl and married her.
These gnomes	1737	503	French	A tailor and a goldsmith were traveling together. One evening, as the sun had just set behind the mountains, they heard the sound of distant music that became clearer as they approached. It was an extraordinary sound, but so charming that they forgot all their weariness and headed strides in that direction. The moon was already up when they came to a hill where they saw a crowd of little men and little women dancing in circles cheerfully, holding by the hand; they sang together a beautiful way, and it was this music that travelers had heard. In the middle stood a little taller than other an old man, clad in a parti-colored coat, and wearing a white beard down to his chest. The two remained standing amazement watching the dance. The old man beckoned them to come in, and the little dancers opened their circle. The blacksmith came without hesitation: his back was a little round, and he was bold like all hunchbacks. The tailor was at first a little afraid and stood back; but when he saw that everything was so gaily, he took courage, and followed. The circle was closed, and the little beings went on singing and dancing by quantum leaps; but the old man took a large knife which hung from his belt and began to board, and when it was sufficiently sharpened, looked at the strangers. They were frozen with terror; but their anxiety was not long: the old man seized the blacksmith, and in a trice he had fully shaved his hair and beard; then he did the same to the tailor. When he finished, he knocked them amicably on the shoulder, as if to say that they had done well to leave shave without resistance, and fear vanished. Then he showed them the finger a pile of coals that were close by, and motioned them to fill their pockets. Both obeyed without knowing what these coals serve them, and they continued their journey to seek shelter for the night. As they reached the valley, the bell from a neighboring monastery struck twelve at the same time the song died away, everything disappeared, and they no longer saw the deserted hill illuminated by the two travelers found an lune.Les hostel and went to bed fully clothed on the straw, but fatigue made them forget to get rid of their coals. An unusual burden placed on them woke them earlier than usual. They carried hand in their pockets, and they do not want to believe their eyes when they saw that they were full, not coal, but with pure gold bullion. Their beards and their hair had also pushed wonderfully. Now they were rich; only the blacksmith, who, due to its nature greedy, had filled his pockets better, had double that had the tailleur.Mais a greedy man always wants more than he has. The goldsmith proposed to the tailor to wait a day and return at night near the old man to gain new treasures. The tailor refused, saying: "I'm tired, and I'm happy, I want to be a master, my job and marry my dear object (for so he called his sweetheart), and I'll be a happy man." However to pleasure to another, he agreed to stay a day more.The evening the goldsmith hung two bags on his shoulders to take good care, and set off up the hill. As the night he found the little people singing and dancing; the old man shaved him and motioned to take coals. He did not hesitate to fill his pockets and bags, while supplies could come in, happy returned to the hostel and went to bed fully dressed. "When gold does weigh heavily, he said, I feel good," and he fell asleep in the sweet anticipation of waking the next morning as a rich Crésus.Dès he had his eyes open, his first care was to visit his pockets; but vain delve into it, he found nothing but coals all black. "At least, he thought, I have gold I won the other night." He went to see; Alas! that it likewise had again turned into coal. He put his forehead blackened his hand, and he felt that his head was shaved bald and his chin. Yet he did not yet know all his misfortune he soon saw that the hump on his back, was attached to another by devant.Il felt when he received the punishment for his greed and began to groan. The good tailor, awakened by his lamentations consoled her best and said: "We are companions, we made our tour together; stay with me in my wealth us both." He kept his word, but the blacksmith was obliged wearing all his life his two humps and hide under a cap his bare head of hair.
The Seven Ravens	240	451	French	A man had seven son and no daughter, so he really wanted to have one. But one day, his wife Joy overwhelmed in the last giving birth to a daughter. The joy of the parents was huge, but unfortunately the baby was so small and frail that it was deemed necessary to baptize any urgence.Le father sent quickly a son at source so that there Pulsatilla water baptism, but the other six are followed and as everyone wanted to be the first to draw, the jug fell into the water. The seven boys stood there, not knowing what to do and not daring to go home eux.Ne especially not seeing the return, the father grew impatient and said: "The rascals are definitely having fun and forgot the poor small! " He was so afraid that the baby died without baptism he was angry: "I would see all turned into ravens!" Hardly had he uttered these words, he heard the beating of wings above her head. He looked up and saw seven ravens fly noirs.Les parents could not break the curse and grief was immense to have thus lost their son in September. Nevertheless, they consoled somewhat by noting that their dear little girl covered her strength and beautified day by jour.Pendant very long time, ignored the little that she had had brothers, for her parents were careful to make it good slightest allusion. But one day she found by chance a conversation about it: they said it was very pretty, but she was still responsible for the misfortune that struck his seven brothers. Any upset, she ran to ask her father and her mother if she did have brothers and what happened eux.Ses parents could not keep the secret any longer. They assured him that only heaven had wanted everything that had happened. His birth had been the indirect cause of the curse. However, day by day, the girl felt more guilty and was convinced that she absolutely had to deliver her brothers. She neither knew pause or rest until she went traveling the wide world: she would find her brothers wherever they are, and deliver at any price. She took a small ring in memory of his parents, a loaf of bread against hunger, a pitcher of water against thirst and her little chair to reposer.Alors went far, far away, till the end of the world. She approached the sun, but it was hot, scary and ate young children. She fled for his life and ran to the moon, but it was freezing, sinister and wicked. When she saw the girl, she said: "I feel, I smell human flesh." The little girl away as fast as she could and came to the stars, who welcomed him with kindness. Each star was sitting on his personal chair. The morning star rose, handed him a small chicken bones and said: "Without this little bone, you will not be able to open the Glass Mountain where are your brothers." The girl took the little bone, wrapped it carefully in his handkerchief and resumed his journey until it was arrived at the Glass Mountain. The door was closed; Small would therefore remove the small bone, but when she untied her tiny handkerchief, he no longer contained a chicken bone, but a small key or.Quand she walked inside, a dwarf came to meet her and asked, "What are you, my child?" "I'm looking for my brothers, the seven ravens," replied the dwarf elle.Et declared: "gentlemen ravens are not at home, but if you want to wait here return, come in! "the dwarf then began to serve the meal crows in seven small plates and seven little cups. The sister ate a bite of each small plate and sipped each small cup; in the last cup she dropped the ring she had brought with elle.Tout a sudden we heard the air wing flapping and cawing. The dwarf said, "Here gentlemen crows returning." As soon as they arrived, they wanted to eat and drink and everyone looked so his plate and his gobelet.Tous, one after another, marveled: "Who ate my plate? Who drank my cup? a human mouth has been there!" And as the raven came seventh at the bottom of his cup, the small ring rolled before him. He looked and saw the ring that had belonged to his father and his mother. "My God, if our little sister could be here," is he exclaimed, "we being delivered!" Hearing this wish, the girl, who stood behind the hidden door, walked to the seven ravens which instantly regained their human form. They embraced warmly, then resumed happily together the way home.
The seven Swabians	1133	1321	French	There was once seven residents of Swabia. The first was called Mr Schulz, the second Jackli the third Marli, the fourth Jergli, Michel fifth, sixth and seventh Veitli Jeannot. They had set a goal of traveling the world in search of adventure and are accomplishing feats. Because they wanted to be armed in order to be safe, they had seen fit to make a pike, a single, but really long and strong. They were holding all seven at a time. The boldest, most virile stood before: it was Mr Schulz. Then came the others, in order, the last being Veitli.Il happened one day in the month of hay, as they had done a long way and that they still had some way to go to the village where they intended to spend the night, a beetle, a hornet perhaps, passed near them, behind a bush, in the meadow, humming peacefully. Mr Schulz was so frightened that he almost dropped the pike and the sweat ran him through all pores.- Hear, hear! he said to his companions. Lord, I hear a tambour.Jackli, holding the spear behind him and I do not know what smell had tickled the nostrils, said, - He unquestionably something going on: I feel the powder and wick these canon.À words, Mr Schulz fled and jumped crosses a clôture.Comme he had fallen on the teeth of a rake that haymakers had left there, the handle came back into his face, hitting her violent coup.- Hearing , hearing, hearing, cried Mr Schulz, let me prisoner, let me prisoner! I go the other six, who followed, cried in turn: - If thou go, I go too! Finally, as there was no enemy who would tie them up and take them, they realized they were wrong. And no one should learn the history and making fun of them, they swore not to speak as long as one of them accidentally open the mouth to sujet.Sur what, they continued their trip. The second danger which threatened them was still much larger than the first. A few days later their path led them through wasteland. A hare was sleeping in the sun, pointed ears and large glassy eyes open. At the sight of this terrifying beast and wild, they became frightened and took counsel to know what they were doing and what was the least dangerous driving forward. For if they were to run away, it was feared that the monster followed them and avalât with skin and bones. And they said - We will have to face a dangerous fight. Although the design is already having won moitié.Ils grabbed their spades, Mr Schulz was before, Veitli behind. Mr Schulz was the craft. But Veitli, which in its protected position, felt full of courage, burned to attack and cried - In the name of Swabia, forward, children Otherwise the devil leaves us plan but Johnny knew where the pack the wounded. He says: - By all the devils, you speak well, but when you see the shadow of dragonde your person sees only the heels Michel cried -! It takes a cheveuQue the devil himself I way the eyes! It was the turn of Jergli. He said: - If not him, so his mèreOu least, the devil's stepbrother He came to Marli a charitable thought!. He told Veitli: - Go, go, Veitli, moving forward from back there, I'll help you bite the bullet But Veitli not listening!. Jackli said: - It's Schulz to be the first alone the honor of attacking Mr Schulz took his courage in both hands and said: -! See your énervementOn see that you are all vaillants.Et together they warred against the dragon. Mr Schulz crossed himself and prayed God for help. But since nothing happened and the enemy approached, he shouted, so great was his fear: - Wow! Wow! Ouahaha! The hare woke up, frightened and went at full speed. When Herr Schulz saw him so cowardly, he exclaimed joyfully: - Pooh! Veitli, look at me CACE was only a hare! The Swabian allies went in pursuit of other adventures. They arrived on the banks of the Moselle, a quiet river and deep as through some bridges and is needed in many places to cross in boats. Swabians did not know anything. They called a man who, on the other hand, went about their business and asked him how it could happen. Because of the remoteness and the focus of his interlocutors, the man did not understand what they wanted and cried - Eh? Eh? Mr. Schultz realized that he said "Walk! Walk!" And as he was the first, he began formal notice to enter the Moselle. Soon he got stuck in the mud and water, deep waves went around him. The wind drove his hat to the other side of the river. A frog croaked and looked: - Yeah, yeah The other six, heard it, they said - Our companion, Mr Schulz, we called. If he could get through, why not us? They all jumped together in the water and drowned. So none of the alliance members Swabian never came home.
The six companions that overcome any	678	513A	French	There was once a man who was skilled in all trades; he became a soldier and served bravely; but when the war was over, he was discharged with three road costs money to regain their homes. All this did not suit him, and he promised himself, he was only companions, to force the king to give him all the treasures of his royaume.Il took while anger, the path of the forest, and there he saw a man who had just six uproot large trees with his hand as if it had not been that of grass. He asked her: "Will you follow me and be my servant - Willingly, said the other; but first I must door to my mother that little fagot?". And taking one of the trees, he made a link around other five, put the bundle on his shoulder and carried it well. Then he returned to find his master, who said, "Between us, we will overcome everything." At some distance from there, they met a hunter who was kneeling and holding his rifle in cheek. The soldier asked: "Hunter, as referred thou so?" He replied: "There is a fly sitting two leagues from here on an oak branch: I want him to lead in the left eye. ! - Oh, come with me, 'said the soldier, the three of us we come to the end of all "the hunter followed him, and they came to seven windmills that turned quickly;. however we did not feel a breath of wind to the right or left, and no leaf stirred. The soldier said, "I can not conceive how these mills can walk, the air is completely still." Two miles farther, they saw a man who had climbed a tree; he was holding a mouthful of his nostrils, and the other blew it. "What the hell breaths you there? asked the soldat.- A few miles from here, he said, there are seven windmills ; as you see, I blow for them tourner.- Oh come with me, 'said the soldier! four of us, we all will overcome "blower descended from the tree and accompanied.. After some time, they saw a man standing on one leg; he won another and had placed next to him. "Here's one, said the soldier, who wants to rest a sudden I sûr.- runner, answered the other, and not to go too fast I won my leg and when I have both, I ahead of the hirondelles.- Oh come with me, 'said the soldier!. we come to us five conquers all "He went with them and little after, they found a man who had a little hat placed entirely on the ear. The soldier said, "With all the respect I owe you, sir, you'd better put your hat over right because you have all the air of a well grelots.- head I would keep myself well, said the other; when I put my hat right, he just such a cold that birds freeze up and fall dead by then terre.- Oh, come with me, 'said the soldier! us six come to us after all. "All six came to a town where the king had published that he who would fight in the race with his daughter would marry if he conquered, but would be beheaded if he was defeated. The soldier appeared, but he asked if he could run one of his people to his place. "No doubt, answered the king, but his life and yours will pledge, and if he is defeated, it will take your head with both." Things being so agreed, the soldier ordered the runner to hold its second leg, and he recommended to run without wasting time, and make every effort to win. It was decided that the winner would be that competitors who would bring the first water of a fountain located near there.The runner and the king's daughter each received a jug and left at the same time; but the princess had made a few steps away, he was out of sight, as if the wind had been removed. He was soon at the fountain, it filled her pitcher and set off again. But amid the journey he felt tired, and laying the ground pitcher, he lay down to sleep a nap; only he took care to put his head under a horse skull he found on the ground, so that the hardness of the cushion does not Tardat éveiller.Cependant to the princess, who was running as well as it can make a person naturally, had arrived at the fountain, and she hastened back after filling her pitcher. She met the sleeping rider. "Well, she said happily, the enemy is in my hands." She emptied the pitcher of sleeper and continued his chemin.Tout was lost, though fortunately the hunter, posted on the top of the castle, had not saw this scene with his piercing eyes. "It must not, however, he said that the princess wins," and with a stroke of his rifle, he broke under the rider's head, and without doing him any harm, the skull of the horse he served as a pillow. The other, waking with a start, saw that his pitcher was empty and that the princess had already taken a big lead. But without losing heart, he returned to the fountain, filled her pitcher again and was again reached the end of its run ten minutes earlier than the princess. "At the end, he said, I really stirred the legs that I had before, I do not call this run." But the king and his daughter were furious that the winner was a miserable soldier licensee; they resolved to lose him and all his companions. The king said to his daughter: "I found a good way: fear not, they will not escape." Then, under the pretext of the feast, he ushered them into a room whose floor was made of iron the iron doors, the windows in the apartment fer.Au middle was a table covered with a sumptuous meal. "Come in, they said the king, and treat you well." And when they were in, it was close and lock all doors outside. Then ordered his cook maintaining the fire in the room until the iron floor was entirely red. The order was executed, and six companions at the table began to feel hot; they thought at first that it was of the activity with which they ate; but the heat still increasing, they wanted to get out and then noticed that the doors and windows were closed and that the king wanted their playing a trick. "But his shot will be missed, said the man with the little hat, because I will bring a cold front which will require that fire back." Then he put his hat straight on his head, and came as a cold that all the heat disappeared and flat froze on table.Au after two hours, the king, convinced that they were all cooked, threw open the doors and came himself to see what had become. But he found every six refreshed, and saying they were glad to get out to go warm up a little, because it was so cold in the room that had frozen dishes on the table. The king, in anger, went to the cook and asked him why he had not executed his orders. But the cook replied: "I have red-hot, see for yourself." The king recognized, indeed, we had maintained a violent fire in the oven below the room, but the six companions none had souffert.Le king always trying to get rid of these troublesome guests, summoned the soldier and said, "If you want to give up your right to my daughter, I will give you as much gold as you voudras.- willingly, sire, replied the other; give me only as much gold one of my servants will carry, and I give the princess "the king was delighted. the soldier told him he would get his gold in two weeks. Meanwhile, he called on the instant all the tailors in the kingdom and rented for a fortnight, to sew a bag. When the bag was ready, the Hercules of the band, who uprooted the trees by hand, placed it on his shoulder and came to the palace. The king asked what was this strong fellow who carried on his shoulder a heavy cloth bundle as a house, and when he had learned, he was scared, thinking of everything that could gold rush in there. He brought a ton sixteen men stronger could hardly roll; but Hercules grabbed with one hand and throwing it in the bag, complained that had brought him so little that there was not enough to fill only the bottom. The king successively bring all her treasure, who spent entirely in the bag without filling it only half. "Always bring shouted the Hercules, two bits are not enough to satisfy a man." They sent yet seven hundred cars loaded with gold from all parts of the kingdom, and stuffed them into her bag with the horse that had harnessed there. "I'm going to end, he said, by taking indiscriminately everything that falls into my hands to fill it." When it was there, there was still room, but he said: "We must make an end, may well close the bag before it is full. "He put it on his back and went to join his king compagnons.Le seeing one man and carried all the wealth of his country, became very angry and said ride horses all his cavalry with orders to run above the six companions and take the bag. They were soon met by two regiments, who cried: "You are prisoners, make the bag and gold it contains, or you are massacred on heure.- What do you say, replied the blower that we are prisoners? Before you dance all in the air. "and stopping one of his nostrils, he mita blow each other on the two regiments and they were scattered here and there in the blue sky, above Mountains and valleys. An old sergeant major shouted through, adding that he had new scars, and a brave like him does not deserve to be treated so shamefully. The blower stopped a little, so the sergeant fell without injury; but he said: "Go to your king, and let him know that he should have sent more people against us, and I have done all jump in the air." The king adventure learner says "You have to let go; the funny are sorcerers." the six companions brought it out of their wealth; they made the sharing and lived happily ever after.
The six swans brothers	469	451	French	One day a king was hunting in a great forest. And he put so much heart that none of his men did manage to follow. When evening came, he stopped and looked around. He realized that he had lost his way. He looked out of the woods, but could not succeed. He saw an old woman in the head shaking approaching him. It was a sorcière.- Dear lady, he said, could you not tell me the way out of the wood - Oh! so, Mr. King, she replied. I can. But on one condition. If you do not fill it, you will never get out of the forest and there you shall die of faim.- What is this condition? asked the roi.- I have a daughter, said the old woman, who is so beautiful that it has no parallel in the world. It deserves to become your wife. If you make a queen, I will show the king chemin.Le was so afraid that he accepted and the old and brought him to his little house where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She received the king as if she had waited and saw that she was really beautiful. Still, she did not like him and it's not without secret horror he watched. After loading the girl with him on his horse, the old woman showed him the way and the King reached his palace where the wedding was célébrées.Le King had already been married and had his first wife seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved more than anything. As he feared their stepmother did not should treat well, he led them to an isolated castle in the middle of a forest. He was so well hidden and the road leading to it was so difficult to discover that he would not have found itself if a fairy had offered him a ball of thread to the wonderful properties. When he threw it to him, she held herself and showed him the way. The king, however, was so often to his dear children that the queen finally notice her absence. Curious, she wanted to know what he was doing alone in the forest. She gave a lot of money to his servants. They revealed the secret and he spoke of the pad that knew itself show the way. She never stopped until she discovered where the king clutched the ball. She fashioned small white silk shirts and, as his mother had taught him the art of witchcraft, she cast a spell. One day the King was out hunting, she went into the forest with small shirts. The ball showed her the way. The children, seeing someone come from afar, thought it was their dear father coming toward them and they ran with great joy to meet him. She threw on each one of the little shirts and as soon as they were touched their bodies, they were changed into swans, and flew away over the forest. The queen, very happy, returned to his castle, convinced that she was free of children. But the girl was not part with his brothers and did not know what they were devenus.Le next day the king came to visit her children. He found that his fille.- Where are your brothers? he asked, il.- Ah! dear father, she said, they're gone and left me all seule.Elle told him she had seen from her window how her brothers transformed into swans were gone flying over the forest and showed him the feathers they had dropped into the courtyard. The king was grieved, but he did not think it was the Queen who committed this evil. And as he feared that his daughter was also pleased him, he wanted to take her with him. But she was afraid of her stepmother and begged the king to let one more night in the castle of the poor girl wood.The thought: "I will not stay here long, I'll go looking for my brothers. "and when the night came, she ran away and plunged straight into the forest. She walked all night and again the next day until fatigue prevented him from advancing. She saw a hut in which she entered; she found six little beds. But she dared not lie down. She crept under one of them, lay on the hard ground and prepared to sleep. But as the sun was going down, she heard a rustling, and saw six swans come flying through the window. They fell on the ground, blew one on the other and all their feathers flew. Their skin appeared as a small shirt. The girl looked well and knew his brethren. It welcomes and went out from under the bed His brothers were not less glad when they saw it. But their joy was short durée.- You can not stay here, they said, we are in a house of thieves. If they find you here when they arrive, they'll tueront.- You do not protect me? asked the little fille.- No! They said, because we can not leave our swan's skin during an hour each night shift and, meanwhile, we resume our human appearance. But then we become the little girl cygnes.La wept and said: - Can you therefore not be saved - Oh, no, they said, the conditions are too difficult?. It would have six years you do not speak nor laugh, and that during this time you us Made-six little shirts made of flowers. If a single word out of your mouth, your entire sentence was inutile.Et like his brothers said this, the time had elapsed quarter and again become swans, they went by the girl fenêtre.La resolved however, to save her brothers, even if it cost him his life. She left the hut, reached the center of the forest, climbed a tree and spent the night. The next day, she gathered flowers and began to sew. She had no one to talk to and had no desire to laugh. She sat where she was and looked only at his work. This was so long ago, when it happened that the king of the country drove in the forest and his people came to the tree on which she stood. They called and said: - Who are you? She replied pas.- Come, they said, we will do you no mal.Elle only shook his head. As they continued to press questions, she gave them her gold necklace, hoping to satisfy them. But they do not démordaient. She then gave them his belt; but it was enough for them either. Then her garter and, little by little, all that had saddle on her and she could happen, so it was left to him but his little shirt. But hunters are not contented. They climbed on the tree, seized her and led her to the king. The king asked: - Who are you? What are you doing in that tree? She did not answer. He asked him questions in every language that he knew, but she remained silent as the grave. As it was beautiful, the king was moved and he was smitten with a great love for her. He wrapped his coat, put before him on his horse and took her to his castle. It gave him rich garments, and she shone with beauty like a sun. But it was impossible to snatch a word. At the table, he placed it by his side and his modesty as his reserve pleased him so hard that he said: - I want to marry her and no one else in monde.Au few days, he married she. But the king had a wicked mother, that marriage did not like. She spoke ill of the young queen. "Who knows where did this crazy, said she. She can not speak and is worthless for a king." After a year, when the queen had a first child, the old woman took him and, while she slept, she smeared her blood lips. Then she went to the king and accused his wife of being a man-eater. The king would not believe and did not accept that we read him wrong. She, however, sat there, sewing the shirts and paying attention to anything else. When she had her second child, a beautiful boy, the evil stepmother again, but the king could not believe it. He said: "She is too pious and too good to do something like that if it were not dumb, and could defend herself, her innocence would break.." But when the old woman stole away a third time her newborn child and the accused queen who did not say a word in his defense, the king could not do anything else than to bring to justice, and she was sentenced to be burned vive.Quand came the day when the verdict was to be executed, it was also the last six years in which she had no right to speak or laugh and she could free her beloved brothers from the evil spell. The six shirts were finished. Only missing the left sleeve of the sixth. When we took her to death, she placed the six shirts on her arm, and when she was on top of the pile, when the fire would be lit, she looked around and saw six swans came flying. She realized that her deliverance was near and his heart is filled with joy. The swans came and rested with her so she could throw their shirts. Once they reached the, swans feathers fell and his brothers stood before her in the flesh, fresh and beautiful. It lacked the younger the left arm. Instead, he had a swan's wing on the back. They kissed and Queen approached the king completely changed, began to speak and said: - My dear husband, now I have the right to speak and tell you that I am innocent and that I was accusée.Et falsely said she deception of old who had kidnapped him three children and hidden them. To the delight of the king, they were brought to him and, as punishment, the wicked stepmother was tied to the stake and burnt to ashes. For many years, the king, the queen and her six brothers lived in happiness and peace.
Worn shoes at the ball	1268	306	French	The king had twelve girls, more beautiful than the other one. They slept together in a large room, their beds were lined up side by side, and every night when they were lying, the king closed the door and pushed the bolt. Now the king observed every morning, having opened the door, the princess had worn shoes for dancing. Nobody was able to unravel the mystery. The king then proclaimed that he who would find where the princesses danced every night could choose one of his daughters and wife to become king after his death. But claiming that, after three days and three nights, would not have discovered the coupée.Bientôt would head a prince, wanting to try his hand, introduced himself. it was very well received, and the evening is accompanied in the room adjacent to the bedroom of the royal daughters. It prepared her bed and the prince had only to watch the girls to find out where they went to dance; and they can do nothing in secret, the door of the bedroom remained ouverte.Mais eyelids grew heavy prince suddenly and he fell asleep. When he awoke in the morning, he could not but observe that the princesses had been at the ball and danced all the twelve stowed their shoes under their beds were completely worn out. The second and third night it was no different and the next day the prince had his head coupée.Par result, many boys still had visited the palace, but all paid their courage with their lives. Then one day, a poor wounded soldier who could not serve in the army, marched towards the town where the King. On his way he met an old woman who asked him where he allait.- I do not know much myself, said the soldier, and added jokingly: I would have wanted to discover where the princesses danced all nights - it's not that difficult, said the old woman, I need you not to drink the wine which will serve thee and thou hast pretended to sleep a sleep plomb.Puis, she handed him cape saying - If you put this cape, you will become invisible and you can steal after the twelve danseuses.Fort such good advice, the soldier began to seriously consider going to the palace. He took his courage in both hands, stood before the king and declared himself ready for the challenge. He was greeted with as much care as its predecessors and was even wearing a princely dress. In the evening, everyone got ready for bed, and the soldier was brought into the hall of the royal daughters. Before he goes to bed, the eldest came, bringing him a cup of wine. Gold, he had tied under her chin a small pipe; he let the wine flow in and not swallowed so not a drop. He lay down and waited a bit before starting to snore as if sleeping profondément.Dès that princesses heard, they laughed, and the eldest said: - What a shame to risk his life so! they got up, opened the cabinets, out of beautiful dresses and began to be beautiful in the mirror; they hopped, rejoicing by the evening's lead that was waiting. But the youngest was worried - you rejoice, but I have a presentiment. Misfortunes attend.- We Do not be silly, said the elder, wiping his worries, you're still worried. Have you forgotten how many princes have we watched in vain? And the soldier next did not even need the potion to fall asleep. This poor guy will not wake arrive.Néanmoins though, when the twelve princesses had finished dressing, they went to take a look at the soldier. He had his eyes closed, breathing regularly and did not move; they concluded that there was to do with fear. The elder approached her bed and knocked. The bed soon faded, giving way to a staircase that plunged underground and sisters down through this passage. The elder led the way, others followed, one after another. The soldier had seen and did not hesitate long: he threw the cape over his shoulders and began to descend behind the youngest. In the middle of the stairs, he walked a little on her skirt; she was terrified, and exclaimed: - What is it? Who is holding my dress - How stupid you are! the silence was the eldest, you had to just hang you a clou.Elles down to the bottom to find yourself in a wonderful driveway. The leaves of the trees were silver there, they shone and scintillaient.- I have to keep proof, decided the soldat.Il broke a small branch, but the tree creaked very fort.- There is something happening cried , anxious, the youngest princess. Did you hear that sound But the eldest said: - They are guns. Our princes are delighted that we will soon go the délivrer.Elles advanced into another aisle where the leaves were gold, and finally they entered an avenue where the trees real diamonds sparkled. The soldier pulled a small branch in the driveway of gold and the diamonds and each time a cracking sound. The youngest princess was frightened and startled every time; but the eldest still said it was many guns in their honneur.Elles continued their way when they came to a lake; near the bank floated twelve boats and in each of them stood a handsome prince. The twelve princes waiting for their twelve princesses. Each took one in his boat. The soldier sat next to the most jeune.- I do not understand, wondered the prince, the boat is so heavier than usual. I have to row with all my strength to avancer.- It must be the heat or storm, considered the little princess, I feel myself any moite.Sur the other side shone a beautiful palace all lit, and music very cheerful escaped from. The rolling drums and the trumpets ringing in the surface of the water. The princes and princesses landed and entered the palace, and each prince asked the princess of their choice to dance. The soldier, still invisible, danced with them, and whenever a princess took a cup in his hand, he drank the wine it contained before the princess could approach the cut of his lips. The youngest princess was all returned but the eldest was always there for rassurer.Ils danced all night until three in the morning; at this point the soles of shoes princesses were already worn and had to stop. The princes brought them to the other side, the soldier being this time sitting next to the oldest. The princesses princes bade farewell and promised to return. The soldier's forestalled up the steps, jumped into her bed and when the twelve princesses tired came up slowly, in the room a very loud snoring resonated déjà.Les princesses heard it, said to themselves: - With celui- there, there is nothing to craindre.Et they undressed, drew up their beautiful dresses in the wardrobes, their worn-out shoes under the beds and they couchèrent.Le next morning the soldier decided to say nothing. He wanted to go at least once more with them to witness their amazing celebration. So he followed the princesses second and third night and everything went exactly as before; princesses danced until their shoes are threadbare. The third night the soldier carried a cup preuve.Vint as the moment when the soldier had to give the answer to the king. He pocketed the three twigs and the cup, and when he stood before the throne. The twelve princesses stood behind the door to hear what he would dire.Le king asked immediately: - Where my twelve girls dance they wear for both their shoes - In a palace which is underground, said the soldier? . They dance there with twelve princes.Et he began to tell how it all happened; and showed the evidence. The king called his daughters and asked them if the soldier had told the truth. The princess saw that their secret was discovered and it was useless to deny, last, willy-nilly, recognize faits.Lorsqu'elles confessed the king asked the soldier which of the twelve princesses he wanted épouser.- I am no longer a young man, said the soldier, give me your daughter aînée.Les wedding took place the same day and the king promised him after his death he would become king. And the princes were under the earth again until bewitched have passed many nights they had spent dancing with the princesses.
The three spoiled children of fortune	669	1650	French	A father once called his three son. At first he gave a rooster, the second a scythe and a third chat.- I'm getting old, he said, the time is coming and before I die I would like to take care of your future. I have no money and I give you here is, at first glance, a small value. But sometimes one must not be fooled by appearances. What is important is how you will use it. Find a country where we do not yet know these servants and you will heureux.Après father's death, the eldest took the cock and went in the world, but wherever he went people knew roosters. Moreover, in the cities he saw from afar on the steeples and turning in the wind. And in the villages, he heard singing many. No one wonder at the creature and nothing made him think he could bring her happiness. One day, however, he finally found an island people who had never seen a cock in their lives. They had no sense of time and did not know the count. They distinguished the evening in the morning, but after dark, if they do not sleep, neither of them knew how long the day was going to lever.Le boy began to question them: - Step right up! Look at this proud animal! It has a ruby ​​crown on his head and spurs like a knight. Three times in the night you will announce the progression of time, and when he called for the third time, the sun will rise soon. If he sings in the day, you can be sure and certain that the time will change and you can enjoy précautions.Les people were in ecstasy before the cock; they stayed up all night to listen with delight, two hours and four hours, and finally at six rooster singing loudly to announce their time. The next morning, they asked the boy to sell the rooster and say his prix.- As much gold as an ass can carry, answered-il.- So few? For such an animal? cried the inhabitants of the island louder than each other. And they willingly gave him what he had request.Breakfast boy came home with the donkey and all his wealth and his brothers were astonished. The second decided - I'll go, too, in the world! We'll see if I have as much chance.Il walked and walked, and nothing indicated that he would have as much success with his scythe; everywhere he met peasants with a scythe on the shoulder. A 'day, finally, the fate directed on an island whose inhabitants had never seen wrong in their lives. When the rye was ripe, the villagers brought the guns on the fields and firing on wheat. It was, after all, pure chance: suddenly they were shooting too high, once they touched the ears instead of the stems, seeds and many were lost and not to mention the crash during the harvest. Unbearable! The boy went into the field and began to mow. He mowed quietly and so fast that people looked at him speechless, holding their breath. they hastened to give him what he wanted in exchange for the false and brought him a horse with such a gold loading heavy it could porter.Le third brother decided to try his luck with her cat. As long as he remained on land, he had no more success than his brothers; he did not find his happiness. But one day he came by boat to an island, and luck finally smiled. The people had never seen a cat before, while mice on the island were not lacking. They danced on tables and benches, reigning supreme everywhere outside as inside. The islanders were complaining a lot, the king himself was helpless before this fléau.Quelle boon for the cat! He began to hunt mice and soon rid into several rooms of the palace. The subjects of the whole kingdom begged the king to purchase this extraordinary animal and the king willingly gave the boy what he asked, a mule laden with gold. Thus the youngest of the three brothers returned to the house and became very rich man very opulent.Et in the royal palace, the cat made to their heart. He regaled with countless mouse. He drove so much so that he ends up having hot and thirsty. He paused, tilted his head back and meowed - Meow, meow When the king and his subjects heard this strange cry, they were frightened, and bulging eyes, they fled the palace!. Outside, the king summoned his advisers to decide what to do. What to do with this cat? Finally, they sent a messenger to him a deal: either he left the palace itself, or one the pages of expelling force.L'un left with the message and asked the cat to leave the palace willingly. But the cat, terribly thirsty, mewed more beautiful - Meow, meow, meow-meow-meow The page understood: No, no, no way! and went forward the response to roi.- Well, decided advisors, we will hunt the force.On brought a gun to the palace and the soldiers pulled him up was soon in flames. When the fire spread to the room where the cat was sitting, the mighty hunter jumped out the window and escaped. But the besiegers as the palace was not razed.
The three leaves of the snake	155	612	French	There is now a long time lived a king whose wisdom was known throughout his kingdom. One could not hide him anything, he seemed to catch in the air news about the most secret things. But he had a strange habit: every lunchtime, while the large table was served and there was nobody in the room, his faithful servant brought him some food. But this dish was covered, and the servant himself did not know what it contained; nobody else will know, because the king lifted the lid and began to eat only when alone. For a long time it happened so. But one day the servant, not knowing resist his curiosity, took the dish in her room and carefully closed the door behind him. He lifted the lid and saw a white snake in the dish. It smelled good and he wanted to taste it. No longer, he cut off a piece and brought it to her mouth. But hardly felt it the song on his tongue he heard chirping in the window. He came, listened and realized that it was the sparrows who told what they had seen in the fields and in the forests. Having tasted the snake had given him the ability to understand the language of animaux.Ce day, precisely, the queen lost her most beautiful ring, and suspicion fell on the servant who had the confidence of the king and was allowed to go everywhere. The king summoned the rudoya and threatened to condemn him if he did not unmasked the culprit before the next morning. The young man swore he was innocent but the king would not listen and dismissed. The valet, scared and worried, down into the courtyard where he began to wonder how he could do to get away. There were, on the edge of the stream, ducks were sitting chatting in low voices while smoothing their feathers with their beaks. The valet paused to listen. The ducks were counted where they had waded that morning and what good things they found room and one of them complained: "My stomach heavy because I accidentally swallowed a ring that was . under the queen's window "the valet immediately grabbed, carried it into the kitchen and said to the cook:" Bleeding the duck, it's bad enough fat "-" Okay, "replied the cook. weighing. "He was not lazy and he is well fed; long he should expect to be put in the oven." He bled and found, by emptying it, the queen's ring . The valet could easily prove his innocence to the king. It found that he had hurt his faithful servant and tried to repair his injustice; So he promised the young man a favor and give it the highest honorary position at court, the valet choisirait.Le servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse and money for the road because he wanted to leave to discover the world. So he set off as soon as he received what he asked. One day he passed by a pond where three fish, which were caught in the reeds were suffocating. It is said that fish are dumb, and yet the servant heard their complaint, saying they did not want to die so miserably. The young man took pity on them; he dismounted from his horse and put the three prisoners in the water. They again began to wriggle with delight, put out the head of the water and shouted: "We will not forget that you have saved us and you turn deserves it a day." The He rode on and suddenly felt to hear a voice from the sand trampled by her horse. He listened and heard the king ants lament, "Oh, if people wanted to do a little more attention and held their clumsy animals away this stupid horse tramples with his heavy clogs my poor servants!" The young man immediately pulled away and the king ants shouted: "We will not forget you and turn deserves another!" the path led him into the forest where he saw a crow and a raven mother father throwing all their little nest. "Go away, scoundrels," they croassèrent, "we come to feed you are already big enough to get you to eat alone!" The little poor, who waved the floor, clapping wings, chirped: "How could we, poor little we are, provide for us as we do not know even fly we'll starve!" the young man went down immediately from his horse, pierced him with his sword and the crows abandoned young people so that they have enough to eat. Small approached and, after filled, shouted "! We will not forget you and you turn deserves it a day" The valet was now forced to continue his journey on foot. He walked and walked and after a long walk, he arrived in a city whose streets were densely populated and lively. Suddenly a man came riding and announced that it was seeking a husband for the Princess Royal, but whoever wants to marry should pass a difficult test and if he failed, he would pay with his life. Many contenders were already tried it and all had perished there. But the young man when he had the opportunity to see the princess was so dazzled by her beauty that he forgot all the dangers. He presented himself as a suitor before the roi.On immediately took to the sea and cast in her eyes a gold ring into the waves. Then the king ordered him to return the ring from the bottom of the sea, and added: "If you emerge from the water without the ring, waves constantly reject you until you perish." All complained the young man and went. Standing alone on the beach, valet wondered what he was going to do, when suddenly saw three fish to approach him. It was the fish which he had saved my life. The middle wearing fish in its mouth a seashell he laid at the feet of the young man. It took him, opened it and found the gold ring. Happy, he took it to the king, rejoicing in advance of the award. But the king's daughter was very proud and, as soon as she learned that her suitor was not of his rank, she despised him and demanded he receive a new trial. She went down into the garden and, with her own hands, she poured in the grass ten sacks of millet. "You'll have to pick up that millet!" She ordered, "that these bags are filled before sunrise! And not one grain must not fail!" The young man sat down in the grass and wondered how he would be able to fulfill this new task. Finding no solution, he sat sorrowfully awaiting dawn and death. But as soon as the first rays of sun lit up the garden, he saw before him the ten sacks of millet filled to. They were arranged next to each other and not a grain was missing. The king of the ants came the night with thousands of his servants and grateful ants had gathered all the millet with infinite care and had filled the bags. The princess herself down into the garden, and was amazed that her suitor had fulfilled its task. Do not know yet still control his heart full of pride, she said: "He was able to pass both tests, but I will not be his wife so that he will not bring me an apple from the Tree of Life . "the young man did not know where pushing such a tree, but he decided to walk to where his legs would carry him, without much hope of finding the tree in question. He crossed three kingdoms and came one night in a forest. He sat at the foot of a tree to rest a little when he heard a rustling in the branches above his head and a golden apple fell into his hand. Meanwhile, three crows landed on his knees and said, "We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starvation We heard you were in search of the golden apple and that's why we have. crossed the sea and went to the end of the world where the Tree of Life to bring you this apple. "the young man, joyful heart, took the way back and gave the golden apple to the beautiful princess who could not shirk. They cut the apple of life in half, ate together and, at this moment, the heart of the princess was kindled love for the young man. They loved each other and lived happily to a ripe age.
The three spinners	135	501	French	It was a lazy young girl who would not spin. Her mother had beautiful get angry, she could not get anything. One day she lost patience, so she went up kicking him, and the girl began to cry aloud. Precisely the Queen passing by; heard the crying, she stopped her car, and, entering the house, she asked the mother why she beat her daughter so hard that the cries of children could be heard into the street. The woman was ashamed to reveal the laziness of her daughter and said, "I can not take away her time; she always wants and constantly spinning, and I am poor and can not suffice to provide flax." the queen replied, "Nothing pleases me more than the distaff; the sound of spinning wheel charm me, give me your daughter in my palace; I linen in abundance, she will spin as she wants." the mother consented with all his heart, and the queen took the young fille.Quand they arrived at the palace, she led her into three rooms that were filled with the finest linen from top to bottom. "Give me this flax, said she, and when this is over, I'll make you marry my eldest son. Do not you worry not your poverty, your zeal for the work you will be a sufficient dowry." The young girl said nothing, but inside she was appalled; because had she worked for three hundred years without stopping from morning until evening, she would not have come to the end of these huge piles of tow. When she was alone she began to cry, and so was three days without work of his fingers. On the third day the Queen came to visit; she was astonished to find there was nothing done; but the girl excused herself by claiming his sorrow for having left his mother. The queen was willing to settle for that reason; but she said, going ". Well, I must start work tomorrow" When the girl was alone, not knowing what to do, in his confusion, she went to the window, and she saw coming it three women, the first was a large flat foot; the second a lower lip so great and it covered and falling beyond the chin; and third, a broad and flattened thumb. They are planted in front of the window, eyes turned to the room and asked the girl what she wanted. She told them her sorrows; the three women offered him help. "If you threaten us, saying they him to invite us to your wedding, to name us your cousins ​​without blushing us, and make us sit at your table, let you spin your flax, and it will be over soon. - with all my heart, she replied, enter and start immediately "she introduced the three singular women and cleared a space in the first room to install them;. they set to work. The first tow spun and twirled the wheel; the second moistened the thread; the third twisted and leaned on the table with his thumb, and each boost it gave, there were ground a skein of the thinnest thread. Whenever the queen entered, the girl hid his spinners and it showed that there was in fact working, and the queen was amazed admiration. When the first room was empty they went to the second, then the third, which was soon also expires. Then the three women went on to say to the girl, "Do not forget your promise; thou find in well." When the girl had showed the queen the empty rooms and spun flax was fixed the wedding day. The prince was delighted to have a woman so clever and active, and he loved passionately. "I have three cousins, she said, which made me much good, and I would not want to neglect in my happiness. I would like to invite them to my wedding and have them sit at our table "the queen and the prince there saw no impediment. The day of the party, the three women arrived in great crew, and the bride said, "Dear cousins, be the bienvenues.- Oh said the prince, you have there very ugly relatives!." Then addressing the one with the flat foot, he said: "where do you get this large walk - having turned the wheel, she replied, having turned the wheel?." to the second: "D ' where does this hanging lip - having wet the wire, having wet the wire "and the third"?.? where do you get this large thumb - having twisted the wire, having twisted the wire. "the prince, afraid of this prospect, declared that henceforth his beautiful wife never would touch a spinning wheel, and so she was delivered from the odious occupation.
The three brothers	1178	654	French	A man had three son and possessed other that the house in which he lived. Each of his son wanted to inherit, and he did not know how to go about doing harm to any of them. The best would have been to sell and to share the prize between them; but could not solve it, because it was the home of his ancestors. Finally he said to his son: "Go into the world; make it your evidence; teach everyone a job, and when you return, one that will show the best expertise will inherit the house." The proposal pleased them; the eldest determined to be a blacksmith, the second and the third barber fencing master. They parted after agreed to meet with their father on a fixed day. Each began with a good teacher who taught him his trade thoroughly. The marshal had to shoe the king's horses; he believed that the house would be for him. The barber shaved noblemen, and he thought both keep house. As for the fencing master apprentice, he received more than one shot foil: mat he clenched his teeth and if not let discouraging: "For he thought, if I'm afraid the house will not for me. "When the appointed time arrived, they returned all three with their father. But they did not know how to rise to the opportunity to show their talents. As they talked among themselves of their embarrassment, he came to spend a hare running across the plain. "Egad, said the barber, it comes as tide in Lent." Grabbing his flat beard and soap, he prepared the foam until the animal was quite close, and ran after him, he soaped at the race and he shaved his mustache without stopping, without cutting at all or disturb him a hair on the rest of the body. "That's good, 'said the father, your brothers are no better, the house will be yours." A moment later ran a post car driving at full speed. "My father said the marshal, you'll see what I can do." And running after the car he took off a horse in full gallop over heels of his feet and gave him four. "You're a real fellow, said the father, and you are worth your brother; I really do not know how you decide deux.Mais the third said," Father, give me also my turn. "And as it started to rain, he drew his sword and waved in all directions on its head, so do not receive a single drop of water. The rain increased and then fell as if he had been paid buckets; it para any water with his sword, and remained until the end as little wet as if it had been covered in her room's father saw it, could not conceal his astonishment: "You s. 'washed away, he said, the house is yours. "The other two, filled with equal admiration, approved of the father's judgment. And as much they loved them, they remained all three together in the house to exercise their state and they won a lot of money, and lived happily until old age. one of them died while the other two took such grief that they fell sick and died also. and, because of their common skill and their mutual affection , they buried them all three in the same grave.
The Three Little Men in the Wood	125	480	French	He was a man whose wife died, and a woman whose husband died; and the man had a daughter, and the woman had a daughter. The girls knew each other and were walking together and then returned to the house of the woman. Then she said to the daughter of the man: "Listen, tell your father that I want to marry her, then you have every morning to milk, wash and drink wine while my daughter bathe in the water and drink water. " The girl went home and told her father what the woman had said. Man: "What should I do Marriage is a joy and also a torment?". Finally, as he could not get to decide, he removed his boot and said, "Take this boot, the sole is pierced, go to the attic, hang it to the big nail and pour water in it If. not leaking, I married again, but if it leaks, I refuse. " The girl did what he had commanded him: but under the effect of the water hole and tightened the boot is filled to the brim. She told her father what fate had decided. So he went to see him and he saw that it was true; he went to ask the widow marriage and wedding took lie.Le next day, when the two girls got up, the daughter of the man found the milk for washing and wine to drink, while the daughter of the woman had water for washing and water to drink. Two days later, there was for the one as for the other water for washing and water to drink. And the third day the man's daughter was water for washing and water to drink, while the daughter of the woman had milk for washing and wine to drink, and we sat there . The woman began to cordially detest his daughter and did not know him to invent to make life increasingly difficult. In addition she was jealous because her stepdaughter was beautiful and kind, while her real daughter was ugly and repoussante.Un winter day, as he froze to stone splitting and mountains and valleys were buried under snow the woman fashioned a paper dress, called the girl and said, "put this robte, goes into the box and bring me a basket of strawberries: I feel like - My God, said the young. girl is that strawberries do not grow in winter, the ground is cracked, and then the snow covered everything. and why should I go in this paper dress? It is so cold outside that has the frozen breath: the wind will pass through and brambles tear me - will you still replicate replied the mother-task spinning and you do not advise to reappear before filling the basket.? fraisers. " Then she gave him a little piece of hard bread and said, "You shall have all day," and she thought she would die of hunger and cold and never reappear before his yeux.Or the girl was obedient, she put the paper dress and went with his little cart. There was nothing but snow around and we did not see a single blade of grass. Arriving in the forest, she saw a small house where three dwarves were in the window. She wished them good morning and knocked discreetly at the door. ILs shout to enter, she entered the room and asit on a bench near the stove to warm up and eat his lunch. The dwarfs said, "Give us a piece .-- Gladly," she said, she cut her piece of bread in two and gave half. They asked him: "What are you doing in the forest this winter day with your little thin dress --Ah she said, eil I must seek strawberries to fill my basket and as I relate not the I can not go home. " When she had eaten her bread they gave her a broom and said, "sweeps snow at the back door." But when she was outside, the three little men said, "What are we going to give him a reward for being so kind and so good and sharing her bread with us?" AWhen the first said: "It will have the gift of grace day by day." The second said, "He will fall down gold coins mouth whenever she shall speak a word." The third said: "A king will come and take a wife." But the girl did what the dwarfs told him she was sweeping the snow behind the little house, and what do you trouvea it? Nothing but ripe strawberries that were dark red stains on the snow. So, in his joy, she picked up her basket full, thanked the little men, shook hands with each of them and went home running to report that her stepmother had requested. As she said "Hello" by entering immediately a piece of gold fell out of her mouth. Then she related what had happened to him in the forest, and every word she spoke gold coins issued from her bouceh, so that soon the whole room was covered with. "Just look at this impertinence, said his half-sister, and wasting money," but she was secretly jealous and wanted to go in turn look for strawberries in the forest. "No, my little girl, said the mother, it is too cold, you could die." But as she left him no respite, she relented, gave her a splendid fur jacket, she had to put on, and gave him bread and a cake for the girl route.La went into the forest and went straight to the little house, the three little men were still at the window, but she did not bowed, and without giving a glance or a hello, she entered the room, stumbled, sat down by the stove and began eating his bread and cake. "Give us a song," cried the little men, but she replied: "I have not enough for me, how would I even other?" When she had finished eating, they said: "This is a broom, cleans snow outside the back door." But she replied: "Hey, brush yourself, I'm not your maid." Seeing that they wanted to give her anything, she took the door and went away. Then the three little men said to each other: "What shall we give it to punish her for being so rude and have an evil heart and jealous that gives anything to anyone?" The first said: "It will have the gift of ugly by the day." The second said: "chauqe word she will deliver a toad out of her mouth." The third said, "She will die a terrible death." The girl looked for strawberries outside; but as she found none, she went bad mood at home. And when she opened her mouth to tell her mother what had happened in the forest here that every word a toad out of her mouth, so she inspired all of répulsion.A now, stepmother was even more angry and thought only do all possible harm to the man's daughter, whose beauty really grew day by day. Finally she took a chaudront, put it on the heat and boiled yarn. When it was boiled, she hung the shoulders of the girl and gave her an ax: she had to go with it on the frozen river, make a hole in the ice and ret wire. As she was obedient, she went and made a hole in the GLAE and she was digging when passed a splendid carrose in which the king was. The carrose stopped and the king asked: "My child, who are you and what are you doing here?" - "I am a poor girl and I rouis the wire." The king took pity and when he saw that she was so beautiful, he said, "will you come with me?" - "Oh yes, wholeheartedly," she replied, as she was very glad not to have to appear before her mother and soeur.Elle therefore entered the carriage and when they arrived at the castle, they celebrated the wedding with great pomp, according to the gift that the dwarves had done. AT the end of a year the young Queen had a son, and when his stepmother had heard of her great joy, she came to the castle with his daughter and pretended to want to make him a visit. But as the king came out a while and there was nobody else in the room, the wicked woman seized the queen by the head, grabbed her daughter by the feet, and then they lifted the bed and threw out the window into the river that flowed past. Then she lay down his ugly daughter in the bed, and the old covered it up to the head. When the king came back and tried to speak to his wife, the old woman cried, 'Hush hush, not now, she is bathed in sweat, he must let her rest today "The king saw nothing wrong and did not return until the next morning, and when he began to talk to his wife and she replied, here at every word a toad out of her mouth, while he usually fell in a piece gold. He asked how it was done, but the old told him that it was of strong perspiration and that it would soon disparaître.La night, however, the scullion saw a duck swimming in the gutter and said "? King, what are you doing ?, Dors you or watches you" and as it did not give answer, she said, "What are my guests?" Then the kitchen boy answered: "They sleep a deep sleep. "she asked again," What is my child "and he replied,". in her crib sleeping nicely "Then the queen took its form and ascended, she gave him to boir has arranged his bed, covered it and start again in the guise of a duck swimming in the gutter. It thus came two nights, the third night she said to the kitchen boy, "Go tell the king to take his sword and brandishing three times on the only above mio." The kitchen boy ran to tell the king, who came with his sword and brandished it three times over the ghost: and the third time his wife stood before him, fresh, safe and sound, as it was auparavent.Alors the king was in great joy; but he kept the queen hidden in a closet until Sunday, when the child was to be baptized. And when he was baptized, he said: "What should be done to someone who pulled in another bed and threw it in the water - it deserves nothing better, said the old? that being placed in a barrel lined with nails that we will roll down from the mountain to the river. " Then the king said: "You gave your sentence," he made a barrel semblabe and put the old with her daughter in, then the bottom was nailed and the barrel tumbling down the mountains rolled to the river.
The three feathers	606	402	French	There was once a king who had three son, who were both intelligent and wise, while the third did not speak much and was foolish, so he was called Beta. When the king became old and he felt his strength declining, he began to think of his end and did not know which of his son he had to leave the kingdom in inheritance. Then he said: "Go, and he who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be King after my death." So there is no dispute between them, he led them outside his castle, blew three feathers in the air, saying, "Where they fly, so shall your direction." One feather flew to the west, the other east, on the third it fluttered straight a short distance, but soon fell to the ground. Then one brother went to the right and one on the left, while they mocked Simpleton who had to stay near the third feather had fallen close to lui.Le Beta sat down and was fine sad. Then he noticed suddenly that door was next to the pen. He raised the hatch and saw a staircase he began to descend. He arrived at a door, knocks and heard screaming inside: "Little green maiden small, Thigh tense, and paw hare Bondis and bounce, quickly see who is outside." The door opened and he saw a big fat toad sitting there, surrounded by a crowd of small frogs. The big frog asked him what was his desire. "I would like the most beautiful and finest carpet," he replied. Then she called a young one to whom she said, "Little green maiden small, Thigh tense, and paw hare Bondis and bounce, quickly see who is outside." The young toad brought the box and the fat toad opened it, took out a carpet that gave the Beta, and the carpet was so beautiful and ornate than could weave like this on earth, there -high. Then he thanked her, and went up the other two escalier.Cependant their youngest brother as so stupid that they believed he would find nothing to report. "Why tiring us Search?" is said he and the first shepherdess he met was the case: they stripped him of his coarse linen shawl and returned wearing the king. Meanwhile Beta also came back, bringing his beautiful carpet. Seeing him, the King was astonished and said: "If we have to rely on justice, the kingdom belongs to the youngest." But the other two did not rest left their father, telling him that it was impossible that the Beta, whose reason was lacking in all areas, became king; So they asked him to kindly make a new agreement. Then the king said, "He who brings me the most beautiful ring shall inherit the kingdom." He went out with his three son and blew the three feathers, which they were the route to follow. As before, the two elder one went east and the other west, but the pen of Beta flew straight and fell off the door. So he went down again to the fat toad, and told him he needed a very nice ring. The frog was immediately bring the big box, took a ring she gave to Beta, and this ring, all glittering with precious stones, was so beautiful that no goldsmith on earth could make in favor. The two eldest mocking the Beta that would probably lock seek a golden ring, They gave themselves no trouble, but knocked the nails of an old wagon wheel and each took it to the king. So when Simpleton produced his golden ring, his father again said, "To him belongs the kingdom." The two eldest did not cease to harass their father so that he might place yet a third condition: it therefore decided that the one who brought the most beautiful woman would have the kingdom. He blew again on the three feathers flew like précédentes.Alors time, without worrying about the Beta went to the fat toad, and said: "I must return to the castle the most beautiful woman." - "Hey, the most beautiful woman!" answered the frog. "That's something we did not immediately within range but you get all the same." She gave him a hollow, hollow core to which six mice were harnessed. "What do I do that?" said quite mournfully. "You only have to install it one of my little frog," she replied. He grabbed one at random in the circle of those who surrounded the big frog, put in carrots, and now barely seated inside, the frog became a wonderfully beautiful maiden, the turnip into a coach and small six horses mice. So he kissed the girl and drove off at a gallop of his six horses and brought the beautiful to the king. His brothers then arrived: they were given no trouble to find a beautiful woman and brought first two peasants came. When he saw the King said: "It's the younger the kingdom belongs after my death." Then the two elders began again to reshuffle the ears of the king of the same protest: "We can not admit that the Beta becomes king," and they asked that this privilege back to the one whose wife could leap through a ring which hung in the middle of the large room. "Our farmers will be well able," if they said, "they are strong enough, by against the delicate damsel going to kill himself by jumping." The old king agreed likewise to their prayer. The two peasant momentum and certainly they jumped through the ring, but they were so heavy that they broke drooping arms and legs. It was then the turn of the beautiful maiden whom Simpleton had brought, and she crossed the ring of a leap as lightly as a doe: it had to cease all opposition. Thus Beta received the crown and long reigned as wise.
vagrants	95	210	French	Coq told hen "is the nuts season you have to go on the coast before the squirrel takes them all harvested." - "Good idea," Hen said, "go; we'll entertain us well." They went together on the coast and stayed there until evening. So either vanity or because they had eaten too much, they would not walk back home, and the cock had to build a small car with walnut shells. When she was ready, the chicken went in and said to the cock to tackle the drawbar. "And for whom do you take me?" said the cock, "I'd better turn around walk that harnessed like a horse; no, it is not in our agreement: I do not mind being coachman and sit on the seat, but drag myself the car, that's what I will not do "as they quarreled and a cane began to cry." well thieves, which allowed you to come under my walnut Wait, I'm going! arrange!" And she ran with open beak on the cock. But this one, quick to retort, hit the duck in the body and plowed him so well the flesh with blows of ergot, she begged for mercy and let himself get on with the punishment by car from his attack. The rooster sat on the seat to lead the crew, and he threw it at full speed, shouting: "Gallop, cane, galloping!" As they had done a stretch of road, they met two travelers who went by foot; it was a pin and a needle, which shouted: "Stop stop!" Soon, they said, he would pitch dark, they could not move; the road was full of mud; they had lingered to drink beer before the door to the inn Tailor; finally they begged that would allow them to get in the car. The rooster, given the thinness of the newcomers and the little space they would hold, consented to receive them, provided they march on anyone's toes. Very late in the evening they came to an inn, and as they did not want to risk night on the road, and the duck was tired, they decided to enter. The host was first difficulties; his house was already full, and new travelers did not seem a very long raised him, but finally defeated by their fine words, by the promise that made her abandon her eggs that the hen had to lay way and let him duck that laid in a daily, he was pleased to receive them for the night. They made use of the best and spent the evening to feast. The next morning, at break of dawn, when everyone was asleep, the cock awoke the hen, and spicy egg beaks, they both swallowed and threw the shell into the fireplace; Then they came to take the needle which was still asleep, and seizing the head, they planted in the chair of the host, and the pin in his towel; then they took their flight out the window. The duck who willingly slept under the stars and had remained in the courtyard stood up hearing the pass, and entering a stream that ran to the wall, she went down faster than she had run the station the day before. Two hours later the host got out of bed, and after washing the face, he took the towel to wipe; but the pin scratched her face and made him a large red scar that went from ear to ear. He went down to the kitchen to light his pipe; but by blowing on the fire, debris from the shell of the egg jumped into his eyes. "Everything conspires against me this morning," he said, and in his grief he fell in his big chair; but he soon pulled screaming because the needle had pricked firmly and not to the head. This accident ended his exasperation; suspicion fell immediately on travelers he had received the previous evening; and indeed, when he went to see what had become, he décampés found. Then he swore that in future he did not receive in his house in the vagabonds who make a lot of expenses, do not pay, and thank you for everything you play some nasty turn.
master Punch	1705	801	French	Mr. Sharp was a small man lean and assets that do not give a moment's rest. A snub nose was only projecting his pale face and riddled by smallpox; his hair was gray and bristly; his little eyes still flashed right and left. He noticed everything, criticized everything, knew everything better than anyone and was always right. Passing through the streets, waving his arms so hard that one day he grabbed a girl a bucket of water and was popped in the air, so it was quite flooded . "Little fool, read cried he, shaking, could not you see that I was coming behind thee?" In his condition he was a shoemaker, and when he worked he pulled the Ligneul with such violence that he sent to those who did not take to be honest distance of heavy blows in the ribs. No worker could not stay more than a month with him, because he always found fault with the work done best. They were uneven stitches, a longer shoe or a higher heel than the other; or was it the leather that had not been beaten enough. "Wait, he said the apprentice, I'll teach you how to skin it softens." And he administered to him on the back two shots tire-pied.Il called all her lazy, yet itself was not great work, because it did not take two minutes in place. If his wife had risen morning and had lit the fire, he jumped out of bed and ran barefoot in the kitchen. "Wilt thou burn the house? He cried, that's a fire to roast an ox! It seems that wood costs rien.Si servants, busy washing, laughing together around the tank by telling the news he scolded the matter: "there they are parties, silly goose! they do move their beak, and a peg, they forget their work. And the soap, what is in the water? Waste and laziness! they save their hands and rub provide linens! "And, in his anger, he stumbled against a full bucket of laundry, and the kitchen was inondée.On was building a new house across from him. From his window he watched the work" They use sand that gnaws not dry up, he exclaimed; we never will do well in that house; see how the builders put their stones through! The mortar is worthless; is gravel, not sand, it takes. I live to see that house down on the heads of its inhabitants! "It was thus above two points to his work, but suddenly he got up again and hurriedly took off his apron Leather saying," Must I go tell them they did. "He fell on the carpenters:" What does it mean? nothing is plumbed into your frame; do you think these joists then held? everything will be distorted from one moment to the next. "He took an ax in the hands of a carpenter and wants to show how one should go about it, when a car loaded with clay comes to pass, he throws out the ax to run after the carter:" are- you crazy? him he cries; There he makes sense to harness young horses in an overloaded car like this? The poor beasts will die on the spot! "Wagoner does not answer; Mr. Sharp returned while anger in his boutique.Comme it goes down again, his apprentice submit a shoe." What further than that? him he cries; you do not I forbidden to cut shoes so low? Who is it who will buy such a shoe? this is only a sole! I hear that my orders are executed at the lettre.- Sir, replied the apprentice, you are right, no doubt; This shoe is worthless; but it's one that you just cut and sew yourself. You did fall just now when you get up, and I have touched only to pick it up; but an angel from heaven would fail to satisfy you. "Mr. Sharp dreamed one night that he was dead and on the road to paradise. On reaching the door he knocked, and St. Peter opened it to see who was there." Ah! it's you, he said, Mr. Sharp; I'll let you in. But I warn you, do not criticize anything you'll see in the sky, otherwise it will happen malheur.- You could have dispensed with this warning, said Mr. Sharp, I know the etiquette, and, God thank you, everything is perfect here; it's not like on earth. "So he went in and began to browse through the vast spaces of the sky He looked all around, right and left;.. But he could occasionally help but nod and mutter between his teeth It finally saw two angels who were carrying a large piece of wood. It was a beam had had a man in the eye as he sought a straw in his neighbor's. But the angels, instead of carrying in its length, standing aside. "did anyone ever seen such a blunder? Mr. Sharp thought. But he was silent and calmed by saying: "Basically, it's a whole; that carries the beam straight forward or sideways, provided it arrives safely, and in truth I see that they collide nowhere. "further, he saw two angels who drew water in a leaky bucket and fleeing in all directions. So they did the rain to water the earth. "! For the devil ..." is he cried; but fortunately stopped by thinking that it was probably a game: For entertainment, he said to himself, we may well do useless things, especially here where I can see that laziness reigns supreme. "Further on, he saw a car stuck in a deep hole." It is not surprising, he said to the man who was with; it is so poorly charged! What you wear there? - Good thoughts. I could not get out; but fortunately I brought my car so far; they will not let me in trouble. "Indeed, there came an angel who harnessed two horses to the car." Very well, said Mr. Sharp; but two horses will not be enough; it would take at least four. "Another angel came with two other horses, but instead of also harness them in front, he harnessed them from behind this time it was too much for Mr. Sharp." Têtebleu! if he cried, what are you doing here? Has anyone ever seen tackle well, since the world began? But in their blind pride, they think they know better than the rest "He was going, but a heavenly inhabitants seized him by the collar and threw in the air with irresistible force. But he still had time to see through -Dessous door car that was removed in the air by four horses ailés.A that time, Mr. Sharp awoke. "the sky, he said to himself, is not quite similar to land, and there are many things that we believe are bad and which are good at the bottom. But still, that could see composure harness horses on opposite sides of a car? they had wings, either; but I had not seen him first. And in any case, it is foolish proud that give wings to horses that have four legs. But I have to get up; otherwise everything would go wrong here. This is fortunate, indeed, that definitely I am not dead! "
Phoebus and Boreas	4144	298	French	Boreas and the Sun saw a traveler who had provided himself with happiness against bad weather. (They entered the Autumn, when the caution to travelers is good) It's raining; the sun shines; and the scarf of Iris Makes those emerging savvy What these months the coat is very necessary for them; The Latins called them doubtful for this case. Our man had therefore to rain expected: Good coat well doubled; good good strong stuff. It said the Wind, claims to have provided At all accidents; but it did not provide what I shall blow so That it is no button that takes: it will, if I want, That the cloak him go to the devil. The ébattement could we be nice: your pleasure to have? - Well, we bet the two of us (said Phoebus) without so many words, Who will soon receding shoulders Cavalier From what we see. Start. I leave you my obscure rays. It was enough. Our blower pledge throat If vapors swells like a balloon Makes a demon of noise, hisses, wind, storm, and breaks in its path Maint roof that can not help it, destroyed many a boat: The all about a coat. The Cavalier was careful to prevent the storm could not to rush into it. This preserved him; Wind waste time: The more agonized, the more the other stood firm; It was nice to be the collar and folds. As soon as he was at the end of the term That the challenge we had set, the sun dispels the cloud, Recreate, and then finally enters the Cavalier Under his Balandras that he knew, The constrained to despoil. Still not he used all his power. More violence is sweetness.
Rapunzel	115	310	French	Once upon a time a husband and wife who had long desired to have a child, when finally the woman was in hope and thought that God had been willing to fulfill his dearest wish. On the back of their house, they had a small window overlooking a beautiful garden where grew the plants and the most beautiful flowers; but it was surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to venture inside because he belonged to a witch of great power and that everyone feared. So one day the woman was standing at the window and admired the garden below, she saw a bed planted with superb raiponces with rosettes of leaves so green and so shining, so fresh and tasty, the water came to him mouth and she dreamed of eating a healthy salad. This desire she had had only grow and grow day by day; but she also knew she could not have, she fell into melancholy and began to waste away, losing weight and growing pale. In the light so low, her husband was worried and asked: "But you did happen, my dear wife?" - "Ah!" she answered him, "I'll die if I can not eat raiponces backyard of the home!" The husband very loved his wife and thought, "Rather than let her die, I will bring him to the rapunzel, whatever it may cost me!" The same day, after sunset, he scaled the garden wall of the witch, took hastily a, handful of rampion it to his wife. The woman in made a salad she ate with great avidity. But it was so good and it had him so much that the next day, rather than his desire was satisfied, she had tripled. And to calm her, it was absolutely necessary that her husband should return once again in the garden. At dusk, so he did as the day before, but when he jumped the wall into the garden, he froze with fear as the witch before him! "How dare you into my garden like a thief," she said with a furious look, "and steal my rapunzel! You'll see what it will cost you in!" - "Oh!" he begged, "do you not prefer clemency and mercy to justice if I did, so I decided to do was that I was forced: my wife saw your raiponces our small window, and she was making such a desire to eat she would have died if she had not been in the witch silenced his fury and said. "If it's as you say, I will allow you to take as much rapunzel as you want, but on one condition: that you give me the child that your wife will give birth. All will go well for him and I will care as a mother. "The man, in his terror, accepted everything without question. And a few weeks later, when his wife gave birth, the witch soon arrived, gave the child name of Rapunzel and won with elle.Raiponce was a little girl, and the best that was in the sun. When she was twelve years, the witch shut up in a tower that stood without stairs or gate, . in the middle of a forest and as the tower had no other opening a tiny window at the top, when the witch wanted to enter, she called in the window and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Descends- me your hair. "Rapunzel had long and beautiful hair that had so-called golden son. hearing the voice of the witch, she undid her hair, tied up his mats on a hook of the window and let run until down twenty ells below, so the witch would climb up th t entrer.Quelques years later, it happened that a king's son who was riding in the forest passed by the tower and heard a song so sweet that he stopped to listen. It was Rapunzel who distracted his solitude letting go his delightful voice. The king's son, who was going up to her, tried the door of the tower and found none. He turned round and went home; but the singing had so shaken and moved in his heart, he could not let a day pass without overlap in the forest to return to the tower and listen. He was there one day, hidden behind a tree when he saw the witch come he heard his name called in the window: "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair." Then Rapunzel let down her braids and the witch climbed. "If this is the staircase by which one mounts, I also want to try my luck," he said. And the next day when it began to get dark, he went to the foot of the tower and cried, "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let down your hair." The mats were held immediately and the king's son monta.Sur the first Rapunzel was very frightened at seeing a man entered her home, as a man she had never seen; but he began to talk to him nicely and tell him how much his heart was touched when he heard her sing, and he had had no rest until he had seen her in person. Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she wanted him as husband saw that he was young and handsome, she thought: "This will surely love me better than my old mother godmother, the Taufpatin, "and she replied that she wanted much, putting his hand in hers. She immediately added: "I would like to go with you, but I would not know how to get down If you come, then bring me each time a silken cord. I will make a ladder, and when it is over, I will come down and you will take me on your horse. They agreed that by then he would come to see her every night because during the day had the old. from all this, the witch had nothing guessed if one day Rapunzel he said: "Tell me, mother, godmother, how is it that you are so heavy to rise, while the king's son, he's upstairs in a flash?" - "Ah! wicked! What do I hear? "Exclaimed the witch." And I thought you have isolated from the world, and yet thou hast cheated! "In the fury of his anger, she grabbed the hair beautiful Rapunzel and clasped in his left hand, turning once or twice, grabbed the scissors in his right hand and jack-crack, beautiful braids falling down. But if was ruthless cruelty, she went Rapunzel drop in a desert solitude where she left him to a miserable existence and full of détresse.Ce same day again, she returned securely attach the mats to the hook of the window, and towards evening came when the king's son and called.. "Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair" witch let unfold the way down mats the king's son went up there, but it was not his beloved Rapunzel he found the top, it was the old witch who stared a fierce and poisonous look. "ha ha!" she sneered, "you just che rch the lady of your heart, but the beautiful bird is no longer in the nest and he sings: the cat won, as will now pop your eyes. For you, Rapunzel is lost you will never see her more "Torn with grief and panicked desperation, the king's son jumped out the top window of the tower: he was not killed, but he saved his life! he lost his eyes falling among thorns, and he wandered blind in the forest, feeding on wild fruits and roots, weeping and wailing endlessly about the loss of his beloved wife's unhappy wandered. and for a few years, blind and miserable, until its not the fumbling came to the desert where Rapunzel lived miserably itself with the twins she had given birth to a boy and a girl he had. heard a voice he thought he knew, and groping, he advanced toward her. Rapunzel knew him and hugged him, crying. Two of her tears that affected his eyes, the king's son recovered completely view, and brought his beloved in his kingdom, where they fu rent greeted with transports of joy and now lived happily for many, many years of happiness.
Ricky with the Tuft	1995	711	French	There was once a queen who gave birth to a son, so ugly and wrong, we long doubted whether he had human form. A fairy that was found at birth assured him that he would not allow to be kind, because it would have a lot of spirit; she added as he could, under the gift she had just received, give as much intelligence he would have the person he would like the mieux.Tout it somewhat consoled the poor Queen, who was very distressed to have given birth to an ugly brat. It is true that this child did not begin to speak earlier he said a thousand pretty things, and had in all his actions whatever so spiritual, that was charmed. I forgot to say that he was born with a small tuft of hair on the head, which caused that appointed him Riquet with the Tuft, carRiquet was the name of the famille.Au after seven or eight years Queen of a neighboring kingdom gave birth to two daughters. The first that came to the world was more beautiful than the day the queen was so comfortable, we apprehended that too much joy she had no man might hurt. The same fairy who had witnessed the birth of little Riquet with the Tuft was present, and to moderate the joy of the queen, she told him that this little princess would not have minded and would be so stupid that 'she was beautiful. This much mortified the Queen; but she had a few moments later a far greater sorrow, for the second daughter she gave birth found himself extremely laide.- Do you grieve so much, madame, said the fairy; your daughter will be rewarded for that matter, and it will have so much spirit, that we will notice almost no it lacks the beauté.- God willing, replied the Queen; but would it developed way to have a little spirit to the elder who is beautiful - I can do nothing for her, madam, on the side of mind, said the fairy, but I can all the beauty side; and as there is nothing I want to do to your satisfaction, I'll give it to donate to make handsome or beautiful person who plaira.À measure him that these two princesses became larger, their perfections grew with them also and they spoke everywhere about the beauty of the elder, and the spirit of the younger. It is also true that their defects augmented greatly with age. The younger disfigured visibly, and the eldest became more stupid by the day. Or she did not reply to what was asked of him, or she said something foolish. It was with this so awkward that it could have put four porcelain on the edge of a fireplace without a break, drink a glass of water without spilling half its habits.Quoique beauty is a great advantage in a young person, however the younger almost always outweighed its predecessor in all companies. First there was the side of the most beautiful to see and admire, ais soon after, we went to the one that had the most spirit, to hear him say a thousand pleasant things; and we were amazed that in less than an hour the elder quarter had no one with her, and everyone was tidy around the younger. The elder, though very stupid, noticed the good, and she would have given without regret its beauty to have half the spirit of his sister. The queen, any wise it was, could not help reproaching her several times his stupidity which thought to die of pain this poor princesse.Un day she had retired to a wood for her complain there misfortune, she saw coming to her a little man very ugly and very nasty, but very beautifully dressed. It was the young Prince Riquet with the Tuft, who having fallen in love with her on her portraits that ran by everyone, had left his father's kingdom to have the pleasure to see and talk to him. Nice to meet all alone, he accosted her with all the respect and all imaginable politeness. Having noticed, after having made the ordinary compliments, that she was very élancolique, he said: - I do not understand the point, madam, how nice a person you are also can be as sad as you appear; for though I can boast of having seen countless beautiful people, I can say that I have never seen whose beauty vôtre.- This approach please to say, sir, 'replied the princess; and remained là.- Beauty, said Riquet with the Tuft, is a great advantage that it must take place in all the rest; and when we have it, I do not see that there is nothing that can afflict us beaucoup.- I would prefer, said the princess, be as ugly as you and have the mind than to have the Beauty as I have, and be stupid as far as I suis.- nothing, ma'am, that we make more of the mind than to believe do not have, and it is the nature of the property there, the more you have, the more you believe in manquer.- I do not know that, 'said the princess, but I board that I am very stupid, and that's where we get grief that I Tue.-If this is it, madam, that you grieve, I can easily end your douleur.- And how will you do? princesse.- said I have the power, madam, said Riquet with the Tuft, giving spirit as far as one can get to the person I have to love the most, and as you are, madam; person, it will hold you to that you have as much spirit as one can be, provided you were good to me princess épouser.La remained all prohibited, and rien.- replied I see, 'said Riquet with the tuft, that this proposal is you pain, and I do not wonder; but I give you a whole year all for you résoudre.La princess had so little mind, and at the same time a great desire to have, she imagined that the end of this year would come Amais ; so she accepted the offer made to him. She had no sooner promised Riquet with the Tuft that she would marry a year on this day, she felt other than it was before; she found incredibly easy to say all that pleased him, and to say a fine manner, easy and natural. It began from the moment a flirtatious conversation and supported with Riquet with the Tuft, where she shone with such a force that Riquet with the Tuft believed he had given her more wit that it had reserved for itself . When she returned to the palace, the whole court knew what to think of a change so sudden and so extraordinary, as much as we had heard him impertinence before, as we heard him say very sensible things and infinitely spiritual. The whole court was in a joy that can not be imagined; there was her younger who was not glad, because no longer having his eldest advantage of the mind, it no longer seemed to her that monkey strong désagréable.Le King led by its opinion, and would even sometimes hold the board in his apartment. The sound of this change had spread all the young princes of the neighboring kingdoms made their efforts to make love, and almost all the wedding demanded; but she was the point which would have enough sense, and she listened to all without committing not one of them. However he came so powerful, so rich, so witty and so well that she could not help but have the good will to him. His father perceiving told her that he was the mistress on the choice of a husband, and that she had only to declare. As more one mind and one has difficulty in making a firm resolution on this matter, she asked, after thanking his father, he would give him time to penser.Elle went there by chance to walk in the same wood where she found Riquet with the tuft, to dream more conveniently to what she had to do. While she was walking, dreaming deeply, she heard a thud under his feet, as several people who will come and who does act. Having listened more attentively, it ouit that one said, "Bring me the pot"; another: "Give me this boiler"; another: "Put the wood in the fire. "The earth opened at the same time, and she saw under her feet like a great kitchen full of cooks, cooks and all sorts of officers necessary for a magnificent feast. He pulled out a band of twenty or thirty roasters, who went to camp in an alley of the wood around a very long table, and all the larding hand, and the fox tail on the ear, began to work rhythmically to the sound of a song harmonieuse.La princess, surprised the show, asked them who they travaillaient.- this, madam, answered most apparent of the band for Prince Riquet with the tuft whose wedding will demain.La princess even more surprised that she had the summer, and recollecting all at once that there was a year that same day she had promised to marry the Prince Riquet with the tuft, she thought fall from its high. What was that she did not remember was that when she made this promise, it was stupid, and that taking the new spirit that the Prince had given her, she had forgotten all her foolishness. she had not taken thirty steps continuing his walk, that Riquet with the tuft presented himself to her, brave, beautiful, and as a prince who will marier.- You see me, he said, ma'am, right to hold my word and I do not doubt you came here to perform vôtre.- I will confess frankly replied the Princess, I have not made up my mind on it, and I do not think I can ever take it as you souhaitez.- you surprise me, madame, said Riquet with the houppe.- I believe, said the princess, and certainly if I was dealing with a brutal, a man without sprit, I I find very embarrassed. A princess has but his word, 'he would say, and you must marry me, since you promised; but as one to whom I speak is the man of the world who has the most spirit, I'm sure he will listen to reason. You know, when I was a beast, I could still bring myself to marry you; how voulez- having your mind that you gave me, which makes me even harder in people that I was, I take a resolution today that I could take in that time ? If you thought all good to marry me, you did very wrong to deprive me of my stupidity, and make me see more clearly than I voyais.- If a man without mind, replied Riquet with the Tuft, would be received, as you just said, to blame your lack of speech, why would you, madam, I do not wear well in something where there is all the happiness of my life? Is it reasonable that people who have the mind to be a worse condition than those who did not? Can the claim, you who have so much, and who have wished to have ant? But come to the point, please. To reserve my ugliness, is there anything in me that displeases you? Are you hurt happy with my birth, my mind, my mood, and my manners? - Not at all, replied the princess, I love you in all that you just dire.- me If this is so, resumed Riquet with the tuft, I'll be happy, because you can make me the most amiable of hommes.- How can it do? said the princesse.- This will be replied Riquet with the Tuft, if you love me enough to want this to be; and so, madam, that you do not suspect, know that the same fairy who on my birthday gave me the gift of spiritual power make the person that would please me, you also made the gift to make it beautiful the one you love, and who you want to do well this faveur.- If it is so, said the princess, I ouhaite with all my heart that you become the ruler of the world more beautiful and most lovable; and I'll do it as far as donation is moi.La princess had no sooner uttered these words than Riquet with the Tuft appeared to him the world's most beautiful man, and best done kindest she had ever seen. Some of them insist that it was not the charm of fairy opérèrent but love alone caused this metamorphosis. They say the princess who is thinking about the perseverance of her lover, in its discretion, and on all the good qualities of his soul and spirit, no longer lives deformity of his body, nor the ugliness of his face, that his hump no longer seemed to him that the good air of a man who made the big back, and instead that until she saw him limp horribly, she found him more than a certain air that bent the charmed; they still say that his eyes, which were suspicious, not struck him as the most brilliant, that their irregularity passed in her mind for the brand of violent excesses of love, and finally his big red nose she had for some something martial and héroïque.Quoi Still, the princess immediately over- promised her to marry him, provided that he should obtain the consent of the king his father. The King having learned that his daughter had great esteem for Riquet with the Tuft, he knew also for a very spiritual and wise prince, received him with pleasure to his son. The day after the wedding were made, and Riquet with the Tuft had foreseen, and according to the orders he had given long auparavant.MoralitéCe that we see in this writing, is less a tale in the air même.Tout that truth is beautiful in that we love, everything we love the esprit.Autre moralitéDans an object where Nature, Aura set of beautiful features, and bright paint on complexion where ever the art can not happen, all these gifts can least, to make a sensitive heart, that a single approval invisibleQue love will find there.
Tom Thumb	354	700	French	A poor laborer sitting one evening at his fireside told his wife, who was traveling at his side: - What a great sorrow for us not to have children. Our house is so sad while cheerfulness and noise that animate our voisins.- Alas! said the woman, with a sigh when we would have a big as a thumb, I should content, and we would like all our cœur.Sur Meanwhile, the woman became ill and gave birth after seven months, a well-formed child in all of its members but have an inch of haut.Ils said: - It is as we want and we do not love each other less, while our cœur.Ils called him Tom Thumb because of its size ... They let him want for nothing; However, the child is not growing and always retained its small size. He had bright eyes, intelligent face and soon appeared wise and skillful, so all he undertook réussit.Le him peasant was about one day to go cut wood in the forest and he said to him -even: "Ah, if I had someone who would drive my cart" - Father cried Tom Thumb, I will lead her well, you can rely on me, it will arrive in the wood temps.L man began to rire.- How is this possible, he said, you are much too small to lead the horse by bride.- it does not matter if mom wants to tackle I will settle in the horse's ear and I shout him where he must aille.- well, said the father, we will essayer.La mother harnessed and set up Tom Thumb in the horse's ear. The little man called him the way he had to take. "Hue Street dia dia!!!!" And the horse and walked, as if he had been guided by a real trooper; the cart came into the wood by the good route.Au moment the car turned the corner of a hedge, while the small shouted: Dia Dia! two strangers came to passer.- That exclaimed one of them, a cart that works without one way the carter and yet we hear his voix.- It is strange, indeed, "said the another, follow it and see where it arrêtera.Elle went on his way and stopped just where the wood abattu.Quand Tom Thumb was, saw his father, he cried: - you see, father, here I am with the car, now just make me descendre.Lie father seized the bridle of the horse with the left hand and the right hand ear removed his son and laid down. It sat happily on a straw. Seeing Tom Thumb the strangers did not know what to say in their étonnement.L'un of them took the other aside and said: - Look, it would be our small fortune if we exhibions for money in a big city. Buy-le.Ils addressed themselves to the peasant and said: - Sell us the little man, we shall have well soin.- No, says the father is my child and it is not for sale for any gold monde.Cependant, hearing this proposal, Tom Thumb had climbed along the folds of the garments of his Father. He landed on his shoulder and then he whispered in his ear: - Deliver me always, father, I shall know revenir.Son father therefore gave the two men a beautiful piece of or.- Where do you you, put him asked-ils.- put me on the edge of your hat, I could walk there and see the scenery; I'll fall pas.Ils did as he asked and when Tom Thumb had bid farewell to his father, they took him with them. They walked along until evening. At that moment the little man said: - Ask me a bit down, I need descendre.L'homme took off his hat and pulled Tom Thumb and laid it in a field near the road. He immediately fled from the clods, and he slipped into a mouse hole he had sought exprès.- Good evening, my friends, go without me, them he shouted in a tone moqueur.Ils wanted to catch up with chopsticks and fourragèrent the mouse hole, hardly lost. Tom Thumb always it sank further, and as night had fallen completely, they had to go home angry and vides.Quand hands they were gone, Tom Thumb went out of his underground hiding place. It is dangerous to venture out at night in the fields, was quick to break a leg. He met fortunately an empty shell of escargot.- I could spend the night here in safety; and he settled there. About to fall asleep, he heard two men pass one of which said: - How to Start to steal his gold and silver to cure richard - I'll tell you, interrupted Tom Thumb?. - What does this mean cried one frightened thieves; I heard someone parler.Ils stopped and gave ear. Tom Thumb repeated: - Take me, I will help you. - But where are you? - search by, ground, he said, and the direction from which comes the voix.Les thieves finally the trouver.- How can you pretend to be helpful, funny little? ils.- asked-him I will slip through the bars in the priest window, and -you will spend all you voudrez.- That's good, they said, let's see what you know they faire.Quand they came to the parsonage, Tom Thumb crept into the room of the priest, and he cried with all his might: - Do you want everything here? The -voleurs were terrified and they said to him - Speak low, you will awaken all world.But Tom Thumb pretended not to have heard and shouted again: - What do you want? Want everything here? The girl who was sleeping in the room adjoining heard these words, she rose up in bed and listened. The thieves had begun to retreat, but they took courage, and, thinking that the little rascal wanted to have fun at their expense, they retraced their steps and said to him softly: - Come on, be serious and pass us some chose.Alors Tom Thumb shouted again, as hard as he could - I will pass all; give me your hands. This time the girl heard very clearly, she jumped out of bed and rushed to the door. The thieves fled as if the devil had been on their trail, but did not notice anything, the maid went to light a candle. When she returned, Tom Thumb went to hide in the hay, and the maid, having searched everywhere without having discovered anything, thought he had dreamed with open eyes and went recoucher.Tom Thumb had hidden in hay and s' there was arranged a good place to sleep; he intended to rest until day, and then return to her parents. But he had to see many more, because this world is full of pain and, miseries. The maid got up at dawn to feed the cattle. His first visit was to the barn where she took an armful of hay where asleep precisely whereabouts poor Tom. But he slept a sleep so deep that he saw nothing and did not wake when he was in the mouth of a cow that had taken with his foin.- My God! cried he, I am in the mill foulon.Mais he soon realized where he was, really was. He was careful to avoid being crushed between the teeth, and eventually slipped into the throat and in the rumen. "The windows were forgotten in this department, he said, and one sees neither the sun nor candle." This, stay displeased him very much and, further aggravated the situation is that it always came new hay and the space it occupied was becoming increasingly narrow. He screamed as high as he could: - Do not send me more forage, do not send me any more fodder, the maid at that time was just milking the cow!. Upon hearing without seeing anyone, and recognizing the voice as that which had already awakened the night, she was seized with such a fright that she fell off her stool and spread her lait.Elle went hastily find his master and cried: - Ah! great God, Father, cow parle.- You're crazy, however said the prêtre.Il went to the barn to ensure this, which passait.A scarcely had he set foot that Tom Thumb cried again: - do not send more fodder me, do not send me to fourrage.La fright won the priest himself, and, imagining that there was a devil in the body the cow, he had the need to kill her. This was done, and they threw the paunch manure, where was poor Tom Pouce.Il had great difficulty to unravel from there and began to move his head when misfortune came new. A hungry wolf passing by swallowed the rumen of the cow with the little man in a single mouthful. Tom Thumb did not lose courage. "Maybe, he thought, the wolf will be there treatable." And his belly where he was locked he shouted: - Dear wolf, I, will give you a good meal and faire.- or this? loup.Dans said such and such a house; you have only to drag you through the window of the kitchen, and you will find cakes, bacon, sausage mouth veux-tu.Et he told him exactly the house of his père.Le wolf does the did not say it twice. It was introduced at night in the basement window and gave heart to joy in the buffet provisions. When he was sated and he tried to leave he was so gonfl6 of food he could get around to go through the same path. It is on this that Tom Thumb had reckoned. So he began to make in the wolf a frightful din, shouting and leaping as he put.- Wilt thou be quiet, said the wolf; you'll wake the world.- What! replied the little man, thou hast entertained, I want to have fun as he began his moi.Et tapage.Il finally awaken his father and his mother who began to look into the kitchen through the lock. When they saw the wolf, they ran to arm man with an ax, the wife of a faux.- Stay behind, said the man, the woman upon entering, I will deal him a shot with my ax, and if he does not die suddenly, you shall cut off her thumb ventre.Tom who heard the voice of his father shouted to him: - Dear father, it's me, I'm in the belly loup.- Our dear child we visited! cried the father full of joie.Et he ordered his wife to the wrong side in order not to hurt Tom Thumb. Then he raised his ax and brought the wolf a kick that laid him dead. He then opened his stomach with scissors and a knife and pulled out the small Tom.- Ah! said the father, we were worried about your fate - Yes, father, I have sailed the world, fortunately I can finally resume air frais.- Where hast thou been? - Oh! Father, I have been in a mouse hole in the rumen of a cow and in the belly of a wolf. But now I want to stay with you more sure.- We sell for anything in the world, said parents kissing and hugging against their cœur.Ils gave him to eat and drink, and gave him to make other clothes because hers had been spoiled during the journey.
Until One Deuxyeux and other folks,	1238	511	French	There was once a woman who had three daughters. The elder was until One because she had only one eye in the forehead, and the second was called Deuxyeux because she had two eyes like everyone else, and the youngest was called other folks, because she had three eyes, having also an eye in the forehead, as her elder. But as Deuxyeux was not made differently from other people, nor sisters nor her mother could not endure her. "You with your two eyes, they told him, you look like everyone and you're not one of us!" They were only the bully and mistreat the jostling and always hunted in the corners, not left him as old rags to dress, gave him only their leftovers to eat, and yet just enough not to starve. So that was their problem-douleur.Or it happened that one day, as Deuxyeux had gone to keep the goat in the meadows, hunger she suffered made her cry, because once again its two sisters had given him too little. Sitting in the grass, the poor wept and wept so much that she had two streams ran down her cheeks. But when she looked up to implore the sky in his distress, she saw before her a lady who asked him: - Deuxyeux, why are you crying - How could I not cry? Deuxyeux replied. Under the pretext that I have two eyes like everyone else, my two sisters and my mother can not stand me and make me all miseries; they drive me everywhere, dress me in rags and does not give me enough to eat: I never their remains, and today there was so little that'm hungry without cesse.- Come, dry your tears, Deuxyeux! said the fairy, and hear me well. You will know never hunger. You have only to say the Méhéhé Biquette, Small table ready and get you at the table setting itself, with the white cloth and board, and fine food served, which you can eat as much as your desire!. And later, when thou shalt be enjoyed myself and thou shalt need, you shall say Méhéhé the Nanny Goat, Small table stops and immediately it will be gone before your yeux.Ces words said, the fairy was gone!. So Deuxyeux thought she was going to try right away if it was true, as it had so grandfaimMéhéhé the Nanny Goat, Small table ready! Yes, almost simultaneously with the lyrics, the small table was there with a white cloth, plate, knife, fork and spoon silver; and succulent dishes and steaming waited before her and felt good; it seemed they were coming all the kitchen right. "God, be our guest for ever! Amen." Such was the prayer Deuxyeux had hastened to say, because it was the shortest she knew. Then she served and entertained with all his heart. Once when she had eaten everything and felt completely satisfied, she said that the fairy had taught him the Méhéhé Biquette, small table off the table, with all that was on it, and fainted! disappeared at the same time. "Service is famous!" Says Deuxyeux, quite glad and happy. And in the evening, when she returned with the goat and found his ground bowl with the remains that had left her sisters, she did not touch the point, nor does it touched the few scraps which were intended for it the next day when she returned with the goat. Once, twice, it passed, and the sisters did not even noticed. But as the thing kept saying they made themselves remarked: "There is something fishy here below: Deuxyeux not touch anything, as she has always eaten what gave him up 'for now. she must have found something ... "and to put your finger on it and find out the truth, until One older sister, decided to accompany him the next day when she would keep the goat, to see if someone gave him food or boire.- I'm going with you today Deuxyeux! until One told him when she was leaving. This way I have to if you keep our goat properly and if thou leadest really the best endroits.Deuxyeux, who was not fooled and saw what he was his mind, and drove the goat into high grass, but much further than where it was usual. There she called his sister and said: - Come, until One we'll sit down and I'll sing you some chose.Fatiguée by long walk and the heat of a sun which it did not usually the eldest half dozing, while Deuxyeux sang to him constantly to the same tune: until One sister, do not you sleep until One sister, are you sleeping already Finally, until One closed his eye? unique and truly asleep. Once in Deuxyeux was very sure and saw sleeping deeply enough to not be able to surprise her, she hastened to say his little song: Méhéhé the Nanny Goat, Small table ready to sit down quickly at his little table, eat and his drink before singing again: Méhéhé the Nanny Goat, Small table stops After everything had disappeared, Deuxyeux woke his sister and said, "until One instead of keeping, now you fall asleep, and during that time! goat could run anywhere! Come, let's go. "when they were back at home, Deuxyeux did not touch the small pieces that unfortunate had put in his bowl, but until one well was unable to tell her mother why she did not eat "I fell asleep there!" she confessed to in excuser.Le next day, the mother said to other folks,. "It is you who will go with it today but be careful and monitor it well, because if Deuxyeux eat there, or someone her app Porte to eat and drink, this must be done in secret. "While other folks, rejoined Deuxyeux and said she wanted to come with her to keep goats and see if it did good Deuxyeux was not fooled and perfectly understood what she had in mind;. Also led-t- she goat far enough in the tall grass, and she invited her sister to sit beside her offering to sing a little to distract her. other folks, lay down in the grass, already tired from the long way and a little dazed by the heat of the sun. Deuxyeux then resumed for him his little song of the day but by inattention, she began as before, and sang without even apercevoirUnœil, sister, do you sleep not before? resume correctly: other folks, my sister, do you sleep already and when the little lullaby does its work, other folks, slept indeed, but only with his eyes his third eye, he was not asleep, having escaped the charm, and if it closed, it was only by stealth and ment in order to watch her eyelashes and surprise all he would have to surprise. So when Deuxyeux, the believer asleep after his little song, ate and drank his fill, then sang another little song, the third eye of other folks, saw it all! Deuxyeux then came to wake her sister and told her, as to the other: ".. You were asleep, other folks, you no good to keep Come, we go now." And they returned; but when they were at home. Deuxyeux did not touch what we had put in his bowl and other folks, told their mother: - I now know why that haughty wants nothing of what you give it. Once there, she told the goat Méhéhé the Nanny Goat, Small table ready and she has before her a small table covered with the best food, much better than those we eat us! His meal finished, she said: Méhéhé the Nanny Goat, Small table stops and then everything goes!. I saw everything clearly and distinctly, because with a little song she had me sleeping eyes, but the third remained open. It was more than enough to excite the furious jealousy of Miss mère.- has pretensions, eh? cried she, by taking Deuxyeux. Miss will enjoy a better life than ours, right? Well! it is a pleasure which you are depriving yourself! Grabbing a knife, she ran to the goat and he plunged the knife into the heart. Seeing his dead goat, she went out full of the house and went away crying bitterly, sitting in the grass of the first pre. Suddenly the fairy was again in front of her and asked her: - Why are you crying, Deuxyeux - How could I not cry? Deuxyeux replied. The goat which covered the small table nicely for me when I sang him your little song, alas! she died and now it was my mother who murdered! Hunger and misery have come back to me ...- Listen to me, Deuxyeux, I'll give you good advice, told him the good fairy: you ask of your sisters that you leave your goat casings and thou enfouiras underground at the door of the house. With this, your happiness is assuré.Ces words said, the fairy was gone, and Deuxyeux came home to ask her sisters: "My dear sisters, please, let me have something of my goat I ask nothing good, just guts "this modest request made them laugh, and they said to him!" If that's your only desire, it can be done "Deuxyeux took guts, she! buried secretly at night, quietly, at the door of the house. So she had told him as fée.Le the next morning, the household awoke and stood up at once, and when they went to the door, what was their surprise to see a wonderful tree had grown there: a tree of splendor and magnificence unparalleled in the world because he had a silver foliage and wore golden fruit! How this tree could have come there in one night? Neither the mother nor the sisters had not a clue; but Deuxyeux, she knew very well, because the tree had grown on the very spot where she had buried guts of chèvre.- up into the tree, my child, 'said the mother until One and picks some of these -we merveilleux.Unœil fruits went up the tree, but when she reached out to catch a golden fruit, the branch moved aside abrupt she was beautiful again as many times she wished it was every time the same thing, and it was impossible to touch one of the finest fruits of or.- Go on, you, other folks, commanded the mother. You'll be better you do with your three eyes that your sister with her unique.Unœil eye slid to the bottom of the tree and other folks, climbed nimbly there; but she could do it as well and she wanted to look everywhere at once with three eyes, she had no more success than his other sister, the golden fruit stood still out of reach. The mother, impatient, mounted it in turn; but no more than his daughters she could not catch a single fruit of gold, and his hand is still closing in on the wind - If I was going up, said Deuxyeux, maybe I better succeed ...- You! The sisters cried. What can you get good with your eyes? It nevertheless climbed the tree, and behold the golden fruit, instead of fleeing to his hands, had just put it themselves and let themselves pick one after another. She had full apron when she came down from the tree, and the mother took her. Jealous all three she could pick the precious fruit as they had not been, they were only nastier with it, instead of him being grateful, and treated even more durement.Un day as they were together at the foot of the wonderful tree, came a young nobleman on horseback. "Quick, Deuxyeux, hide not make us ashamed! He cried her two sisters in the thrusting hurriedly in an empty barrel that was there, and with it, the golden apples that had gathered. the young lord looked good as they could see when he was close, and he stopped to admire this wonderful tree with silver and or.- who this beautiful tree is it? asked the young lord the two sisters. If one gave me a branch, one might wonder what other folks, and voudrait.Unœil answered together that the tree was to them, are already rushing to break a twig. But some they both took barely there, they were able to neither one nor the other branches, such as fruits, stood suddenly away from their mains.- It is truly amazing that tree belongs, says the young rider, if you do not have the power to cut a piece off! the two sisters supported néanm anoint the tree was indeed their property; but while they thus spake, Deuxyeux pushed foot under his barrel, some golden apples and sent him rolling to the foot of the beautiful rider, because the lie of his sisters had outraged. Seeing the golden fruit before him, the young lord was surprised and asked where they were from. So until One other folks, and confessed that they had another sister, who was not to show because she had only two eyes like ordinary people. The young lord would yet see it demanded, it was his great desire, and he called himself shouting - Deuxyeux! Come! Get out! The most natural, Deuxyeux slipped out of the barrel to approach, and the knight was surprised of his great beauté.- You, Deuxyeux, he said, you can certainly pick me a branch tree - yes, replied Deuxyeux, I might as well, since this tree appartient.Grimpant me to the tree, she broke into a wonderful branch with leaves of silver and golden fruit that it handed the beautiful cavalier.- What do you want me to give you in return Deuxyeux? asked the cavalier- Ah! Deuxyeux replied I, who have only misery, sorrow and pain, which only know hunger and thirst for the crack of dawn to the end of the evening, if you wanted to take me with you, that would be my deliverance and I'd be happy! the young lord took her behind him and galloped to his father's castle, where she had a beautiful wardrobe and table his own heart. Love with her as he was, the good Lord did bless their union, and their wedding was celebrated with great joie.Après Deuxyeux starting with the handsome knight, the two sisters envied him his happiness furiously while seeking consolation. "At least if they said we still wonderful tree! And even if we can not pluck golden fruit, everyone will be attracted by its splendor and come to us, stopping there for admire and compliment us. Who knows how far can our luck? "that may be what they believed, but the next day when they got up, had tree disappeared, taking with him their brightest hopes. By cons, putting himself at the window of her pretty little room Deuxyeux saw who was there: he had therefore followed, and she was happy infiniment.Mariée and happy, she lived for many years of joy and pleasure. But one day, there were two poor who knocked at the door of the castle, and begged alms; and now Deuxyeux in the closer, recognized until One other folks, and her two sisters got so miserable that they were going from door to door begging bread. Deuxyeux received them with heart and kept close to her, treating them with such generosity and such an affection, they were all two genuine remorse and deeply repented of the evil that had been done to their sister in her youth.
